CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CHATSWORTH, GEORGIA 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Republished by Order of the City Council  2017 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF CHATSWORTH, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Tyson Haynes 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dr. Celeste Martin, Post 1 
Rhett Griffin, Post 2 
Jeff Cloer, Post 3 
Fred Welch, Post 4 
City Council 
____________ 
Stephen A. Williams 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Wilma Nolan 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete republication of the ordinances of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia, of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2009 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2009 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their locations within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Successfully keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This republication was under the direct supervision of Tassy Spinks, Supplement Department Director, Rachael Calloway, Supplement Editor, and April McDermid, Proofreader, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Tyson Haynes, Mayor, Stephen A. Williams, City Attorney and Wilma Nolan, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Chatsworth, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and all ordinances amending the same, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body: 
Bonds. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they are bound thereby. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(1). 
City. The term "city" shall mean the City of Chatsworth, Georgia. Where appropriate, it shall also mean duly authorized officials, officers and employees of the city. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, as amended, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3). 
Council, city council, mayor and council, mayor and aldermen governing authority, governing body. The terms "council," "mayor and council," "mayor and aldermen," "governing authority" and "governing body" shall mean the mayor and council of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia. 
County. The term "county" shall mean Murray County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires an official or the head of a department of the city to do some act or perform such duty, it shall be construed to authorize the official or head of the department to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing one gender shall extend and be applied to the other genders, except where inappropriate. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater authority restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons as the term "persons" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing only the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title. 
Person. The word "person: shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, receivers, trustees and personal representatives, to bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The words "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any open area. 
Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state," in reference to a political entity, shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Title of officer or official. Whenever the title of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Chatsworth" were added. 
Week. The word "week" shall mean seven calendar days. 
Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, or figures whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or subsections, nor as any part of the section or subsection, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability. 
It is hereby to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included herein, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and added hereto. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subscriptions or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Chatsworth, Georgia is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provision may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not theretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Chatsworth, Georgia is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:…" The new section (or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the governing body. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the governing body or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations; abatement of nuisances. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city amending this Code, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code, ordinance or resolution the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance or resolution shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days or both, or by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as provided by law. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance or resolution shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1926, § 175) 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code, ordinance or other public document. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, or in any other manner alter any ordinance book or minute book, or any notice posted by the city for the benefit of the public, or any other document or record of the municipal government of the city. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or an ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing salaries of officials, officers or employees of the city; 
(5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation; any ordinance levying any tax; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution to any person; 
(7)  An ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for the subdividing or platting of property; 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundary of the city; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance; 
(13)  Any ordinance enacted after December 12, 1988. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2-1. - Mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall be the chief executive of the city and shall see that all of its laws and ordinances are faithfully executed. 
(b)  The mayor shall have the direction and control of the police department, the fire department, and all other departments and ministerial officers of the city. 
(c)  The mayor shall appoint standing committees of council; and shall preside over the meetings of council; at which meetings such official shall not vote, except in case of a tie, when such official shall cast the deciding vote. 
(d)  The mayor shall administer all oaths of office to the members of council and all other officers and agents of the city. 
(Code 1926, § 46) 
Sec. 2-2. - Mayor pro tem. 
In the absence or disqualification of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall exercise all of the mayor's functions in the mayor's stead. 
(Code 1926, § 47) 
Sec. 2-3. - Councilmembers. 
The members of council, in council assembled, shall constitute the legislative body of the city with power to direct its affairs as provided by its charter and to pass such ordinances as such legislative body may deem for the best interest of the city and its citizens. 
(Code 1926, § 48) 
Sec. 2-4. - Standing committees enumerated. 
(a)  The mayor shall appoint three members of the council to serve on each of the standing committees for the preparing and considering of the business for the action of council, to whom may be referred such business as the council may deem appropriate, to wit: 
(1)  Finance committee; 
(2)  Street committee; 
(3)  Ordinance committee; 
(4)  Nuisance committee; 
(5)  Fire committee; 
(6)  Light committee; 
(7)  Park committee; 
(8)  Water committee; 
(9)  Entertainment committee; 
(10)  Sanitary committee; 
(11)  Police committee. 
(b)  Members, etc., of police committee: 
(1)  Membership: The police committee shall consist of three members of the council appointed by the mayor. 
(2)  Chairman: The committee shall elect its own chairman. The chairman shall have authority to call a committee meeting when deemed necessary. 
(3)  Purpose and duties: 
a.  To see that all ordinances pertaining to the police department are observed. 
b.  To prepare a yearly budget and present it to the council for approval. 
c.  To review all applications for employment and make recommendations to council. 
d.  To review all public complaints against the police department, and make recommendations to council concerning the complaint. 
e.  To meet any time there is an internal problem affecting the police department and resolve it. 
(Code 1926, § 66; Ord. of 10-3-88, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 2-5. - Duties of committees. 
It shall be the duty of each standing committee to investigate and report on all matters referred to it by council pertaining to the subject in charge of such committee. 
(Code 1926, § 68) 
Sec. 2-6. - City clerk and treasurer—Duties as clerk. 
(a)  The city clerk shall attend all meetings of the council and keep a correct record of the proceedings of the same, issue all licenses, summonses, processes, subpoenas, and executions, and shall have the custody of all records, papers, books and seals belonging to the council. 
(b)  The clerk shall keep the following books: 
(1)  A book of neat and accurate minutes. 
(2)  A book for recording all licenses. 
(3)  A book for ordinances. 
(4)  The Code of Ordinances book. 
(5)  A book for the registration of voters. 
(6)  A book of annual tax digest. 
(7)  A waterworks register. 
(c)  The clerk shall have an office in the council chamber, or as near thereto as practicable. The clerk shall keep such office open from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon, and from 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
(Code 1926, § 49) 
Sec. 2-7. - Same—Acting as treasurer; keeping receipts record. 
The clerk shall perform the duties of the office of treasurer, and as such it shall be such officer's duty to keep in a distinct and lucid manner, a record in a well-bound book or books, kept for the purpose, of all moneys received by such officer and on what accounts. 
(Code 1926, § 51) 
Sec. 2-8. - Same—Expenditures by treasurer; exhibiting books. 
(a)  The treasurer shall not pay out any money except upon orders passed by the council and signed by the chairman of the finance committee or the chairman of the committee in charge of the subject of such expenditure, which orders the treasurer shall number and keep as vouchers. 
(b)  Before the first regular monthly meeting in each month, the treasurer shall make a full exhibit of such officer's books, accounts, orders and vouchers to the finance committee, who, after careful examination, shall embrace in their monthly report a full statement of the condition of the same. 
(Code 1926, § 52) 
Sec. 2-9. - Conduct of elections by county. 
(a)  Murray County Election Officials are hereby authorized to conduct all elections held by the city. 
(b)  The county shall perform all duties as superintendent of elections including voter registration and absentee voting, with the exception of the qualification of candidates. 
(Ord. of 10-26-88) 
State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-10. 
Sec. 2-10. - Filing notice of candidacy. 
Each candidate for municipal office, or his designee shall file notice of his candidacy in the office of the municipal superintendent of the city. 
The opening date and time for filing such notice of candidacy shall be 36 days prior to the election at 9:00 a.m. 
The closing date and time for filing such notice of candidacy shall be 32 days prior to the election at 12:00 noon. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 7, 1993, was not specifically amendatory to the Code. Said ordinance has been designated as § 2-10 and included herein at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-11. - Tree commission established. 
There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as the City of Chatsworth Tree Commission and to be herein referred to as the "commission" for the purpose of regulating the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs in public places; providing for the pruning and removal of trees on private property which endanger public safety and to generally improve the general welfare and health of the people of the City of Chatsworth and Murray County. 
(Ord. of 10-1-90, § 1) 
Editor's note— Sections 1—4 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 1, 1990 was not specifically amendatory to the Code. Said ordinance has been designated as §§ 2-11—2-14 and is included herein at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-12. - Members; terms. 
The commission shall consist of five members as follows: Three members shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the city; the superintendent of the street department for the city shall be an ex-officio member, and the city clerk for the city shall be an ex-officio member. The three members appointed by the mayor and council shall be citizens of the city and the respective terms of the members shall begin as follows: 
(1)  One member for one year; 
(2)  One member for two years; 
(3)  One member for three years; 
and thereafter upon the expiration of such terms, successors shall be appointed for a term of four years by the mayor and council. Vacancies caused by death, resignation or otherwise, shall be filled for the unexpired term by mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 10-1-90, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13. - Powers and authorities. 
The city tree commission shall have the powers and authority to do the following: 
(1)  To study and to make determinations and recommendations to the mayor and council regarding the planting, maintenance, and/or protection of trees and shrubs upon public properties and/or in public places; 
(2)  To make recommendations to the mayor and council of the types, kinds, and species of trees and/or shrubs to be planted upon the right-of-ways of city streets, public parks, and other public facilities or places; 
(3)  To make recommendations to the mayor and council regarding the removal of any trees and/or shrubs it deems hazardous to the public safety or public health or which, because of disease, fungus, or infestation, are not likely to survive or which may cause such disease, fungus, or infestation to spread; 
(4)  To identify and to designate any "landmark tree" within the City of Chatsworth. For purposes of this section, a "landmark tree" shall include, but not be limited to, a tree which has particular significance, as evidenced by any one of the following criteria; rare species, large size, estimated age over 50 years, location, unique characteristics, visibility from scenic byway, scenic enhancement, or association with a notable event or person. Designation as a "landmark tree" shall be in the discretion of the commission based upon the foregoing factors, with appeal to the mayor and council. The effect of such designation shall be that landmark trees may not be removed or pruned in any manner which may or could damage the tree, except upon notice and a hearing before the commission and a specific finding therefrom that such tree is then hazardous to the public safety or to the public health and that there is no reasonable alternative to the removal or pruning, as requested; 
(5)  To assist the city parks and recreation department with the protection and maintenance of existing trees and/or shrubs upon all city owned recreational lands and properties; 
(6)  To assist the mayor and council and to make available to the general public advice and resource information regarding the selection, planting, and maintenance of trees and/or shrubs, particularly as related to drought tolerance issues; 
(7)  To make recommendations from time to time regarding proposed ordinances, rules, or requirements of the city relating to the protection and maintenance of trees and/or shrubs within the City of Chatsworth. 
(Ord. of 10-1-90, § 3; Ord. of 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 2-14. - Officers and meetings. 
Upon appointment of the initial commission by mayor and council, said commission shall meet and elect one (1) of its members as chairman and one (1) of its members as secretary. The commission shall then provide for the rules and procedures for the holding of regular and special meetings of the commission as deemed advisable and necessary. 
(Ord. of 10-1-90, § 4) 
Sec. 2-15. - City marshal. 
There shall be created herewith the position of city marshal for the purpose of enforcing all ordinances of the city, including, but not limited to, animal control; litter and trash; general nuisance; business licenses; signage; collection of delinquent taxes; posting of notices; and other duties attendant thereto, as may be assigned by the mayor and council from time to time. The city marshal shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 1-5-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 2-16. - Duties, powers and qualifications of city marshal. 
(a)  The city marshal shall be at least 21 years of age at appointment and shall be of good character; 
(b)  The city marshal shall be a P.O.S.T. certified peace officer within the State of Georgia at appointment and shall maintain such designation throughout the appointment; 
(c)  The city marshal shall maintain a written log of all complaints regarding potential violations of any ordinance of the city; 
(d)  The city marshal shall investigate and otherwise take necessary and appropriate enforcement action to correct and/or to mitigate violations; 
(e)  The city marshal may assist the city zoning administrator as necessary and appropriate with respect to zoning and/or annexation issues; 
(f)  The city marshal may assist the city clerk as necessary and appropriate with respect to tax collection matters; 
(g)  The city marshal shall report in writing upon the activities of the city marshal's office to the mayor and council not less than monthly; 
(h)  The city marshal shall perform other specific lawful duties not inconsistent with this appointment as requested by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 2-17. - Authorized designee. 
The city clerk, shall, on behalf of the City of Chatsworth, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. §46-5-1, et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(a)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(b)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(c)  Review payments of the compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of an amended law and this section. 
(d)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this section. 
(e)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(f)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights of way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
( Ord. of 7-6-09(1), § 1 ) 
Chapter 2.5 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2.5-1. - Definitions. 
All definitions set forth in the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. tit. 3) and state regulations, as amended, are adopted by this chapter. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcohol beverage includes all alcohol, distilled spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Applicant means any person who files forms designated by the city clerk as an applicant for a license to sell alcoholic beverages either at retail or wholesale, deal in alcoholic beverages either at retail or wholesale or manufacture alcoholic beverages. 
Bartender means a person that serves beverages behind a bar in a restaurant, pouring outlet or similar establishments. 
Brewer means a manufacturer of malt beverages. 
Church means a permanent freestanding building located in an area designated for such use by the zoning ordinances where persons regularly assemble for religious worship which shall be publicly designated as a place of worship, but does not include a residence or place of business also used for religious purposes. 
Code enforcement officer means a certified peace officer, as defined by state law, appointed by the mayor and council to enforce this chapter. 
Distance means the distance as established in section 15-96 of this chapter. 
Distilled spirits or liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Eating establishment means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 60 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sale from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Family means any person related to the holder of a license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
Financial interest includes, but is not limited to, holding an investment, indebtedness, or security interest in a business. 
License means the authorization by the governing body to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package or for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, as may be permitted by the terms of this ordinance. 
Licensee means the individual, to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation. 
Local caterer or concessionaire means a person, whose principal business is to cater meals or other food items for functions located off the caterer's premises, who maintains a permanent office within the city and who meets the citizenship and residency requirements of section 15-105 of this chapter. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of, and adjacent to a restaurant as defined in this chapter, or located in a hotel; provided that in no event shall the seating capacity of the lounge exceed that of its connected restaurant and provided that in no event shall the lounge be located in a separate building. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoration of barley, malt hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese wine. 
Nonprofit civic organization means an organization which is an exempt organization under section 501(c) or (d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
Package store means a geographic location within the city wherein a license may be issued for the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages and where the sale of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages comprises more than 50 percent of the licensee's annual gross sales and where the sale of nonalcoholic items is incidental to the business of the licensee at that location. 
Person means any individual or entity as defined in the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, (O.C.G.A. tit. 3) and state regulations, as amended. 
Person under age means any individual under the age of 21 years. 
Pour or sell by the drink mean the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
Pouring outlet means any place where wine or malt beverages are poured or proposed to be poured, but excluding places or establishments other than restaurants, hotels, motels, private clubs and lounges. 
Premises means the entire building and lot or complex, including parking area, upon which either a pouring outlet or package store is located. 
Private club means an entity that meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  It is either a corporation organized or existing under the laws of the state, or a fraternal or veterans' organization that has by laws and that is part of a national organization. 
(2)  It shall have existed in the city for at least one year immediately prior to application for licensing as a private club under this chapter. 
(3)  It has at least 100 members regularly paying dues at least annually. 
(4)  It is organized and operated exclusively for nonprofit purposes, including fraternal brotherhood, pleasure and recreation. 
(5)  No part of the net earnings of the entity inure to the benefit of any share holder or member. 
(6)  It owns, hires, or leases a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members, with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment. 
(7)  It maintains a kitchen area and dining area for cooking, preparing, and/or serving meals for its members and guests at least once a month. 
(8)  No member, officer, agent or employee is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profit from the sale of wine or malt beverages to the entity or its members or guest beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at an annual meeting or by its governing board out of general revenue of the club. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are regularly served, such place being provided with kitchen and with a separate dining room, equipment, and personnel to serve, and regular seating for 60 persons. The serving of food shall consist of at least one meal per day at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating, and shall be where the principal business is conducted, with pouring being only incidental thereto. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail or retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail sale means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. 
School building or educational building means such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, dance, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupation or other special subjects are taught. 
Tavern means a pouring outlet, as defined in this section, which serves malt beverages or wine by the drink. 
Waiter/waitress means a person taking customer's orders, serving food and drinks, and also prepares tables before and after meals in a restaurant, bar or similar establishments. 
Wholesale or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers or to retail dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, and combination of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixes with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Definitions relating to alcoholic beverages. O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-2, 3-3-2. 
Sec. 2.5-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter has been enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  Promoting the health and general welfare of the community; 
(2)  Establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages to protect and preserve schools and churches; 
(3)  Giving effect to existing land use and preserving certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the area and the peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining the stability of neighborhoods and property values; and 
(4)  Protecting against the evils of concentration of ownership of retail outlets for alcoholic beverages or preventing undesirable persons from engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-3. - Applicability. 
The sections of this chapter and the license fees levied in this chapter shall apply to all persons residing or maintaining a place of business in the city or to any person bringing alcoholic beverages into the city for the purpose of sale, except those sales made by a salesperson upon order and delivery later. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-4. - Compliance with chapter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages without having first complied with this chapter including, but not limited to, obtaining the appropriate alcoholic beverage license from the city. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-5. - Laws and regulations adopted. 
The state laws and regulations relating to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state, as revised and promulgated by the general assembly and by the state revenue department and especially as they relate to wholesale and retail package sales and retail sales for consumption on the premises, are incorporated into and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this section. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-6. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the sections of this chapter or who shall assist any dealer in alcoholic beverages in the city to evade or avoid the payment of the fees and taxes provided for in this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be fined or sentenced to the maximum allowed under the Charter or both such fine and sentence to be inflicted in the discretion of the municipal court, and such person so convicted shall also be subject to having his license revoked if he shall be a licensed dealer in alcoholic beverages either at wholesale or retail. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-7. - Possession of unsealed containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any unsealed alcohol container on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package, and it shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit possession of an unsealed alcohol container on the premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-8. - Possession in public places. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section and section 15-9, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume, transport, carry alcoholic beverage (except in the original package and with the seal unbroken), on any public street, sidewalk, or in any city park, city maintained recreation facility, public parking lot or semipublic parking lot located within the city limits. The term "semi-public parking lot" shall include any area wherein motor vehicles are parked by the public in conjunction with any business, enterprise, commercial establishment, office building or apartment building. 
(b)  The following activities shall not be a violation of this section: 
(1)  Beer and/or wine and/or distilled spirits by the drink within a special outdoor area as provided in section 15-9, or has city approval and been issued a temporary permit good for a three day event. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-9. - Open area and patio sales. 
The consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be allowed in open areas and patios under the control of the licensee provided that such open areas and patios are separated from public areas by a physical barrier, fence, rail or similar structure sufficient to prevent ingress and egress by a person(s) except through a controlled access point and further provided that the licensee is in compliance with all other appropriate regulations as to the safe and orderly operation of such establishment and its open area or patio, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. In the event the designated area is separated from the licensee's premises so that it is necessary to traverse public property to get from one location to the other, then in such event it shall be unlawful for alcoholic beverages to be carried from said premises to the designated area or vice versa by anyone but licensee or employees of licensee. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-10. - Underage persons prohibited on premises. 
No person who holds a license to sell malt beverages, wine, distilled spirits, or other alcoholic beverage shall allow any person underage to be in, frequent or loiter about the premises of the licensee unless such underage person is accompanied by a parent or a legal guardian. However, this section shall not apply to a licensee whose annual sales of food and non-alcoholic beverages upon the premises comprise more than 60 percent of the licensee's annual gross sales and where the sales of alcoholic beverages are merely incidental to the business. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-11. - Sales to person underage. 
No licensee or any other person on a licensed premises shall sell alcoholic beverages to any person under the age of 21 years. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Furnishing alcoholic beverages to underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 2.5-12. - Purchase or possession by underage persons; misrepresentation of age. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under age to purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. It shall be unlawful for any person under age to misrepresent his age in any manner whatsoever for the purpose of illegally obtaining any alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Purchase of alcoholic beverages by underage persons, misrepresentation of age O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 2.5-13. - Employees. 
Except as otherwise provided by law: 
(1)  No person issued a license under this chapter shall employ any person under 18 years of age in or about the premises where alcoholic beverages are sold, consumed or offered for sale, or for such person under 18 to sell or deliver or to aid or assist in the sale or delivery, directly or indirectly, of alcoholic beverages; and 
(2)  No person under 18 years of age shall sell, take orders for or deliver or in any manner take part or assist in the sale, serving or delivery of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Underage persons employed where alcoholic beverages sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 2.5-14. - Furnishing to underage persons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy alcoholic beverages and furnish them to a person under age, except as provided by law. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Furnishing alcoholic beverages to underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 2.5-15. - Sunday sales. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold either by a wholesale or retail dealer on Sunday. 
(b)  If otherwise lawful, persons holding alcoholic beverages licenses from the city pursuant to this chapter shall be authorized to sell alcoholic beverages subject to all of the rules and regulations of this Code applicable to such sales. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 2.5-16. - Business hours of licensed wholesaler. 
The business hours of any wholesaler licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall be at all times not inconsistent with limitations on such sales as set forth in this chapter or in state law. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-17. - Hours of sale. 
No alcoholic beverage shall be sold after 12:00 a.m. or before 7:00 a.m. in the city. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-18. - Closing and vacation of premises of pouring outlets. 
The premises of all pouring outlets shall be completely closed and vacated by all persons except those persons regularly employed for management, sanitation and supply purposes, no later than 12:00 a.m. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-19. - Service after hours at pouring outlets. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be mixed or sold at pouring outlets during the prohibited hours, based upon timely sale of tickets, chits, decanters or other devices. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-20. - Delivery by retailer beyond licensed premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person issued a license under this chapter to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverages by the package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license or any alcoholic beverages by the drink beyond the indoor boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-21. - Drive-in window or curb service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispense alcohol from drive-in or service window. Curb service or other sale of alcohol outside the building licensed to sell is hereby expressly prohibited. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-22. - Clear view of entrance and interior of licensed premises. 
No licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall operate under the license unless the front entrance to the licensed premises is clearly visible from the public street. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-23. - Misrepresentation of contents. 
Under this chapter it shall be unlawful for licensees or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Quality requirements, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-5. 
Sec. 2.5-24. - Sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages to intoxicated persons. 
No person issued a license under this chapter or any other person on the licensed premises shall be sold, bartered, exchanged, given, provided, or furnished to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or of unsound mind. The licensee or his/her designee shall provide access to transportation for intoxicated persons on the premises. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22. 
Sec. 2.5-25. - Private clubs. 
Any private club that secures a pouring license under this chapter and is operated behind locked doors, shall provide at least three keys to each lock, or where cards are used for admittance, three cards for each lock, properly marked. One key or card shall be provided to the chief of police, one key to the city fire chief, and one key or card shall be provided to the county sheriff. The changing of the locks without supplying new keys or cards shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-26. - Copy of chapter on premises. 
It shall be the duty of the management of a pouring or package outlet to maintain a copy of the pouring or package license ordinance contained in this chapter at the location and to instruct each employee on the terms thereof. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-27. - Limitation on consumption sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally sell any alcoholic beverage for consumption on premises located within 100 yards of any housing authority property or library. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-28. - Proper identification-Definition. 
Proper identification as used in this chapter of the code shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and such person's date of birth. Proper identification includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or any identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate and shall not include any traffic citation and complaint form. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-29. - Responsibility to examine proper identification; exceptions to prohibitions. 
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to examine the proper identification of each patron to ascertain that such patron is 21 years of age or older. The prohibitions of sections 15-11 of the code shall not apply with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing the alcohol beverage is to be sold to a person who is 21 years of age or older. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-30. - Brown bagging prohibited; exception; sanction. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or employee of a food-serving establishment, private club, dance hall or any other establishment primarily in the business of providing food, drink or entertainment to permit customers, guests or invitees to bring an alcoholic beverage onto the premises of such establishment for consumption purposes. 
(2)  This chapter shall not apply to a private event on any premises where the general public is not allowed entry. An event at a private club where only club members are allowed entry shall not be deemed a private event for the purposes of this ordinance. 
(3)  Any owner, manager or employee of a food serving establishment, private club, dance hall or any other establishment primarily in the business of providing food, drink, or entertainment who violates this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a civil penalty of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Secs. 2.5-31—2.5-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2.5-54. - Necessity for license in compliance with ordinance. 
(a)  No distilled spirit shall be manufactured, sold or offered for sale at wholesale or retail within the City of Chatsworth, Georgia, without the appropriate license for such manufacture or sale, or in violation of the terms of such license or of this ordinance. Any person found guilty of violating this provision may be fined or sentenced to jail at the discretion of the court up to the maximum allowed of said court, or both such fine and sentence of jail time. 
(b)  Distilled spirits may only be sold for consumption on the premises to consumers and not for resale by a duly licensed retail consumption dealer of the City of Chatsworth and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter at duly licensed outlets. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-55. - Separate license for each retail consumption dealer; license not transferable; surrender of license. 
(a)  A separate license shall be required for each distilled spirits outlet, and a separate application shall be made for each such outlet. 
(b)  No license shall be transferable or assignable unless a new license shall first be approved by the Chatsworth Chief of Police in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  Immediately upon the sale or closing of an outlet, it shall be the duty of a licensee to surrender the license to the City of Chatsworth by presenting same to the city clerk who shall mark it "cancelled and void" with the date it is so marked. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-56. - Approval of mayor and council. 
(a)  With the exception of a temporary permit, no alcoholic beverage license shall be issued until it has been approved by the mayor and council. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be approved unless all sections of this chapter have been met. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-57. - Grant or privilege. 
Every license issued under this article shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license, subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and related laws, applicable sections of this Code and other city ordinances and resolutions relating to such business. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Local licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 2.5-58. - Types of licenses. 
The types of alcoholic beverage licenses which may be issued under this article are as follows: 
(1)  Pouring of distilled spirits. 
(2)  Pouring wine and/or malt beverages. 
(3)  Package wine and/or malt beverages. 
(4)  Wholesale alcoholic beverages. 
(5)  Local caterer or concessionaire. 
(6)  Temporary permit. 
(7)  Private club. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-59. - Holding more than one retail license. 
A retail alcoholic beverage licensee may hold more than one type of retail license, provided that each license must be approved by the mayor and council. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-60. - Use restricted to license type. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a premises license for the sale of wine and malt beverages to store or have on the premises any distilled spirits. 
(b)  Holders of a pouring distilled spirits license shall not sell distilled spirits in the package. 
(c)  Holders of a pouring wine and malt beverages license shall not sell malt beverages or wine by the package for carry-out purposes. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-61. - Display. 
Each licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall have his license posted conspicuously in his place of business. The failure of a licensee to display the license conspicuously in his place of business shall be a violation of this chapter and shall subject the licensee to citation and nonjudicial sanctions as provided in this chapter upon a finding of a violation after a hearing. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-62. - Inspection of licensed establishments. 
Sworn officers of the police department and the city marshal shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other sections of this Code. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-63. - Audits. 
The city clerk shall be authorized to conduct an audit of the records and books of a retail alcoholic beverage licensee for the purpose of determining' whether such licensee is in compliance with this chapter or any other provision of the Code. The city clerk or their designee shall notify a licensee of the date, time and place of the audit, and the licensee shall present for inspection at such date, time and place its books and records for audit purposes, and such licensee shall cooperate with the city officials and the agents of the city conducting said audit. 
The burden of proving compliance with minimum annual food sales requirement contained in this chapter shall be on the licensee. Compliance with such requirement may only be proven through the submission of licensee's business records made and kept in the ordinary course of business. If the licensee is unable to meet its burden of proof with such business records, then licensee shall be deemed to be in violation of this article, and, in addition to any other remedy or right available to the city, the licensee shall be liable for, and shall pay to the city upon demand, the cost of said audit. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-64. - Eligibility for pouring license. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no application shall be considered from and no license granted to an applicant whose business location for the pouring of distilled spirits is anything other than a restaurant, private club, local caterer or concessionaire, or non-profit civic organization desiring a temporary permit. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-65. - Separate businesses. 
Under this chapter a separate license shall be required for each business location, and a separate application shall be made for each such place. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-66. - Annual fees. 
All annual alcoholic beverage license fees shall be paid in advance on or before, January 15 of each year, and any new license granted during a calendar year shall be prorated for the remainder of the calendar year. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-67. - Amount of fees. 
(a)  Each person selling distilled spirits in the city shall pay an annual license fee as follows: 
(1)  Wholesaler ..... $100.00 
(2)  Pouring ..... 1,500.00 
(3)  Private club, pouring only ..... 1,500.00 
(4)  Temporary permit ..... 50.00 
(5)  Local caterer or concessionaire ..... 100.00/event 
(b)  Each person selling malt beverages in the city shall pay an annual license fee as follows: 
(1)  Wholesaler ..... $100.00 
(2)  Retailer, package only ..... 500.00 
(3)  Pouring ..... 500.00 
(4)  Private club, pouring only ..... 500.00 
(5)  Temporary permit ..... 50.00 
(6)  Local caterer or concessionaire ..... 50.00/event 
(c)  Each person selling wine in the city shall pay an annual license fee as follows: 
(1)  Wholesaler ..... $100.00 
(2)  Retailer, package only ..... 500.00 
(3)  Pouring ..... 500.00 
(4)  Private club, pouring only ..... 500.00 
(5)  Temporary permit ..... 50.00 
(6)  Local caterer or concessionaire ..... 50.00/event 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Maximum amount of license fee for sale of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-50; municipal governing authority to fix malt beverage license fee, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-42. 
Sec. 2.5-68. - Responsibility for employee's conduct. 
Every person issued an alcoholic beverage license is responsible for the conduct or actions of his employees while under his employ. 
(a)  Every holder of an alcoholic beverage license for the pouring of distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages shall comply with the occupancy load requirement set forth in part 1003.2.2.5 of the International Fire Code (2000 edition), as amended. 
(b)  No holder of an alcoholic beverage license as described in subsection (a) hereof shall allow the occupancy of the holder's establishment to exceed the posted occupancy load for the space. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-69. - Public benefits verification. 
(a)  The mayor and council find that the issuance of an alcohol beverage license is a public benefit as defined by federal and state law and therefore all persons who apply for an alcohol beverage license individually or on behalf of a partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other entity shall, as condition precedent to the issuance of an alcohol beverage license, execute and deliver to the city clerk an affidavit on a form approved by the city clerk which shall state: 
(1)  The applicant is a United States citizen or legal permanent resident 21 years of age or older; or 
(2)  The applicant is a qualified alien or nonimmigrant under the federal Immigration and Nationality Act, Title 8 U.S.C., as amended, 21 years of age or older lawfully present in the United States and provides the applicant's alien number issued by the department of homeland security or other federal immigration agency. 
(b)  Eligibility for an alcohol beverage license shall be made through the systematic alien verification of entitlement (SAVE) program operated by the department of homeland security or successor program. 
(c)  Until such eligibility verification is made, the affidavit shall be presumed to be proof of lawful presence in the United States and an alcohol beverage license may be issued conditioned upon eligibility verification through the SAVE program. In the event the applicant's non-eligibility is determined through the SAVE program, the alcohol beverage license shall be immediately deemed null and void. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Secs. 2.5-70—2.5-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - QUALIFICATIONS GENERALLY 

Sec. 2.5-93. - Issuance to person. 
A license required under this article shall be issued to a person, as defined in the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. tit. 3) and state regulations, as amended. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-94. - Location of premises. 
No license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued except where such business is to be located in the area of the city properly zoned for such business. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-95. - Inspections. 
The city building official or designee shall conduct periodic inspections of the businesses regulated by this chapter and to report to the city any violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such businesses or other regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or for the violation of any state or federal law or city ordinance, other than infrequent minor traffic violations. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-96. - Location restriction. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell alcohol within 300 feet of any school building, school grounds, or college campus. It is unlawful for any person to sell alcohol within 300 feet of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. The distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements to determine distances, required by the city, for the issuance of city alcohol licenses, shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door to the structure from which beverage alcohol is sold or offered for sale. 
(2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway. 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route C-2 General Commercial, C-3 Commercial Parkway District and CBD Central Business district. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Cross reference— Appendix A, Zoning. 
Sec. 2.5-97. - Disqualified location. 
Except as provided herein the city clerk may not accept or process an alcoholic beverage license application for a location that is associated with a license that is suspended, revoked or expired pursuant to section 15-16 through 15-219. An alcoholic beverage license application for such location may be accepted and processed by the city clerk if the business at such location is sold pursuant to a bona fide sale at fair market value to a person or entity with no direct or indirect relationship to the holder, or equity owner of the holder if the holder is not an individual, of the suspended, revoked or expired alcoholic beverage license at that location. Conditions precedent to the acceptance and processing of a license at such location shall be the delivery of the following documents to the city clerk: 
(a)  Copy of the sales contract for the business. 
(b)  Sworn affidavit of seller, or all equity owners of seller if seller is not an individual, that the: 
(1)  Sale price represents the fair market value of the business; 
(2)  Affiant does not have and will not have an interest in business of the applicant buyer; 
(3)  Affiant is not a relative of the buyer or any equity owner of buyer, if applicable; and 
(4)  Affiant will receive no payment from the buyer other than as set forth in the sales contract 
(c)  Sworn affidavit of buyer, or all equity owners of buyer if buyer is not an individual, that the: 
(1)  Sale price represents the fair market value of the business; 
(2)  Affiant has never had an interest in business of the seller; 
(3)  Affiant is not a relative of the seller or any equity owner of seller, if applicable; and 
(4)  Seller, and the equity owners of seller, if applicable, will receive no payment from the buyer other than as set forth in the sales contract. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-98. - Citizenship and residency requirements. 
Citizenship and residency requirements for an applicant for a license to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be as follows: 
(1)  If an individual, the person shall be a United States citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence and a resident of the city; provided, however, the individual applicant need not be a city resident if the applicant designates a resident of the city or county as his agent who shall be responsible for any matter relating to the license. 
(2)  If a partnership or corporation, this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and principal stockholders as defined in section 6-108(a). If a corporation or LLC, the license shall be issued to the corporation or LLC. Where the principal stockholder or member is not a resident of the city or county, the corporation or LLC shall designate an individual as its agent who must be a resident of the city or county who will be responsible for any matter relating to the license. For a partnership, the license will be issued to one of the partners. If a partner is not a resident of the city or county, the partnership must designate a city or county resident as the partnership agent who shall be responsible for any matter relating to the license. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-99. - Filing of changes. 
Any change in any relationship declared in this division must be filed, when made, with the city clerk, and failure to do so within a period of 30 days after such change is made shall be grounds for cancellation of a license granted under this chapter by the mayor and council. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-100. - Disqualification generally. 
No application for any license required under this article shall be granted where the application, investigation or the evidence presented at a hearing before the mayor and city council shows any of the following conditions to exist. 
(1)  The applicant or his agent has a conviction, as defined in section 15-101, or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made or who has been dishonorably discharged from the armed services of the United States. 
(2)  The applicant or any agent, stockholder, partner or member of the applicant has had any license issued by the city or any other municipality previously revoked. 
(3)  The applicant or his agent, as previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business, within a 36-month period immediately preceding the date of the application. In the event of a renewal application, offences prosecuted and resolved pursuant to this chapter shall not be considered. 
(4)  The applicant's business is not properly zoned for the license applied for or does not otherwise meet the requirements of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-101. - Persons with prior convictions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Convicted includes an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; 
Principal owner refers to an individual owning, directly or indirectly, a five percent or more interest in a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company or other entity. 
(b)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued to any individual, partnership, limited partnership, corporation or limited liability company where such individual or any individual who is a principal owner of any partnership, limited partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other entity, or who is the agent responsible for matters relating to the license shall have been: 
(1)  Convicted under any federal, state or local law of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within five years prior to the filing of the application for such license; or 
(2)  Convicted under any federal state or local law of any felony within five years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-102. - Local caterer or concessionaire. 
(a)  A local caterer or concessionaire may seek a license from the mayor and council for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by the drink at catered affairs, provided such applicant meets all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  A local caterer or concessionaire licensee shall only sell alcoholic beverages for consumption by the drink in conjunction with the service of catered food items. 
(c)  A local caterer or concessionaire licensee shall not sell alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
(d)  Except as set forth in this section, a local caterer or concessionaire licensee must comply with all other sections of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-103. - Temporary permits for nonprofit civic organizations. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, a "nonprofit" civic organization is defined as an organization which is an exempt organization under section 501(c) or (d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, whose membership includes city residents or property owners. 
(b)  Upon the filing of an application, payment of the required fee and notification to the police chief on the required form by a nonprofit civic organization, the city clerk may issue a permit authorizing the organization to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or for off-premises consumption, or both, for a period not to exceed three days, subject to any law regulating the time for serving such beverages. No more than six permits may be issued to a qualified organization in any one calendar year pursuant to this section. Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the location, times and dates specified in the permit. No permit may be issued unless the sale of such alcohol beverage is lawful in the place for which the permit is issued. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Secs. 2.5-104—2.5-126. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE GENERALLY 

Sec. 2.5-127. - Application required. 
Every person desiring to obtain a license required under this chapter shall make formal written application to the mayor and council for such privilege, signed by the applicant and agent, if applicable, upon forms to be prepared and provided by the city clerk. All such applicants and agents shall furnish all reasonable data, information and records requested to them by the mayor and council, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Applicants or those having an interest in the application, by filing an application, agree to produce any criminal record for review by the mayor and council and, for oral interrogation, any person requested by the mayor and council and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. The failure to produce such person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of the application. The application must be in the name of the person conducting the business at the address contained in the application. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-128. - False information. 
Any material omission or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original or renewal application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be cause for the denial thereof. If any license has previously been granted on the basis of such misleading statements or material omissions, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of the license. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-129. - Processing fee. 
Upon filing an application for an alcoholic beverage license with the city clerk, the city shall require the applicant to pay a fee to cover the cost of processing the application in such an amount as the mayor and council shall set from time to time. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-130. - Advertisement of intent to engage in business. 
The city clerk shall give notice of the application for an alcoholic beverage license by advertisement at least two times in two weeks, once weekly prior to hearing, in the weekly paper published in the city in which the legal advertisements of the city are carried. The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant and agent, if applicable, and if a partnership the name of the partner to whom the license shall be issued and if a corporation the names of the largest stockholders and the date and time the mayor and council would hear the application. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-131. - Payment of taxes and other debts to city. 
The city clerk shall cause an inquiry to be made into the city tax records to determine if an applicant for an alcoholic beverage license or other party with interest in the application has any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent against his property or any other monies owing to the city. No license shall be issued or renewed until such debts are paid in full. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-132. - Issuance. 
Upon an application for an alcoholic beverage license being granted by the mayor and council, a license shall be issued to the applicant as of the date the applicant commences his alcoholic beverage business and upon the payment by the applicant of the license fee prescribed in section 15-67. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-133. - Notification of denial. 
The denial of an application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant. Upon timely application any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council regarding a permit or license shall be afforded a hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-134. - Acceptance and consideration of application after rejection or revocation. 
When any application for an alcoholic beverage license is denied for cause or any license is revoked for cause by the mayor and council, the mayor and council shall not accept or consider any application by such applicant or licensee for a license to operate the same type of business within 24 months in the event of a denial for cause and 60 months in the event of a revocation for cause. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-135. - Approval of applications for sites under construction. 
An application for a proposed licensed alcoholic beverage premises may be approved by the mayor and council prior to the applicant obtaining an occupancy permit for the premises if the premises are currently under construction, renovation or rehabilitation. If approved by the mayor and council, the city clerk shall not issue the alcohol beverage license until the applicant has obtained an occupancy permit and all other approvals required by the state and city for fire and building code purposes and has advised the city clerk in writing of the date on which the alcoholic beverage business shall commence, which date shall not exceed 12 months from the date of application approval. The license shall be dated as of such commencement date and shall not be effective until that date. If the applicant fails to obtain an occupancy permit or to commence the alcoholic beverage business within 12 months of the date of approval of the alcohol beverage license by the mayor and council, the applicant shall forfeit his application which shall, by virtue of failure to obtain an occupancy permit or failure to commence the alcoholic beverage business, be rejected without the necessity of any further action of the mayor and council. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-136. - Time limit for commencement of business. 
Except for a license issued to a site under construction which is governed by section 15-135, an applicant must open the alcoholic beverage business in the establishment referred to in the application within six months after its approval by mayor and council. The city clerk shall not issue the alcoholic beverage license until presented with the applicant's notarized statement stating the applicant is in fact the owner of the establishment and will open for business on a date certain. The license shall be dated as of the date certain in the affidavit and shall not be effective until that date. Failure to open the licensed establishment within the six-month period or the date stated in the applicant's affidavit shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-137. - Time limit for closed business. 
Any holder of a license issued under this division who shall begin the operation of the business authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of six consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall, upon completion of the six-month period, automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of the failure to operate, be revoked without the necessity of any further action of the mayor and council. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-138—2.5-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 2.5-161. - Compliance with article by wholesalers. 
All wholesalers licensed under this article shall file a certified statement of the gross sales of the business in the city for the preceding calendar month with the city clerk on or before the 20 th of the following month. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-162. - Interest in other licenses by wholesalers. 
No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license or an interest in any license under the terms of this article. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-163. - Sales and deliveries by wholesalers. 
Alcoholic beverage deliveries and sales by wholesalers under this article shall only be made to retailers properly licensed for the operation of alcoholic beverage establishments in the city. Deliveries shall be made in a conveyance owned and operated by the licensed wholesaler, and such license shall, at all times when deliveries are made in the corporate limits, be in the conveyance making such deliveries and shall be subject at all times to inspection by any and all duly authorized city authorities, 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-164. - Retailers to purchase from licensed wholesalers. 
Retail dealers in alcoholic beverages licensed under the applicable sections of this article shall not buy or accept deliveries of alcoholic beverages from wholesalers or other persons offering alcoholic beverages for sale except from wholesalers duly licensed under this article. Any such retail dealer shall only accept deliveries of alcoholic beverages directly to the premises for which his license or permit is issued and by no means other than a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as required by this article. However, on written request to the mayor and council and upon the granting of permission by the mayor and council in writing, deliveries may in special instances be made otherwise upon terms and conditions as prescribed by the mayor and council as to each such delivery. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-165. - Invoices. 
Upon every delivery of distilled spirits by a licensed wholesaler to a licensed retailer, an invoice in triplicate shall be prepared, showing the quantities and brands of distilled spirits delivered together with the price thereof and the tax collected on the distilled spirits. The original copy of such invoice shall be delivered by the wholesaler to the retailer simultaneously with each such delivery. The wholesaler shall retain the second copy of the invoice and shall keep it for a period of 12 months. The wholesaler shall keep such invoices for one year after the date of the invoices, and during the year such invoices shall be made available for inspection by authorized city representatives. If requested by an authorized representative, a copy of such invoices shall be attached to any reports requested or required by the city. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Secs. 2.5-166—2.5-188. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RENEWAL AND TRANSFER 

Sec. 2.5-189. - Renewal required. 
All licensees under this article shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the city clerk. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-190. - Time of renewal; provisional renewal. 
(a)  Any person licensed under this article shall be required to renew his license on or before the next January 15. Any license not renewed by January 15 shall expire automatically and without notice at 12:01 a.m. on January 16. Any application for a new license necessitated by the failure to timely renew shall be assessed a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the license fee to cover administrative costs associated therewith. 
(b)  In the event an applicant for renewal of licenses has not paid all required city taxes on or before January 1 for the reason that the county tax digest was not timely approved by the state revenue commissioner and the deadline for timely tax payments has been extended past January 1, then, in such event, the city clerk shall be authorized to issue a provisional license to the applicant who is otherwise qualified for renewal and pays the appropriate fee. The provisional renewal shall be conditioned upon the timely payment of all city taxes due from the applicant after approval of the county tax digest. Failure of an applicant to timely pay all city taxes due shall result in the automatic expiration of the provisional license without notice. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-191. - Transferability. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  If an individual licensee dies, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur. However, no further sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application with the city clerk for authorization to continue to sell for such period. 
(c)  (1)  If a licensee or responsible person, other than the owner, severs such person's association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 60 days from the date of such severance, provided a new application is filed with the clerk within ten days of such severance which submits a new licensee or responsible person, as the case may be, for approval and indicates that there has been no change in the ownership of the licensed establishment. If approved, the term of the new license shall be for the remaining term of the original license and the original license shall terminate as of the date of such approval. No additional license fees, other than an advertising and administrative fee set by the clerk from time to time, shall be required from the applicant. 
(2)  If licensed establishment is sold to a person who, at the time of the sale holds a valid license to sell alcohol at another establishment located within the city (purchaser), the purchaser may continue, if otherwise qualified and with the written permission of the original license holder, to sell alcohol under the permit or permits of the selling license holder for a period of 60 days from the date purchaser's application to sell alcohol at the purchased licensed establishment (the temporary period), provided purchaser makes such application on or before the date of sale and in writing on a form approved by the clerk, agrees to accept, all responsibility for and arising from the license during the temporary period. If approved, the term of the purchaser's license shall be for the remaining term of the original license and the original license shall terminate as of the date of such approval. No additional license fees, other than an advertising and administrative fee set by the clerk from time to time, shall be required from the purchaser. 
(d)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were at the time of the issuance of the license and who meet the qualifications of a licensee under this article. This subsection shall not prohibit the transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license, nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing such person's holdings by a total of ten percent or more of any class stock. 
(e)  If a transfer of location is approved by the mayor and council, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(f)  Except as provided in this section, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license issued automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. 
(g)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used, and no license will be issued to the old or the new owner for one year from the date of the violation. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-192. - Surrender of license. 
(a)  Criteria generally. Any licensee authorized to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages on specifically described premises shall be required to surrender the license held by him without demand of the mayor and council upon any of the following events: except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any sale or transfer of any interest in the business of the license holder, whether an actual sale of any of the license holder's stock or proprietorship or partnership interest to any unregistered person or upon a sale of all or substantially all of the license holder's assets to any unregistered person. For purposes of this subsection, the term "unregistered person" shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, club, association or fraternal order not shown upon any current application for an alcoholic beverage license on the specific premises involved, For purposes of this subsection, a sale of all or substantially all of the licensee's assets shall include, or be deemed to include, any sale of any specifically described premises or bulk sale of inventory or assets at any specifically described premises for which the license holder is licensed to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city. For purposes of this subsection, any corporation or limited partnership or association whose stock is traded on any stock exchange recognized by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission shall be excepted from this requirement to the extent of any transfer of shareholding or partnership interests not exceeding five percent in anyone trade or transaction. 
(b)  Time limit. Surrender as provided in this chapter shall be made to the city clerk within 30 days of any event requiring surrender of the license. 
(c)  Fines and failure to surrender. For failure to surrender the license within the period provided in subsection (b) of this section, the applicant shall be fined an amount as follows: 
(1)  The sum of $50.00 for failure to surrender within 30 days of the date that any surrender of the alcoholic beverage license is required; and 
(2)  An additional sum of $10.00 per day for each day thereafter from which the applicant fails or defaults in the surrender of the license after the date upon which the surrender is required. 
(d)  Assessment of penalty. The city clerk shall assess any penalty against any applicant for failure to surrender the license as required by this section. Notice of assessment shall be by certified letter to the licensee based upon information and belief of the city clerk stating the date that any required surrender should have been made by the licensee. The licensee shall have a period of ten days from the date of receipt of the certified letter of the city clerk of the notice of assessment of the penalty to protest the assessment to the city clerk by presenting evidence or information in writing to the city clerk as to the licensee's position. If the city clerk shall not agree with the licensee's position after the licensee's written showing, the licensee shall have ten days from the date of the written notice of the city clerk's written decision disagreeing with the licensee's protest to request protest to request in writing a hearing before the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall either approve or reject or modify the city clerk's assessment at its next regular meeting. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-193—2.5-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - LICENSE STATUS 

Sec. 2.5-216. - Expiration upon delinquency. 
A license issued under this article shall expire automatically and without notice upon the occurrence of a delinquency of 20 days in: 
(a)  Filing any required monthly report under this chapter; or 
(b)  Paying over any required exercise tax levied under this chapter or any other indebtedness owed to the city. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-217. - Revocation of state license. 
Whenever the state department of revenue shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, any license issued under this chapter to the same licensed premises shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the mayor and council or any city officer, and the licensee shall not be entitled to any refund of any license fee theretofore paid to the city. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-218. - Suspension in emergency. 
The mayor and the chief of police are each delegated the authority to suspend any license issued under this chapter for due cause in any emergency situation, and the suspension shall be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the next regular or called meeting of the mayor and council. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-219. - Other licenses. 
When the mayor and council find a violation of any section of this Code for which the licensee shall have his alcoholic beverage license suspended or revoked, all alcoholic beverage licenses of the licensee shall be so suspended or revoked. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Secs. 2.5-220—2.5-242. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - HEARING PROCESS 

Sec. 2.5-243. - ue cause hearing; defined; cost hearing. 
(a)  Except as provided in sections 75-216 through 15-219, no license which has been issued or which may be issued pursuant to this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after a hearing as provided in this chapter of the code. 
(b)  The term "due cause" for the purpose of this chapter of the code shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any person holding an interest in the license for any felony, any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics, or tax laws, or misdemeanor involving more moral turpitude. 
(2)  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any person holding an interest in the license for any sex offense when the licensed business permits on-premises consumption. 
(3)  Material falsification of any fact given in an application for a license issued under this chapter or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor. Any act, which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this chapter, shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented. 
(4)  Violation of any provision of this chapter, or any failure to meet or maintain any standard or regulation prescribed by this chapter as a condition or qualification for holding a license. 
(5)  Any other factor known to or discovered by the city whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in a license, has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, local ordinance or administrative regulations involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, narcotics or sex offenses and it shall create a rebuttable presumption that the violative act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-244. - Notice of violation. 
The city clerk shall notify the licensee in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, of any charge of conduct or offense subject to penalty, suspension or revocation or any combination thereof. If the potential sanction is suspension or revocation the notice shall also state the place and time the mayor and council will hear the charges against the licensee. The notice may also contain such additional information, as the city clerk may deem appropriate. The notice shall be deposited into the United States mail at least five days prior to the hearing date. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-245. - Action by mayor and council. 
(a)  Unless waived by the licensee, the mayor and council shall conduct a hearing on any charge against a licensee alleging conduct or offense that is subject to a suspension or revocation, at its next regularly scheduled meeting, but not later than 60 days from the date of notice to the licensee unless a continuance is granted at the request of the city or the licensee. The mayor and council shall have the discretion to call a special meeting to conduct a meeting or to reschedule or continue any hearing upon the request of the city or the licensee. The licensee shall be allowed to appear at said hearing to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. Upon hearing evidence from the city and licensee, if the licensee shall present any evidence, the mayor and council shall, no later than 30 days after the hearing, either dismiss all or some the charges against the licensee and/or, make a finding that a violation has occurred as to all or any one of the charges. If a violation is found to have occurred the mayor and council shall levy the monetary penalty provided in this article. The mayor and council may also make a finding that a licensee shall be allowed to pay any applicable penalty within a time certain not to exceed 30 days. The mayor and council shall have the authority to suspend the license of any licensee for a period of time not to exceed 30 days who: 
(1)  Has been found to have incurred more than three violations in a three-year period; or 
(2)  Has been found to have willfully violated the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The mayor and council may also make a finding that a willful violation of this article has occurred, and upon making such a finding, may determine that the license of any licensee be suspended for a period of time not to exceed 60 days or be revoked. For the purposes of this article, a finding that: 
(1)  The violation or a pattern of violations shows that the licensee lacks operational control regarding the responsible sale of alcohol or that the licensee's operations are contrary to the public safety or welfare of the community; 
(2)  That the licensee knowingly violated a provision of this article; or 
(3)  Knowingly made a false statement on either a document filed with the city or to any city official, 
Shall create a rebuttable presumption that a willful violation has occurred. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-246. - Procedures for first three violations. 
(a)  Except for a violation of this chapter that results in a suspension under section 15-218, or an initial determination by the police department that a willful violation has occurred, then, within ten business days of a citation for a violation of this chapter, a licensee may pay the monetary penalty to the city clerk for the first three violations of this chapter within a moving three-year period and forgo a hearing before the mayor and council. 
(b)  A licensee who fails to timely pay the monetary penalty as provided in the preceding section shall be noticed to a hearing before the mayor and council as provided in section 15-243. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-247—2.5-269. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SANCTIONS 

Sec. 2.5-270. - Sanctions for violations. 
(a)  Judicial remedy for violation of this chapter. Any person who violates any part of this chapter of the code, or knowingly and willfully makes a false statement in any affidavit required in section 15-97, shall be subject to citation and subpoena to the appropriate court, and to the judicial penalties resulting therefrom as provided in the code or by general law. 
(b)  Nonjudicial sanctions for violation of this chapter. In addition to the penalties of suspension or revocation as set forth in this article, a licensee shall be subject to monetary sanctions upon a finding of a violation after a hearing. For purposes of determining sanctions under this section, a violation shall include each distinct violation of this chapter though they are presented in a single hearing. 
(1)  A licensee shall be subject to a monetary sanction of $1,000.00 for each violation of this chapter. 
(2)  The failure of a licensee to pay when due any penalty or costs assessed pursuant to the terms of this chapter of the code shall result in the immediate suspension of all alcohol licenses issued by the city to such licensee. A suspension under this subsection shall continue until all penalties and other sums due the city by the licensee are paid in full. 
(3)  A revoked license shall become null and void as of the time of revocation. A holder of a revoked license shall not be entitled to a refund of all or a part of the license fee. A holder of a revoked license may apply for a new license after the expiration of the revocation period. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-271. - No refund of fee. 
When an alcoholic beverage license is revoked, suspended or expires pursuant to section 15-216 through 15-219, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-272. - Removal of signs and alcoholic beverages. 
When any license for selling alcoholic beverages is revoked or automatically expires pursuant to section 15-216 through 15-219, all alcoholic beverages and all signs indicating that such beverages may be sold or purchased shall be removed from the place of business, both outside and inside. After receipt by the police department of notice of such revocation or expiration, the police department shall take the necessary steps to see that this section is enforced. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-273. - Costs. 
If due cause to assess sanctions is found to exist, then the licensee shall be charged with and shall pay, in addition to any sanction, the actual costs of the court reporter arising from the take down and transcription of the hearing proceedings and, if applicable, the cost of translation services. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Secs. 2.5-274—2.5-296. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX 
DIVISION 1. - DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 2.5-297. - Unlawful sales. 
It shall be a violation of this division for any person to sell at retail within the city any distilled spirits by the drink on which the taxes provided for in this division have not been paid. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-298. - Levied. 
In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the city in the business of selling distilled spirits by the drink, as defined in this chapter, there is imposed and levied upon all such dealers an excise tax, to be computed and collected as set forth in this division. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Municipal excise tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 
Sec. 2.5-299. - Duties of wholesaler. 
Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping or delivering distilled spirits to any retail dealer in the city shall, as condition of the privilege of carrying on such business in the city: 
(1)  Keep true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of such distilled spirits to each retail dealer in the city. Such records shall be preserved for a period of one year and shall be made available on request for the inspection of any duly authorized city representative. 
(2)  Collect from each such retail dealer in the city, at the time of delivery of the distilled spirits, the amount of tax due under this division and hold the money in trust for the city until such amount is remitted to the city as provided in subsection (3) of this section. 
(3)  On or before the 20th day of each calendar month, make a verified and comprehensive report to the city which shall correctly show all sales and deliveries of distilled spirits to or for retail dealers in the city for the month immediately preceding the report. The report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount collected under the terms of this division and such other information as may be called for by the city. The report shall be accompanied by remittance to the city for all taxes collected or due as shown on the report. 
There is assessed a ten percent late charge on the gross tax due for the month. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-300. - Unlawful deliveries. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for any wholesale dealer or distributor or other person to deliver any distilled spirits to any retail dealer in the city without collecting the taxes provided for in this division at the time of delivery. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-301. - Noncompliance by wholesale dealer, distributor. 
If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports provided for in this division, the city shall notify the person in writing. If the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of the notice, the city may withdraw from the wholesale dealer or distributor the privilege of doing business in the city by revoking his license. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-302. - Frequency of payment 
The tax imposed in this division shall be computable and payable monthly. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-303. - Rate. 
The tax levied under this division shall be computed on the basis of $0.80 per gallon of distilled spirits sold or delivered. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Maximum rate of tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 
Sec. 2.5-304—2.5-326. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MALT BEVERAGES 

Sec. 2.5-327. - Imposed generally. 
Except as provided in section 15-328, there is levied and imposed upon each wholesaler dealer selling malt beverages within the city an excise tax in the amount of $0.05 per 12 ounces or proportionately of such amount of malt beverages sold by such wholesale dealer within the corporate limits, so as to graduate the tax on bottles, cans and containers of various sizes. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; occupation taxes for certain salesperson and merchants, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 
Sec. 2.5-328. - Tap or draft beer. 
All malt beverages sold in or from a barrel or bulk container and being commonly known as tap or draft beer shall not be subject to the excise tax provided for in section 15-327, but in lieu thereof there is imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling such malt beverages within the corporate limits an excise tax of $6.00 for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of not more than 15½ gallons sold by such wholesaler dealer within the city and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 
Sec. 2.5-329. - Separate from other charges. 
The excise taxes provided for in this division shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may be imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages at retail or wholesale within the corporate limits. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-330. - Payment and collection generally. 
The excise tax imposed in this division shall be paid and collected in the manner provided in this division. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-331. - Duties of retail dealers for receipt and presentation of invoices. 
All retail dealers of malt beverages and all persons selling at retail malt beverages within the city shall keep a correct record of all purchases of malt beverages and shall demand of and require all persons from whom they purchase malt beverages to furnish and deliver to them with such beverages a correct invoice of each purchase. The invoice shall be kept and preserved by the retailer at his place of business for a period of 12 months from date of the purchase. The invoices shall be open and subject to inspection by any authorized city representative at all reasonable times. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-332. - Report of wholesale dealers. 
Each wholesale dealer who has sold malt beverages within the city shall file a report by the tenth day of each month itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of all malt beverages, by size and type of container, for the month sold within the city. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this division. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81. 
Sec. 2.5-333. - Marking. 
No decal, stamp or other marking may be required on malt beverages designating the particular municipality or county in which a sale of malt beverages is made or in which resides a licensed retailer to whom the beverages are delivered. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-82. 
Sec. 2.5-334. - Delinquencies. 
The failure to make a timely report and remittance under this division shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of ten percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof during which such report and remittance are not filed. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Enforcement by city authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-84. 
Sec. 2.5-335. - False report. 
The filing of a false or fraudulent report under this division shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-336. - Revocation of license. 
In addition to the penalties in sections 15-334 and 15-335, the failure to make a timely report or remittance or the filing of a false or fraudulent report under this division shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of the business license issued by the city to a wholesale dealer. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to enforce collection and payment of tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-84. 
Secs. 2.5-337—2.5-359. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WINE 

Sec. 2.5-360. - Levied. 
There is imposed and levied a specific excise tax upon all retail dealers in wine within the city limits at the rate of $0.22 per liter container and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Municipal excise tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 2.5-361. - Separate from other taxes and fees. 
The tax levied under this division shall be in addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon retail dealers in wine and may be added by the retail dealer and collector as a sales tax from each customer, but the tax shall be paid nevertheless to the city by the retail dealer. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-362. - Payment and collection generally. 
The excise tax imposed in this division shall be paid and collected as provided in this division. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-363. - Invoices. 
Each wholesale dealer selling, shipping or delivering wine to any retailer dealer or to any establishment having a pouring license in the city, by rail, truck or otherwise, shall make three true and correct copies of invoices of all sales and deliveries made to and for retail dealers in the city. One copy shall be delivered to the retail dealer at the time of delivery and one copy shall be retained and preserved by the wholesaler, distributor or manufacturer for a period of 12 months from the date of the sale to the retail dealer. The copy so retained shall be subject to inspection by any duly authorized city representative at all reasonable times. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-364. - Collection and custody. 
At any time of delivery of wine, the wholesale dealer shall collect from the retail dealer the taxes imposed by this division and shall hold the money in trust for the city until the tax is remitted to the mayor and council as provided in this division. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-365. - Monthly report. 
On or before the 20 th day of each calendar month, each wholesale dealer, delivering wine to or for any retail dealer or to an establishment having a pouring license shall make a true and correct report to the mayor and council on blanks to be furnished by the mayor and council of all sales and deliveries made to or for retail dealers in the city for the current month immediately preceding the report. The report shall show the name of each retail dealer, the location of the place of business of the retailer or the place where each delivery was made, the method of delivery, the number and size of each container, the amount collected as taxes and such other information as may be called for by the mayor and council. The failure to receive such blanks will not excuse the furnishing of the report and the remittance of the taxes. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-366. - Remittance. 
The report required by section 15-365 shall be accompanied by remittance to the city for all taxes collected or due shown on the report. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-367. - Duties of retail dealers for receipt and preservation of invoices. 
All retail dealers of wine and all persons selling wine at retail within the city shall keep a correct record of all purchases of wine and shall demand of and require all persons from whom they purchase wine to furnish and deliver to them, with the wine, a correct invoice of each purchase. The invoice shall be kept and preserved by the retailer at his place of business for a period of 12 months from the date of the purchase. The invoices shall be open and subject to inspection by any authorized city representative at all reasonable times. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-368. - Failure to make reports. 
If a wholesaler, or retail dealer of wine fails and refuses to make the reports or maintain records as provided in this division and at the time specified, the mayor and council shall notify the party in writing by mail or otherwise. If the reports are not made and the taxes paid within five days from the date of the notice, the mayor and council shall proceed to assess the amount of taxes due by the dealer from the best information available, together with ten percent thereof as a penalty, and proceed to collect the taxes and penalty as provided for the collection of delinquent license taxes. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-369. - Sale upon which tax not paid. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the city any wine on which the tax as set out in this division has not been paid to the wholesaler for the city as provided or on which the tax not paid to the wholesaler at the time of delivery is not paid to the city by the retailer. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-370. - Prohibited sales and deliveries. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesaler, or other person to deliver any wine to any retail dealer in the city or to transport wine into the city for resale by any means whatsoever, except to licensed wholesale distributors, without collecting the taxes thereon as set out in this division at the time of delivery. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-371. - Revocation of license. 
Any retail dealer of wine failing or refusing to pay the tax imposed and levied in this division or failing to abide by any of the terms or sections of this article shall be deemed to have forfeited his privileges of conducting or engaging in the business of selling wine in the city, and any license issued to the dealer by the city prior to that time shall be revoked and canceled. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Secs. 2.5-372—2.5-394. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 2.5-395. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means the person designated by the licensee in his application for a permit to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
Alcoholic beverages means any beverage containing alcohol obtained by distillation, including any distilled or fermented liquid containing consumable alcohol, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, vodka, cordials or other spirituous liquors by whatever named called and including fortified wines as defined by the Federal Alcohol Administration, but does not include nonfortified wines, beer, ale or malt liquors. 
Drink and mixed drink mean any alcoholic beverage, as defined in this division, served for consumption on the premises, which may or may not be diluted by water or other substance in solution. 
Licensee means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, plural as well as singular number, who holds a permit from the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including receipts, credit, property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any individual, firm, or organization, who orders and gives present or future consideration for any alcoholic beverage by the drink. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this division. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this division. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-396. - Imposition and rate. 
There is imposed and levied upon every purchaser of an alcoholic beverage by the drink within this city a tax in the amount of three percent at the purchase price of the beverage. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-397. - Administration of division. 
(a)  Authority of mayor and council. The mayor and council shall administer and enforce this division for the collection of the tax imposed by this division 
(b)  Records required from licensee; form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in this city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the mayor and council may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audit. The mayor and council or any person authorized in writing by the mayor and council may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee for the sale of the alcoholic beverages by the drink and any licensee liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of this division, the mayor and council may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having possession or custody of information relating to purchases which are subject to the tax. Reports shall be filed with the mayor and council when required by the mayor and council and shall set forth the purchase price for each purpose, the date of purchase and such other information as the mayor and council may require. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-398. - Violations. 
Any person violating any section of this division shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 15-6. Any licensee or any other person who fails to furnish any return required to be made or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the mayor and council or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in this section. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-399. - Authority and requirement of licensee to collect. 
Every licensee or his agent is authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed in this division from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink within the licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be required by the mayor and council to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-400. - Collection; receipts. rules and regulations. 
Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink operating a place of business in this city shall, at the time of collection for food and/or drink served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the purchase price and tax imposed by this division on alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be itemized separately. When the collection of food and/or drinks is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee is liable at the time of and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The mayor and council shall have authority to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-401. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date. The tax imposed by this division shall become due and payable from the purchaser at the time of the purchase of any mixed drink in this city. All amounts of such taxes collected by the licensee shall be due and payable in the city monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth in section 15-400. 
(b)  Return. On or before the 20 th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the mayor and council in such form as the mayor and council may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of the tax under this division. All returns shall show the gross receipts of the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink and the amount of the tax collected on such drinks. 
(c)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, against any future liability for the tax. If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city, he will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the mayor and council, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid or from his administrators or executors. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-402. - Deficiency determinations on returns. 
(a)  Generally. If the mayor and council have cause to believe that the return of the tax or the amount of tax required to be paid to the city under this division by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service. The city or its designated representatives shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the city records. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Timeframe for mailing. Except for failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20 th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-403. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimates of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return as required in this division, the mayor and council shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in possession of the mayor and council. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection. 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof would have been returned until the date of payment. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-404. - Penalty for nonpayment. 
Any person who fails to pay the tax imposed in this division or who fails to pay any amount of the tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in subsection 15-403(b). 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 2.5-405. - Action for tax; tax credit; penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. 
At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected pursuant to this division becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the mayor and council may bring an action in the courts of this state any other state or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been paid erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this division, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city, he will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the mayor and council, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid or from his administrators or executors. 
( Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 2 ) 
Secs. 2.5-406—2.5-422. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISTILLERS 

Sec. 2.5-423. - License required. 
Any distiller licensed by the State of Georgia or the agent of such distiller shall be granted a license to manufacture distilled spirits in the City of Chatsworth for sale to wholesalers upon application for such license to the city clerk or his/her designee and the presentation of satisfactory evidence that the license applicant understands the alcoholic beverage rules and regulations of the State of Georgia and the City and the conditions under which such licenses are issued. 
Any person selling or manufacturing distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine within the corporate city limits shall provide the city clerk with a current copy of his/her state license. 
( Ord. of 6-1-15(1), § 15-70 ) 
Sec. 2.5-424. - License fees and special provisions. 
Distillers manufacturing distilled spirits in the city shall pay an annual license fee of $1,000.00. Annual manufacturing license fees shall be paid in advance on or before, January 15 of each year, and a new license granted during the calendar year shall be prorated for the remainder of the calendar year. 
(1)  A license shall expire automatically and without notice upon the occurrence of a delinquency of 20 days. 
(2)  In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon distillers or brewery engaged in the business of manufacturing in the city as defined in this chapter, there is imposed and levied upon an excise tax, to be computed and collected and reported to the city clerk by the 20 th day of each calendar month. The comprehensive report shall correctly show all sales to wholesalers, with names and address of each wholesaler that has purchased. 
( Ord. of 6-1-15(1), § 15-71 ) 
Sec. 2.5-435. - Special provisions applicable to distiller license. 
(a)  Distillers must comply with all applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
(b)  Distillers shall only sell distilled spirits to wholesalers and shall not sell distilled spirits directly to retailers or end consumers. 
(c)  Distillers shall not allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, except that distillers may allow free tastings of distilled spirits in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-4-180. 
( Ord. of 6-1-15(1), § 15-72 ) 
Chapter 3. - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1, adopted June 1, 2009 , repealed the former chapter 3, article I, §§ 3-1—3-8, article II, §§ 3-20—3-25, and enacted a new chapter 3 as set out herein. The former chapter 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1926, §§ 190, 191, 203, 212—217, 226; Ord. of 11-6-72, § 1; Ord. of 6-2-86, §§ 1—5; Ord. of 7-7-1997; Ord. of 7-12-99, §§ I—IX. 
Cross reference— Deposit of animal carcasses, § 7-24; creation of noise by animals, § 7-5(4). 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Domesticated animal means any animal raised so as to live in close proximity to humans. Such animals include dogs and cats, as well as varieties of poultry, livestock, or reptiles. 
Domesticated animal at large means any domesticated animal not under the restraint of a person capable of controlling it, on or off the premises of the owner. 
Owner means any person who owns, posses, harbors, keeps, or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept or has an animal in his care or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises for more than three days. 
Public nuisance means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of other animals or persons or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than its owner, to enjoyment of life or property. 
Public nuisance means and includes, but is not limited to, any animal that: 
(1)  Is found at large; 
(2)  Damages, the property of anyone other than its owner; 
(3)  Chases vehicles; 
(4)  Attacks other domestic animal. 
(5)  Unprovoked, attacks pedestrians or passersby; or 
(6)  Has been found by the animal control officer to be a public nuisance animal by virtue of being a menace to the public health, welfare or safety. 
Vaccination means a protection against rabies by inoculation with anti-rabies vaccine given in an amount sufficient to provide immunity from rabies for a minimum of one year. All dogs and cats within the city must be vaccinated against rabies with the vaccine and in the manner prescribed by the state veterinarian and the board of health of the state. Vaccinated dogs and cats shall be provided with proper tag. The owner of every dog or cat vaccinated shall obtain from a veterinarian a certificate of such information. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-2. - Protection of wild birds. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or maim any wild bird or to destroy the nest of such birds; except that when any such birds are declared by public authority to be a nuisance, any such birds may be destroyed in such numbers as deemed necessary by the public authority; and except that game or migratory birds may be killed only as authorized State or Federal law. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-3. - Livestock at large and the sale of—Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to allow any person to keep or maintain livestock, including fowl, horses, mules, cattle, pigs, goats, or any other farm or game animal in the city except in R-A zoning districts and upon not less than three acres. Stock yards, meat packing, slaughter yards or processing plants are permitted in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts and are exempted from this section. 
It shall be unlawful to hold livestock, swine, horse, fowl, or any other farm or game animal sale in the city except for educational purposes or in the R-A and M-1 or M-2 zoning districts, where livestock auctions are permitted to be held. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-4. - Same—Impounding; redemption of any animal. 
(a)  Length of time prescribed. Any non-biting animal seized and impounded under any of the provisions of this article shall be detained for a period of five working days, ten days for biting animals, and if ownership of the animal is not determined within that period, the animal shall be disposed of in such manner as the animal control department may designate. 
(b)  Wavier of time for healthy animals. If at any time during the required waiting period set forth above the owner affirmatively declines to reclaim the animal, the balance of the waiting period shall be waived and the animal shall be disposed of pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Waiver of time for sick and threatening animals. If at any time during the required waiting period, an examination of the animal by the animal control department indicates the animal to be severely sick and ..... or to be a threat to the health of other animals detained in the impoundment, the balance of the waiting period shall be waived and the animal shall be disposed of pursuant to this section. 
(d)  Authority to kill menacing animals. Nothing in this section shall prevent the animal control department from killing an animal when it determines that it is a menace to public safety or to other animals and cannot be impounded with reasonable effort. 
(e)  Certificate for sterilization. Any animal not heretofore sterilized which is released for purposes of adoption rather than to its owner for redemption shall be required to have a nonrefundable certificate purchased from the animal control officer in the amount as set forth by the animal control department. This certificate shall be redeemable by any participating veterinarian in Murray County. 
(f)  Seizure and quarantining of animals that have been deemed harmful by the department of animal control. If an animal has harmed any person to the extent to where the skin is either scratched or punctured, that animal shall be seized and impounded in quarantine for a period of not less than ten days so as to ensure that the animal is not rabid. 
(g)  Destruction of animals seized three or more times. If any animal is seized and ..... or impounded under any of the provisions of this chapter on three or more occasions, the animal shall be destroyed at the discretion of the animal control department. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-5. - Unlawful interference by third parties. 
(a)  Holding animal without consent of owner. No person shall, without the knowledge or consent of the owner, hold or retain possession of any animal which he does not own for more than 72 hours without first reporting the possession of such animal to the animal control department. This section shall not apply to those nonprofit organizations whose purpose is the protection of the animals. 
(b)  Causing animals to be in violation of article. No person shall willfully cause an animal to be in violation of any portion of this article. 
(c)  Attack, assault, or interfere with an officer of the animal control department. It shall be unlawful for any person to attack, assault, or in any way physically or verbally threaten or interfere with an animal control officer in the performance of those duties required to enforce this article. 
(d)  Motorist to notify animal control department and render assistance. Any motor vehicle operator who strikes any animal shall immediately give notice to the animal control department or appropriate law enforcement agency if unable to identify the owner immediately. If the animal requires veterinarian assistance, the owner shall be responsible for such bills. 
(e)  Cruelty to animals prohibited; defense allowed. No person shall perform a cruel act on any animal nor shall any person harm, maim, or kill any animal, except for the animal control department. Any person may, however, reasonably defend his person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal. The method used for killing the animals shall be designed to be as humane as is possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely kills an animal under the circumstances described herein shall incur no liability for such death. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-6. - Charging the owner with violation. 
In case the animal control department shall be unable to seize and impound any stock or animal found running at large, a charge shall be filed against the owner or other person entitled to the possession of such stock or animal, and who has permitted the same to run at large. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-7. - Swine and poultry prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or have any swine or poultry within the corporate limits of the city, except within the R-A zoning districts, upon not less than three acres. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-8. - City municipal court jurisdiction. 
The municipal court of the city shall have jurisdiction over all alleged violations of any section of this article and shall have all powers granted to it which are necessary and incident to the hearing and disposition of the matters brought before the court, such powers to include the authority to issue citations and summons for witnesses. The following persons have standing to file complaints for violations of this article: 
(1)  The animal control officer or his agent. 
(2)  Other law enforcement officers. 
(3)  Public health officials. 
(4)  Individuals with personal knowledge of the violation upon filing a sworn complaint with the city municipal court. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Secs. 3-9—3-19 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMALS 

Sec. 3-20. - Prohibited acts. 
If any dog or cat commits any of the following acts in the city and a legitimate complaint is filed with the animal control department or other law enforcement offices, the owner will be summoned to municipal court. 
(1)  Destroys or damages public or private property (including trash containers). 
(2)  Is a hazard to pedestrians, cyclists, or motorized vehicles. 
(3)  Becomes a public nuisance by continually barking at night. 
(4)  Is an abandoned dog or cat. Any animal shall be considered abandoned, for the purpose of this section, which shall have been placed public property or within a public building unattended and uncared for, upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property and is unattended or uncared for. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-21. - Animal barns, stables and pens; cleanliness. 
The owners of animal barns, stables and pens are required to keep the same properly cleaned out and frequently limed, so as not to be offensive to persons who reside near them. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-22. - Shelter requirements. 
Animals within the city may be confined in a yard with a fence adequate to prevent the animal from leaving the yard. As long as the fenced area permits the animal to reach shade, shelter and a supply of fresh water and food. Animals confined by fenced area shall be provided shelter which shall meet the following minimum requirements. 
(a)  The housing facilities shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animal from injury and to contain the animal. 
(b)  Enclosures shall be constructed and maintained to provide sufficient space to allow each animal adequate freedom of movement. 
(c)  Minimum standards of sanitation necessary to provide humanely clean conditions for both indoor and outdoor enclosures shall include periodic cleaning to remove excretions and other waste materials, dirt and trash to minimize health hazards. 
(d)  When sunlight is likely to cause heat exhaustion of an animal fenced or caged outside, sufficient shade by natural or artificial means shall be provided to protect the animal from direct sunlight. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-23. - Animal fights. 
It is unlawful for any person to promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, carry on, train for, attend or own any animal for the purpose of participating in any game, exhibition, contest or fight in which one or more animals are engaged for the purpose of injuring, killing, maiming, or destroying themselves or any other animal. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-24. - Animals disturbing the peace. 
It is unlawful for any person to allow any animal in his possession or control persistently or continuously to bark, howl, or make noise common to their species or otherwise to disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood. It shall likewise be unlawful to keep or maintain such animals in such a manner as to produce noxious or offensive odors or to other wise endanger the health and welfare of surrounding inhabitants. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-25. - Destruction of property. 
No animal shall destroy or damage private or public property. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-26. - Animals running at large. 
It is unlawful for any person owning or otherwise having a domesticated animal in his or her care, charge, custody, control, or possession to cause or to allow such domesticated animal to run at large, loose and unattended, in or on any public property, vacant lot, or private property, specifically including, but not limited to, the property of such owner. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-27. - Cruelty. 
It shall be unlawful to abandon any animal or fail to provide it with sufficient, wholesome, and nutritious food, water in sufficient quantities, proper air, shelter space and protection from the weather. No person shall kill, beat, cruelly treat, torment or otherwise abuse an animal or improperly use chains or restraints less than 12 feet in length. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-28. - Female dog or cats in heat. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow the animal to run at large while in heat. Such animals must be confined so as to prevent access by males. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-29. - Allowing animal to injure shade trees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow such person's horse, mule or other animal to bite, skin or otherwise injure any shade tree on public property. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-30. - Driving animals on sidewalks; obstructing crossings; hitching to trees, etc. 
It shall be unlawful to ride, drive or place any horse, mule or other animal on any sidewalk, or in any way obstruct the crossings at any intersection of streets in such manner as to prevent the passage of persons, or hitch any animal to any shade tree, electric light or telephone pole. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-31. - Cleanup requirement. 
The owner of any animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by such animal on public or private property with the exception of such animals used for transportation on public rights of way as outlined under O.C.G.A. 40-6-4. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ; Ord. of 8-3-09(2) ) 
Sec. 3-32. - Animal control. 
No person owning or otherwise having an animal in his or her care, charge, control, custody, or possession shall cause, permit, or allow such animal to be in or upon any public area unless such animal is under restraint by leash or other means. Animals are prohibited in those areas so designated and posted by the city. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-33. - Keeping of sick or diseased animals. 
It is unlawful for any person to own any animal which is seriously sick or injured without providing proper veterinary care for such animal. This section shall not be construed to include animals under active veterinary care or veterinary hospitals. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec 3-34. - Proof of vaccination required. 
Any animal requiring vaccination shall wear proper tags evidencing vaccination. If the animal is picked up by the animal control department and does not have a collar and proper tags shall be returned to its owner within five working days upon the owner's compliance with this section. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-35. - Penalties. 
Any owner whose animal is found to be in violation of any of the provisions herein may be cited by an animal control officer or other city law enforcement office's through a sworn complaint alleging any violation by a person who has knowledge of such violation and who can identify the owner of the animal involved or other premises where the animal is located. The maximum punishment for the violation of this article shall not exceed a fine of $1,000.00, or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-36. - Restrictions on permitting dogs to be outside proper enclosure. 
No person shall permit any dog to run at large anywhere out-of-doors in the city. This section shall apply to all public places and to private property. No person shall permit any dog to be out-of-doors in any place unless the dog is on a leash held by a person able to control the dog or in a yard with a fence adequate to prevent the dog from leaving the yard. Leaving an unattended dog fastened to a leash, chain, or trolley shall not be deemed to comply with the requirements of this section. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-37. - Maximum number. 
No person or household shall own, posses, harbor or keep more than three domesticated animals. Unless for educational facilities located in R-A zoning districts are exempted from this section. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-38. - Jurisdiction. 
(1)  This article shall govern the entire corporate limits of the City of Chatsworth. 
(2)  This chapter shall become effective following its enactment by the mayor and council of the City of Chatsworth, the public health, safety, and welfare requiring it. 
(3)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(4)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council of the City of Chatsworth that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are severable and if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases herein. 
( Ord. of 6-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS, CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Creation of noise, § 7-5(9). 
State Law reference— As to state minimum standard codes, see O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Codes adopted. 
(a)  For the following purposes respectively, this section is enacted: 
(1)  Establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipping, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures; 
(2)  Governing all electrical installations, wiring, service and matters relating to electricity, electric appliances, electric machinery, electrical wiring and the use, control, regulation and handling of all electric current in the city; 
(3)  Setting forth minimum energy conservation requirements in the design of new buildings and structures or portions thereof, renovated or altered buildings and lighting efficiency in public buildings and other structures within the city; 
(4)  Governing the installation, inspection and supervision of gas piping and gas appliances in the city; 
(5)  Regulating the keeping, storing and using "bottled gas" including propane, butane, propylene, or any other liquified hydrocarbon gas or any mixture of such gases, within the city; 
(6)  Governing all heating and air conditioning installations, repairs and service of all buildings and structures within the city; 
(7)  Governing all housing except insofar as such matters are otherwise provided for in the building, electrical, gas, heating and air conditioning, and state plumbing codes, and safety fire rules and regulations, of the city; 
(8)  Controlling all plumbing in the construction of all buildings and other structures within the limits of the city. 
(b)  The adoption and enforcement of the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended now and in the future by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, [are hereby adopted by reference]: 
(1)  International Building Code; 
(2)  International Mechanical Code; 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code; 
(4)  International Plumbing Code; 
(5)  National Electrical Code; 
(6)  International Fire Code; 
(7)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings; 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code (Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code); 
(9)  The following appendices of said codes, presently adopted and adopted in the future by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
a.  International Building Code; 
b.  International Mechanical Code; 
c.  International Fuel Gas Code; 
d.  International Plumbing Code; 
e.  National Electrical Code; 
f.  International Fire Code; 
g.  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings; 
h.  International Energy Conservation Code (Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code); 
(10)  The following Codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
a.  International Property Maintenance Code; and 
b.  International Existing Building Code. 
(c)  Copies of such codes are on file in the office of the city clerk and building inspector of the city. The same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city, unless a more restrictive provision in another provision of this Code or another ordinance is presently in effect. 
(d)  Any person charged with the violation of any provision of any of such codes, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 7-12-93, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-1995, § 1; Ord. of 7-12-10(1) ) 
Sec. 4-2. - Fire limits. 
The fire limits of the city shall be Blocks KK, LL, SS and TT, as shown by the official map of the city. 
(Code 1926, § 143) 
Sec. 4-3. - Building permits. 
(a)  Work plan prerequisite to issuance: No building or other structure or part thereof shall hereafter be constructed, enlarged or altered until a plan of the proposed work, together with a statement of the materials to be used, shall have been submitted to the building inspector, city engineer and fire department representative. If in accordance with the provisions herein contained, the building inspector shall issue a permit for the proposed construction. 
(b)  Removal of nonpermitted, nonconforming structures: Structures hereafter erected without permit, or not in conformity with this chapter, shall be removed and the violator prosecuted. 
(c)  Permit to precede work; compliance with technical codes required: No building shall be constructed, enlarged, altered or moved until a building permit has been obtained from the building inspector, and such official shall not issue such permit if the proposed construction, enlargement, alteration or moving would in any manner violate the housing, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, heating and air conditioning, zoning, or subdivision codes or regulations or any other codes or ordinances now or hereafter adopted by the city. 
(d)  Fees: The charge for issuing a building permit shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any construction or improvement up to $200.00 will be $2.50. 
(2)  Above $200.00 a charge of $2.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, with a minimum permit charge of $5.00. 
(3)  If permits required herein are not applied for within 48 hours of the beginning of work, then a penalty of $25.00 or double the amount of permit fees, whichever is greater, shall be charged. 
(e)  Application: All applications for building permits shall be made in duplicate upon forms provided for this purpose by the office of the building inspector with payment in the amount necessary to cover the cost of such building permit, together with all other exhibits and information as required. 
(f)  Persons responsible: The persons responsible for obtaining permits called for herein shall be the person actually doing the construction work or the person in charge of the construction work regardless of whether such person doing the actual construction work or in charge of the actual construction work is the owner, lessee or contractor. 
(g)  Display: All building permits called for in this section shall be displayed in a manner on the property under construction or on which repairs are being made so as to be visible from the public street closest to such construction site. 
(h)  Penalty for violation: All persons violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1926, §§ 136, 230) 
Sec. 4-4. - Building moving permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move a building of any kind over the public streets of the city without first obtaining a permit to do so. Such permit will be issued upon the payment of $25.00 for same and will set out the following requirements: 
(1)  Contact building inspector. 
(2)  Contact utilities. 
(3)  Obtain police escort. 
(Ord. of 6-17-84, § I) 
Sec. 4-5. - Sign permit and restrictions. 
(a)  A sign permit is required before a sign may be erected or attached to, suspended from or supported on a building or structure; and before an existing sign may be enlarged, relocated or materially improved upon to an extent of 60 percent of its total replacement value. 
(b)  A sign permit shall be issued by the building inspector when the plans, specifications and intended use of the applied sign or part thereof conform in all respects to the applicable provisions of this section and the city building code as certified by the building inspector. The application shall be accompanied by plans or such other information as the zoning administrator may require in the exercise of sound discretion in acting upon the application. Standardized sign plans may be filed with the zoning administrator in fulfillment of this requirement, although site plans to determine the location of a sign shall be filed with each application. 
(c)  The building inspector is hereby authorized to issue a temporary permit for special event signs to be placed along the streets of the city whereby the public will be informed about an upcoming event or directed to the location of an event. Such temporary permit shall require a $200.00 cash bond and shall allow the signs to be posted not earlier than ten days prior to the event nor longer than seven days after the event. The maximum size of such signs shall be 32 square feet. Such signs shall be set back from the street right-of-way at least ten feet. All special event and political signs authorized by temporary permit must be removed by the permittee by the eighth day after such event or election has been held or the cash bond is forfeited. Upon forfeiture of the bond by the permittee, the city's public works department shall be authorized to remove the affected signs. 
(d)  The building inspector is hereby authorized to issue a temporary permit for political signs to be placed along the streets of the city whereby the public will be informed about a candidate or directed to a political event. The temporary permit shall require a $200.00 cash bond and shall be for a period of not more than six weeks before a duly authorized election date (as established by applicable federal, state, or local law) and seven days after the election date. (Amendment April 4, 1983) 
(e)  The building inspector is hereby authorized to issue a temporary permit for portable signs subject to the requirements of [Section VII, Paragraph G.] 
(f)  Each application shall contain an agreement to indemnify and save the city harmless of all damages, demands or expenses of every character which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. 
Cross reference— Attaching signs to property, § 10-7; sign regulations, App. A, Art. III, § H; Art. IX; permit issued by zoning administrator, App. A, Art. IX, § D. 
Sec. 4-6. - Floodplain; defined. 
Floodplain means an area defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodplain map as floodprone. 
(Ord. No. 12-2-91, § 1; Ord. of 10-6-2003, § 1; Ord. of 10-6-2003, § 1) 
Editor's note— Sections 1 and 2 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 2, 1991 was not specifically amendatory of the Code. Said ordinance has been designated as §§ 4-6 and 4-7 and is included herein at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 4-7. - Connection to water or sewer systems; exception. 
On or after December 3, 1991, no connections to the water or sewer system of the city shall be made if the structure to be connected to the water or sewer system will be located in a floodplain or if a floodplain must be filled with dirt or other substances in connection with the construction of the structure which is to be connected to the water or sewer system, with the following exception: 
(1)  Connections to the water or sewer system of the city will be allowed in the areas designated on the drawing of the flood hazard area of the city, prepared by G. Ben Turnipseed Engineers dated September, 1991, provided the construction meets the FEMA rules and regulations. 
(2)  No connections to the water or sewer system of the city shall be made if: 
a.  The structure to be connected to the water or sewer system will be located in a floodplain or if a floodplain must be filled with dirt or other substances in connection with the construction of the structure which is to be connected to the water or sewer system; 
b.  Any jurisdictional freshwater wetland as designated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is involved unless the Corps of Engineers give specific approval otherwise; 
c.  There is any prime farm land involved as designated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture; and 
d.  The land involves any endangered or threatened species habitat as identified by the Endangered Species Act of 1973. 
(Ord. of 12-2-91, § 2; Ord. of 10-6-2003, § 2) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 4-6. 
Cross reference— Municipal utilities and services, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 4-8. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Purpose and scope. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes heretofore adopted. 
(2)  Code remedial. 
a.  General. These codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof—Which are public safety, health, and general welfare—Through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
b.  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this Code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
c.  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this Code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither The City of Chatsworth, nor any employee, agent or designee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(3)  Scope. 
a.  Applicability: 
1.  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
2.  Building. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures; except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
3.  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
4.  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
5.  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems; except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
6.  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as amended, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
7.  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Standard Fire Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
8.  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as amended, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
9.  One- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the International Residential Code for one- and two-family dwellings, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
10.  Unsafe buildings. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code shall provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
b.  Federal and state authority. The provisions of this Code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this Code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
c.  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
d.  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
e.  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(4)  Planning and zoning administrator. The office of the City of Chatsworth Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of these code provisions. The City of Chatsworth Planning and Zoning Administrator is hereinafter referred to as "building official". The employees, agents and designees of said building official are hereinafter referred to as "code enforcement personnel". The qualifications of the building official and the code enforcement personnel shall be established by the mayor and council of the City of Chatsworth. 
a.  Restrictions on employees. Officers, employees, and code enforcement personnel connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this Code, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
b.  Records. The Building Official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
c.  Liability . No officer, code enforcement personnel, employee, or member of the City of Chatsworth Building Code Board of Appeals (hereinafter "board of appeals"), charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the City of Chatsworth in the discharge of his duties, shall render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the City of Chatsworth until the final termination of the proceedings. 
d.  Reports. The building official shall submit to the mayor and council of the City of Chatsworth such reports as may be requested from time to time. 
(5)  Existing buildings. 
a.  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
b.  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
(6)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the building official. The term "building official" shall include, as to enforcement powers and duties, all code enforcement personnel. 
(1)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(2)  Right of entry. 
a.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
b.  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
(3)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official or code enforcement personnel, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(4)  Revocation of permits. 
a.  Misrepresentation of application. The building official or code enforcement personnel may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this Code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
b.  Violation of code provisions. The building official or code enforcement personnel may revoke a permit upon determination that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this Code. 
(5)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(6)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this of the other technical codes, shall be determined by the Building Official or Code Enforcement Personnel. 
(7)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official or code enforcement personnel. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(c)  Permits . 
(1)  Permit application. 
a.  When required, any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application and obtain the required permit for the work. 
Exception : Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
1.  Any portable heating appliance; 
2.  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
3.  Any portable cooling unit; 
4.  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this Code; 
5.  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
6.  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
7.  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kilograms) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 watts) or less. 
b.  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
c.  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
d.  Information required. Each application fora permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
e.  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(2)  Drawings and specifications. 
a.  Requirements . When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
b.  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
c.  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
1.  All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
2.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
3.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 square meters) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
Exception : Single family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect or engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
d.  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
e.  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
f.  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
1.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
2.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(3)  Examination of documents. 
a.  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicted and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
b.  Affidavits . The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(4)  Issuing permits. 
a.  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application fora permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
b.  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
c.  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
d.  Public right of way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in Chapter 22 of the Standard Building Code. 
(5)  Contractors responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(6)  Conditions of the permit. 
a.  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
b.  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
c.  Plans . When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(7)  Fees . 
a.  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
b.  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
c.  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
d.  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
e.  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(8)  Inspections . 
a.  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
b.  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
c.  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by (c)(8)f. [The] building official may accept reports of officials of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
d.  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy or Completion. 
e.  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
f.  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
BUILDING 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
2.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
ELECTRICAL 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
PLUMBING 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Note: See Section 417 of the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests. 
MECHANICAL 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
GAS 
1.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to insure compliance with all the requirements of this Code and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
ENERGY 
1.  Foundation inspection: be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
2.  Frame inspection: to be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
g.  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
h.  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
i.  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(9)  Certificates . 
a.  Certificate of occupancy. 
1.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
2.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
3.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
4.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
b.  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Service utilities. 
1.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
2.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
3.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorized disconnection of utility service to the building, structure of system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(10)  Posting floor loads. 
a.  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
b.  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor In pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the Building Department. 
c.  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(d)  Tests. The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(e)  Violations and penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the technical codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted there under, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(f)  City of Chatsworth Building Code Board of Appeals. 
(1)  Appointment. There is hereby established a board to be called the City of Chatsworth Building Code Board of Appeals (hereinafter referred to as "board of appeals") which shall consist of three members. The board shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Membership and terms. 
a.  Membership. Members of the board of appeals shall consist of three members. Such board members should be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience in the technical codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. A Board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
b.  Terms. The terms of office of the board member shall be staggered so no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. Vacancies shall be filed for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the mayor and council, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
c.  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this Code, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. 
d.  Secretary of board. The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(3)  Powers. The Board of Appeals shall have the power, as further defined in 6.4, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the office of the City of Chatsworth Planning and Zoning Administrator and consider variances of the technical codes. 
(4)  Appeals. 
a.  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the office of the City of Chatsworth Planning and Zoning Administrator to the board of appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
1.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
2.  The provisions of this Code do not apply to this specific case. 
3.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
4.  The true intent and meaning of this Code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
b.  Variances. The board of appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or this technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
1.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
2.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
3.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Code to other buildings, structures or service system. 
4.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will made possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
5.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this Code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(i)  Condition of variances. In granting the variance, the Board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
c.  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the Building Official. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the Building Official. 
d.  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system which, in the opinion of the building official is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeal to a shorter period. 
(5)  Rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
a.  Decisions. The board of appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official, or varies the application of any provision of this Code, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the board and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(g)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decisions. 
( Ord. of 7-12-10 ) 
Secs. 4-9—4-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Arts. 1—6), adopted September 13, 2010 , amended article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article II, §§ 4-20—4-41, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of 5-4-87, Arts. I—V. 
Cross reference— Flood hazard area development requirements, App. A, Art. VII, § C. 

Sec. 4-20. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 4-26. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(a)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(b)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(c)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(d)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 2, 1987 [The effective date of the initial FIRM for that community]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 04, 1987. [The effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the federal insurance administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or 
(2)  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after July 2, 1987 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 04, 1987 [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after May 04, 1987. [The effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 6)) 
Sec. 4-21. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 1, § A)) 
Sec. 4-22. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Chatsworth, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 1, § B)) 
Sec. 4-23. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 1, § C)) 
Sec. 4-24. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 1, § D)) 
Sec. 4-25. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Chatsworth, Georgia. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 2, § A)) 
Sec. 4-26. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 29, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated Sept 29, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for ( * Murray County * ) are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Chatsworth City Hall, 400 North Third Ave. Chatsworth, Ga. 30705. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 2, § B)) 
Sec. 4-27. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article PRIOR to the commencement of any development activities. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 2, § C)) 
Sec. 4-28. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 2, § D)) 
Sec. 4-29. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 2, § E)) 
Sec. 4-30. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 2, § F)) 
Sec. 4-31. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of City of Chatsworth or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 2, § G)) 
Sec. 4-32. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Chatsworth from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 2, § H)) 
Sec. 4-33. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The flood plain administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 3, § A)) 
Sec. 4-34. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the flood plain administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsection 4-37(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The floodplain administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 3, § B)) 
Sec. 4-35. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the flood plain administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 4-26, then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of sections 4-36—4-42. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 4-34(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsection 4-34(2). 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the floodplain administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsections 4-34(1)c. and 4-34(2) or 4-36(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the floodplain administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 3, § C)) 
Sec. 4-36. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings —All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 4, § A)) 
Sec. 4-37. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements —Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 4-36(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction —New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in Article 3, Section C. (6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles —Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 4-36(6) above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 4-37(3)a.3., above. 
(4)  Floodway —Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 4-26, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection 4-37(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 4-36—4-42. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 4, § B)) 
Sec. 4-38. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 4-26, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), OR where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 4-26 reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of sections 4-36—4-42. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 4-25(4) "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The floodplain administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 4, § C)) 
Sec. 4-39. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 4-37, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with 4-37. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 4, § D)) 
Sec. 4-40. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 4-37, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 4-36(4), "elevated buildings". 
The floodplain administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsection 4-34(1)c. and subsection 4-34(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 4, § E)) 
Sec. 4-41. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 4, § F)) 
Sec. 4-42. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 4, § G)) 
Sec. 4-43. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The construction code board of appeals as established by the City of Chatsworth shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this ordinance. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the construction code board of appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of Murray County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if Any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the construction code board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this ordinance. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the construction code board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), § 1(Art. 5)) 
Secs. 4-44—4-49. - Reserved. 
Article III. - Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 2-6-17(1), §§ II—IX, adopted February 6, 2017 , amended article III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article III, §§ 4-50—4-57, pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control, and derived from Ordinance of 6-7-10(2), § 1. 
State Law reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

Sec. 4-50. - Title. 
This article will be known as "City of Chatsworth Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. of 2-6-17(1), § I ) 
Sec. 4-51. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The limestone valley soil and water conservation district. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 4-53(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 4-52(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Lime Stone Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(a)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
(b)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(c)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. of 2-6-17(1), § II ) 
Sec. 4-52. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of subsection 4-53(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. of 2-6-17(1), § I ) 
Sec. 4-53. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this ordinance shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsection 4-53(b) an d(c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(1)  Construction site operators are also responsible for implementing effective erosion and sediment control best management practices at all times. This includes waste control at the construction site including, but not limited to, proper management of discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste to the construction site to prevent adverse impacts to water quality; 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsection 4-53(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in (c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 4-53(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single—family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsection 4-53(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. of 2-6-17(1), § IV ) 
Sec. 4-54. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of City of Chatsworth without first obtaining a permit from the land development officer or designee to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the land use and development office and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 4-54(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsection 4-53(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by six copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  A fee, in the amount of $58.00 shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof up to ten acres and $12.00 per acre or fraction thereof for the remaining project area. In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23. Provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, an these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsection 4-53(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 4-54(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $1,500.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection 4-53(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this ordinance. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsection 4-53(c)(15) and (16), are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 4-54(b)(6), are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this ordinance. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7 (f) (1). 
( Ord. of 2-6-17(1), § V ) 
Sec. 4-55. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The land development officer or designee will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the Local Issuing Authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The land development officer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7 (e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
( Ord. of 2-6-17(1), § VI ) 
Sec. 4-56. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this ordinance, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 4-54(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this ordinance under county ordinances approved under this ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. of 2-6-17(1), § VII ) 
Sec. 4-57. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. of 2-6-17(1), § VIII ) 
Sec. 4-58. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Chatsworth City Code Board of Appeals within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Murray County. 
( Ord. of 2-6-17(1), § IX ) 
Secs. 4-59—4-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER RESTRICTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—6 of an ordinance adopted Mar. 4, 1991 was not specifically amendatory to the Code. Said ordinance has been designated as Art. IV, §§ 4-70—4-75 and is included herein at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 4-70. - Definitions. 
(a)  Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
(b)  Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
(c)  Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 3-4-91, § 1) 
Sec. 4-71. - Requirements for construction. 
On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of one and six-tenths gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this paragraph shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of two and five-tenths gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two and five-tenths gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. of 3-4-91, § 2) 
Sec. 4-72. - Commercial buildings. 
On or after July 1, 1992 there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections (1) through (5) of section 4-71 of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-4-91, § 3) 
Sec. 4-73. - Existing buildings. 
The requirements of section 4-71 of this article shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991 and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Ord. of 3-4-91, § 4) 
Sec. 4-74. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 4-71, 4-72 and 4-73 of this article when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; or, 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; or, 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or, 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or, 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee of $35.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. of 3-4-91, § 5) 
Sec. 4-75. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector of the city. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. of 3-4-91, § 6) 
Sec. 4-76. - Standards for outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)  Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the incorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial agricultural operations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 to the extent such operations are otherwise permitted in this Code; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia department of natural resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in ordinance. 
(2)  The chief executive officer and his designee of each of the water utilities shall be the enforcement authority for this ordinance as to all persons who are customers of his respective water utility. 
(3)  Each of the water utilities shall enforce this ordinance through its respective water conservation plan, as the same may be modified in conformity with applicable law and regulations from time to time. 
(4)  Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the enforcement authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the municipal court. 
( Ord. of 1-3-11(1), §§ 1, 2 ) 
Chapter 4.5 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—4 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 13, 1993 was not specifically amendatory to the Code. Said ordinance has been designated as Art. II, §§ 4.5-21—4.5-24 and is included herein at the editor's discretion. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4.5-1—4.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RATES 

Sec. 4.5-21. - Regulation of basic service rates and charges. 
The city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise. 
(Ord. of 12-13-93, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-22. - Consideration of views of interested parties. 
In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. 
(Ord. of 12-13-93, § 2) 
Sec. 4.5-23. - Authorization of certification. 
The mayor, or his or her designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
(Ord. of 12-13-93, § 3) 
Sec. 4.5-24. - Effective date. 
This article shall be effective immediately. 
(Ord. of 12-13-93, § 4) 
Chapter 5 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 5-1. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter the term ``emergency management'' shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than the functions for which the state and federal governments are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy nuclear attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or by acts of nature, fire, explosion, civil disorders or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, law enforcement services, medical and health services, rescue services, engineering services, warning services, communications, defense from radiological fallout, welfare services, evacuation when and where necessary, emergency transportation, plant and utility protection, restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to the protection and well-being of the population of the city, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to preparation for and the carrying out of the above functions. 
(Ord. of 4-5-71, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2. - Emergency management office; director. 
There is hereby established the city emergency management office. The mayor and city council shall appoint a director of emergency management for the city. When appointed the director will be a deputy director on the Chatsworth-Murray County emergency management or civil defense staff and is charged: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  With assisting city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  With developing in conjunction with the county emergency management or civil defense director, the plan for emergency functions set forth in section 5-1. 
(4)  With maintaining and carrying out the day-to-day administration of the emergency management program including the rendering of required reports to the Chatsworth-Murray County emergency management or civil defense office. 
(5)  Rendering reports such as financial, daily activity, etc., as required by governing officials in keeping with good business practices. 
(6)  Procuring, with authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the city emergency operating center. 
(7)  During periods of a declared emergency, and under the supervision of governing officials, coordinate the activities of the city emergency operating center staff. 
(Ord. of 4-5-71, § 2) 
Sec. 5-3. - Emergency management organization. 
The emergency management organization shall be established around existing city departments and agencies and the emergency functions listed in section 5-1 are assigned as follows: 

 
Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing the standing operating procedures for their assigned emergency functions. 
(Ord. of 4-5-71, § 3) 
State Law reference— Authority to form, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 5-4. - Declaring state of emergency—In case of attack or disaster. 
In the event of an actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other disaster which might affect the lives or property of the citizens of the city, the mayor, or in the mayor's absence, the mayor pro tem, may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws, and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management forces. 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any property for the protection of the public. 
(3)  To sell, lend, give, or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the city, to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and of funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-5-71, § 4) 
Sec. 5-5. - Same—In case of civil disturbance, etc. 
In addition to any and all powers enumerated in this Code, the mayor, or in the mayor's absence, the mayor pro tem, as the chief executive of the city, shall have further emergency powers as follows: 
(1)  The mayor, or mayor pro tem in mayor's absence, shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when, in such official's opinion, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
a.  There is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions. 
b.  Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of city streets or areas difficult or impossible. 
c.  Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists. 
d.  There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. 
(2)  After declaration of such emergency the mayor, or the mayor pro tem in the absence of the mayor, as chief executive, shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
a.  The power to use employees of the city to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of citizenry of the city. 
b.  The power to close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists. 
c.  The power to impose emergency curfew regulations. 
d.  The power to close business establishments within the affected areas. 
e.  The power to close any or all municipally owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public. 
f.  The power to do all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city. 
(3)  No emergency power as set forth in this section shall be effective for more than 72 hours after the declaration of an emergency by the mayor. However, upon declaration of a second or further emergency to exist the emergency powers as set forth in this section may be exercised during such further emergency periods, but never for more than 72 hours in one declared emergency period. 
(4)  No emergency period declared under this section shall extend beyond the next regular, special or called meeting of the governing body. 
(5)  The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
(Ord. of 10-2-67, § 3) 
Sec. 5-6. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Ord. of 4-5-71, § 5) 
Sec. 5-7. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 4-5-71, § 6) 
Sec. 5-8. - Liberality of construction. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes. 
(Ord. of 4-5-71, § 7) 
Sec. 5-9. - Conflict of laws. 
Where the provisions of this chapter are in conflict with existing local laws or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter will govern during a declared emergency. 
(Ord. of 4-5-71, § 8) 
Chapter 6 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Fire prevention code—Adopted. 
There is adopted by the municipality for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, the Standard Fire Prevention Code, 1991 edition, as revised, published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. Not less than one copy of such code is filed in the office of the clerk and is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this Code, and it provisions shall be controlling within the limits of the municipality. 
(Ord. of 7-12-93, § 1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Same—Enforcement. 
The fire prevention code adopted herein shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. 
Sec. 6-3. - Same—Chief to have power to modify. 
The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted herein upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or a duly authorized agent of the owner or lessee, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department shall be furnished the applicant. 
Sec. 6-4. - Same—Appeal. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the governing body within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
Sec. 6-5. - Same—Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted herein or fail to comply with it, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made under the code, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved under the code, or any certificate or permit issued under the code, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with an order as affirmed or modified by the governing body or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in section 6-4, shall severally, for each violation and noncompliance respectively, be punished as provided in section 1-8. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All persons in violation shall be required to correct or remedy the violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
Sec. 6-6. - Remedying unsafe conditions. 
If any building shall appear to the governing body in charge of such matters, to be dangerously exposed to fire on account of defective flues, the unsafe location of stoves, heaters or gas jets, the exposure of unprotected windows to outside fires, the improper storage or accumulation of combustibles or explosives, or for any other reason, the owner or agent of such building shall at once make such building safe as directed by such authority. 
(Code 1926, § 142) 
Sec. 6-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of 8-1-16(1), § 1, adopted August 1, 2016 , repealed § 6-7, which pertained to discharge of fireworks and derived from Code 1926, § 205. 
Secs. 6-8—6-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU 

Sec. 6-20. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established the fire prevention bureau, a service within the fire department. The fire prevention bureau shall consist of a chief fire inspector and such other inspectors as are designated by the fire chief. 
(Ord. of 8-3-87, § 2) 
Sec. 6-21. - Investigative duties. 
The fire prevention bureau shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city in which any person is injured or killed or in which property has been damaged or destroyed and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design, or was unavoidable. The fire prevention bureau shall report the findings of the investigation to the fire chief on forms designated by the fire chief in a timely manner. 
(Ord. of 8-3-87, § 3) 
Sec. 6-22. - Inspections for permits. 
Whenever any city ordinance requires an inspection to be made by the fire department, such inspection shall be made by the fire prevention bureau. 
(Ord. of 8-3-87, § 4) 
Sec. 6-23. - Periodic inspections. 
The fire prevention bureau shall, to the extent that manpower is available, inspect premises throughout the city to look for fire hazards, explosion hazards, and violations of city ordinances relating to fire and explosion hazards. 
(Ord. of 8-3-87, § 5) 
Sec. 6-24. - Notice to remove combustible material; compliance required. 
(a)  Whenever any fire inspector finds in any building, or upon any premises or other place, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any highly flammable materials that may endanger property; or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, such inspector shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or building. 
(b)  Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within a reasonable period after service of this order, shall be liable to penalties as provided in this Code. 
(c)  The service of any such order may be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy of the same to such occupant personally or by certified mail. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of any premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the person a copy of the order, or, if such owner is absent from the city or cannot be found in the city, by mailing such copy by certified mail to the owner's last known post office address. 
(Ord. of 8-3-87, § 6) 
Sec. 6-25. - Entering private premises. 
Upon arriving at any private premises to make an inspection, each member of the fire prevention bureau shall identify such member's self to the owner, occupant or person in charge. If the owner, occupant or person in charge refuses to let the member of the fire prevention bureau enter the premises, the member of the fire prevention bureau shall not attempt to force entry but shall obtain, with the help of the city attorney, a search warrant or other appropriate court order to permit entry and inspection of the premises. 
(Ord. of 8-3-87, § 7) 
Sec. 6-26. - Nuisance, injunction. 
Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this Code, the city attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this article. Such application for relief may include a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent injunction. 
(Ord. of 8-3-87, § 9) 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-27. - Title. 
This article shall be known and designated as the "fireworks regulations ordinance." 
( Ord. of 8-1-16(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-28. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article and defined by state law, the term: 
Consumer fireworks means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. 
Consumer fireworks retail sales facility shall have the same meaning as provided for 120 by NFPA 1124; provided, however, that such term shall not include a tent, canopy, or membrane structure. 
Consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124. 
Distributor means any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership which sells consumer fireworks. 
Electric plant shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A Code Section 46-3A-1. 
Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. 
NFPA 1124 means the National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 Edition. 
Nonprofit group means any entity exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, any entity incorporated under Chapter 3 of Title 14, the 'Georgia Nonprofit Corporation Code,' or a sponsored organization of a public or private elementary or secondary school in this state. 
Proximate audience means an audience closer to pyrotechnic devices than permitted by the National Fire Protection Association Standard 1123, Code for Fireworks Display, as adopted by the safety fire commissioner. 
Pyrotechnics means fireworks. 
Store shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124; provided, however, that such term shall only include such buildings with at least 4,000 square feet of retail display space and wherefrom: 
(1)  No more than 25 percent of such retail display space is used for consumer fireworks and items or products as provided for under paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of this Code section; and 
(2)  Other items or products which are not consumer fireworks or items or products as provided for under paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of this Code section are sold; and provided, further, that such term means a person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership with more than one mercantile location, where all such mercantile locations are collectively known to the public by the same name or share central management. 
Waste-water treatment plant shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A Code Section 43-51-2. 
Water treatment plant shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. Code Section 43-51-2. (b) 
(b)  As used in this ordinance, the term 'consumer fireworks' or 'fireworks' shall not include: 
(1)  Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term 'consumer fireworks' or 'fireworks' include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and 
(2)  Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture." (1) "Consumer fireworks" means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 46 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-29. - Limited prohibition as to consumer fireworks or fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to offer for sale at retail or wholesale, to use or ignite or cause to be ignited, or to possess, manufacture, transport, or store any consumer fireworks or fireworks, within the city except as expressly authorized by the general law of the State of Georgia. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-30. - Prohibition of consumer fireworks or fireworks in city park areas or the use of fireworks at a time or place not authorized by the general law of the State of Georgia except pursuant to a special use permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to offer for sale at retail or wholesale, to use or ignite or cause to be ignited, or to possess, manufacture, transport, or store any consumer fireworks or fireworks, on, upon, or above any city property, including but not limited to the public parks of the city, except as allowed by a special use permit issued by the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks on any day at a time not allowed by the general law of the State of Georgia within the City, unless such person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership is issued a special use permit by the City Council for the use or explosion of consumer fireworks in a location within the City at a time not allowed for under the general law of the State of Georgia. The applicant for a special use permit shall use the application forms of the city for said permit, and shall designate the time or times and location that such person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership desires to use or ignite or cause to be ignited such consumer fireworks or fireworks. The city council shall consider the application, and considering reasonable factors such as the time requested, the proposed location of the fireworks display, prior experience concerning the applicant's use of fireworks, the potential for fires or wildfires, and other reasonable factors, and in its discretion based upon these factors grant or deny the issuance of a special use permit. If the special use permit is granted by the city council, then the applicant shall pay a special use permit fee of $100.00 to the city. If the application is denied, then the applicant shall have a right of appeal to the Superior Court of Murray County pursuant to the procedures for the grant of a writ of certiorari by said court. The City of Chatsworth, the city council, and the agents of the city shall have no liability as to any decision made pursuant to this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks on, upon, or above any location where such person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership is not lawfully present or is not otherwise lawfully permitted to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks; or within 100 yards of an electric plant; water treatment plant; waste-water treatment plant; a facility engaged in the retail sale of gasoline or other flammable or combustible liquids or gases where the volume stored is in excess of 500 gallons for the purpose of retail sale; a facility engaged in the production, refining, processing, or blending of gasoline any flammable or combustible liquids or gases for such retail purposes; any public or private electric substation; or a jail or prison; within 100 yards of the boundaries of any public use air facility or any public use landing area or platform marked and designed for landing use by helicopters; within any park, historic site, recreational area, or other property which is owned by or operated by, for, or under the custody and control of the City of Chatsworth, except pursuant to a special use permit as provided for in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this section; within any park, historic site, recreational area, or other property which is owned by or operated by, for, or under the custody and control of the State of Georgia, except pursuant to any rules and regulations of the agency or department having control of such property which may allow for such use or ignition of consumer fireworks; within 100 yards of a hospital, nursing home, or other health care facility; provided, however, that an owner or operator of such facility may use or ignite or cause to be ignited consumer fireworks on the property of such facility or may grant written permission to any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited consumer fireworks on the property of such facility. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-31. - Occupational tax for a licensed distributor operating a permanent consumer fireworks retail sales facility or store in the city. 
A licensed distributor operating a permanent consumer fireworks retail sales facility or store shall be entitled to receive a city occupational tax license for said facility or store upon making application for said license from the city pursuant to the city's procedure, and providing a copy of the license issued to the distributor and as to said permanent facility or store by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner or the Judge of the Probate Court of Murray County and as provided by general law. The occupational tax license fee for said licensed distributor shall be assessed for said licensed distributor upon the same basis as other businesses, professions, or occupations under the city's occupational tax ordinance. Any termination, revocation, or suspension of the license issued by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner shall act to automatically in similar fashion terminate, revoke, or suspend the city occupational tax license issued to said licensed distributor. If the licensed distributor selling consumer fireworks from a permanent consumer fireworks retails sales facility or store as defined herein, then any city occupational tax license issued for said store shall be sufficient to authorize the sale or the offer for sale at retail or wholesale any consumer fireworks without having said store acquire an additional occupational tax license from the city as to the sale of consumer fireworks or fireworks. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-32. - License for a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. 
The City of Chatsworth is hereby authorized to issue a temporary license (and which shall also serve as a temporary occupational tax license) for a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand or stands, provided that the city fire department determines that the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand meets the requirements of the general law of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(c)(1) and O.C.G.A. § 25-10.5.1(a)(1). In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(c)(2), a temporary license shall also be granted in the event that the judge of the probate court of Murray County determines that such a temporary license should be issued due to an appeal of the decision by the applicable fire department. The application for the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall be submitted to the applicable fire department, and with a copy provided to the city clerk. Any temporary license issued shall identify the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand applicable to such license, and the temporary license shall expire on the next January 31st after the issuance of such license. The license fee for a distributor selling consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall be $500.00 per location, payable to the governing authority of the city. All temporary licenses for a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall only be issued to licensed distributors where the sales of consumer fireworks from such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands shall accrue to the benefit of a nonprofit group as agreed between the licensed distributor and the participating nonprofit group. A nonprofit group benefitting from the sale of consumer fireworks pursuant to this provision shall directly participate in operating the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-33. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city fire department is authorized to refer cases for enforcement as to violations of O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(c) to the state fire marshal. 
(b)  All fireworks manufactured, offered for sale, exposed for sale, or stored in violation of this ordinance or state law, or both, are declared to be contraband and may be seized, taken, and removed, or caused to be removed and destroyed at the expense of the owner thereof, or both, by any authorized law enforcement officer operating within the City of Chatsworth. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-34. - Certain devices unlawful that require a flame for propulsion or lighting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to release or cause to be released any balloon, bag, parachute, or other similar device which requires fire underneath for propulsion or to release or cause to be released any floating water lantern or wish lantern which uses a flame to create a lighting effect in any public waters within the City of Chatsworth. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-35. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership that knowingly violates the provisions of this article may be punished by a fine, or imprisonment, or both, up to the maximum penalties allowed under section 1-8 of the code of the City of Chatsworth, or pursuant to state law. Each act in violation of this article, including but not limited each sales transaction, shall be deemed to be a separate offense, and subject to the maximum penalties as provided herein. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16(1), § 1 ) 
Chapter 7 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Sewers, § 8-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Abatement of nuisances. 
Any person creating, keeping or maintaining a nuisance on premises owned or occupied by such person, whether a public or private nuisance, or allowing such nuisance to continue after notice to remove the same from the premises by the city, shall be guilty of an offense, and the offending party shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-8. 
(Code 1926, §§ 204, 209) 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 7-2. - Slaughter pens prohibited. 
No slaughter pen shall be erected or established within the city. 
(Code 1926, § 201) 
Sec. 7-3. - Open wells. 
The owners of all open and dangerous wells in the city shall close in, cover, or otherwise abate such nuisances. Upon failure to do which, such nuisance shall be abated by authority of the city and the cost of abating same collected from the owner. 
(Code 1926, § 202) 
Sec. 7-4. - Loud and unnecessary noises—Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the city. 
Sec. 7-5. - Same—Acts enumerated. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this Code, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc.: The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or any other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creating by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; or the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc.: The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the purpose of producing or reproducing sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with more volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, etc.: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Animals, birds, etc.: The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Steam whistles: The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(6)  Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motorboat or any other motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Defect in vehicle or load: The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(8)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes: The creating of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading of a vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(9)  Construction or repairing of buildings: The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period of not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building inspector should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if such inspector shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, such inspector may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(10)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals: The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, court or church, while many of the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(11)  Hawkers, peddlers: The shouting and crying of wares, ringing bells or use of other noisemaking devices by peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(12)  Drums: The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale, except parades, etc., authorized by proper authorities. 
(13)  Metals, rails, pillars and columns, transportation thereof: The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along the streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, or trucks, which in any way disturbs the peace and quiet of persons in such streets or public places. 
(14)  Railroads, operation thereof: The causing, permitting or continuing any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of a railroad locomotive or cars. 
(15)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc.: The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliances, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(16)  Blowers: The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of the operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(17)  Motor vehicle brake equipment: The usage of any and all compression release engine brakes on any motor vehicle is prohibited within the corporate limits of the city. For the purposes of the subsection, "compression release engine brakes" shall be defined as any device which, by the release of compressed air within an engine cylinder prior to the ignition of fuel therein, results in the slowing of said vehicle. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 7-6. - Same—Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in the time of an emergency. 
(3)  Any other noise resulting from activities of temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the city in accordance with its ordinances and laws. 
Sec. 7-7. - Same—Tests and standards. 
(a)  Factors to consider: The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of sections 7-4 and 7-5 exist shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The volume of the noise. 
(2)  The intensity of the noise. 
(3)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual. 
(4)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural. 
(5)  The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any. 
(6)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities. 
(7)  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates. 
(8)  The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates. 
(9)  The time of the day or night the noise occurs. 
(10)  The duration of the noise. 
(11)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant. 
(12)  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(b)  Tables: 
TABLE I—LIMITING NOISE LEVELS FOR  USE DISTRICTS 

 
If the noise is not smooth and continuous, one or more of the corrections in Table II below shall be added or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in Table I. 
TABLE—II TYPE OF OPERATION IN  CHARACTER OF NOISE 
Noise source operated less than 20 percent of any one-hour period; plus 5.* 
Noise source operated less than five percent of any one-hour period; plus 10.* 
Noise source operated less than one percent of any one-hour period; plus 15.* 
Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc.): minus 5. 
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.): minus 5. 
*Apply one (1) of these corrections only. 
If the noise occurs between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday or at any time on Sunday or holidays, seven shall be subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in Table I. 
Motorized vehicles. It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized vehicle within the city which creates a noise or sound which exceeds the noise level limits set out in Table III below. 
TABLE III—LIMITING NOISE LEVELS  FROM VEHICLES 
(c)  Trucks and buses: 
Over 10,000 pounds: 
93 dB(A) measured at 25 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
97 dB(A) measured at 50 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
Under 10,000 pounds: 
80 dB(A) measured at 50 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
86 dB(A) measured at 25 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
(d)  Passenger cars: 
78 dB(A) measured at 50 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
84 dB(A) measured at 25 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
(e)  Motorcycles, including other vehicles: 
87 dB(A) measured at 50 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
93 dB(A) measured at 25 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
Secs. 7-8—7-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER, CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES; JUNK[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 7-20—7-28 are hereby deleted as being superseded by §§ 1—4 of an ordinance adopted July 5, 1989. Said sections pertained to litter, cleanliness of premises and junk and derived from §§ 206—208 of the 1926 Code, § 4 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 7, 1949, an ordinance adopted Jan. 9, 1950, an ordinance adopted Aug. 1, 1955, and an ordinance adopted Sept. 8, 1975. Sections 1—4 of an ordinance adopted June 5, 1989, have been designated as §§ 7-20—7-23 at the editor's discretion. Subsequently this article has been amended by an ordinance adopted Nov. 6, 1989 and is herein set out. See history note following each section for specific derivation thereof. 
Cross reference— Cleanliness of animal enclosures, § 3-7. 
State Law reference— Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20; littering, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-40 et seq.; 40-6-249. 

Sec. 7-20. - Definitions. 
(a)  Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
(b)  Public or private property means the right-of-way of any street, road or highway; any body of water or watercourse; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties; timberlands or forest. 
(Ord. of 11-6-89, § 1) 
Sec. 7-21. - Dumping, depositing, etc., litter on public or private property or waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, organization, or governmental entity or representative, to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter upon any public or private property, whether residentially or commercially zoned, or otherwise within the city, unless: 
(1)  Such property is designated by the city for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use the property in such manner; or 
(2)  The litter is placed within a self-contained litter receptacle or container that may be opened and closed securely so as to prevent the blowing of such litter from the receptacle or container and so as to prevent infestation of vermin or insects. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Upon first offense: 
a.  By a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00; 
b.  By having to perform a certain number of hours of designated community service not to exceed 40 hours; or 
c.  By both subsections a. and b. under this first offense. 
(2)  Upon second offense: 
a.  By a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00; 
b.  By having to perform a certain number of hours of community service not to exceed 100 hours; or 
c.  By both subsections a. and b. under this second offense. 
(3)  In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(4)  In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of the sentence. 
(5)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-6-89, § 2; Ord. of 10-6-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 7-22. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of section 7-21 of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of section 7-21 is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the litter belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 11-6-89, § 3) 
Sec. 7-23. - Litter on private property. 
(a)  Neglected premises visible to the public. It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling a house or other building or premises, to maintain such premises in a reasonable clean and orderly manner and to a standard conforming to other orderly premises in that vicinity. It shall be a violation of this section to abandon, neglect or disregard the condition or appearance of any premises so as to permit it to accumulate litter thereon. 
(b)  Areas around business premises; clean conditions. The owner or person in control of any public place, including but not limited to restaurants, shopping centers, fast food outlets, stores, hotels, motels, industrial establishments, office buildings, apartment buildings, housing projects, gas stations, and hospitals and clinics shall at all times keep the premises clean of all litter and shall take measures including daily cleanup of the premises to prevent litter from being carried by the elements to the adjoining premises. It shall be a violation of this section to abandon, neglect, or disregard the condition or appearance of such premises so as to permit it to accumulate litter thereon. 
(c)  Premises owned or controlled by a handicapped person who cannot, due to their handicap prevent the violation of this article, may request assistance in correcting the violation. All requests of this nature should be directed to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 11-6-89, § 4) 
Sec. 7-24. - Nuisances on private property. 
(a)  Definition of nuisances. For the purposes of this article, the term "nuisance" is defined to mean any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others of which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or the deposition on, or the scattering over of any of the following: 
(1)  Lumber, junk, or trash, or debris; 
(2)  Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, or containers; 
(3)  Any compost pile which is of such nature as to spread or harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors, or harmful gas, or attract rodents, vermin or other disease-carrying pests, animals or insects, provided that the presence of earthworms in a compost pile shall not constitute a nuisance; 
(4)  Keeping unsanitary matter on premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or permit another to keep upon any premises deleterious or septic material, unless such material is retained in containers or vessels which deny access to humans, flies, insects, rodents and animals. 
(b)  Duty of maintenance of private property. No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. 
(c)  Exterior storage of nonoperating vehicles prohibited. No person in charge or in control of premises, whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise shall allow any partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise nonoperating motor vehicle to remain on such property longer than 30 days; and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the city for a longer time than 30 days; except that this section shall not apply with regard to any vehicle in an enclosed building or so located upon the premises as not to be readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. This article shall further not apply with regard to any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place, other than in a residential district, and operated in a lawful manner, when the keeping or maintenance of such vehicle is necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or with regard to a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city or any other public agency or entity. 
(Ord. of 11-6-89, § 5) 
Sec. 7-25. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this article may be accomplished by the city in any manner authorized by law, and in addition, any person who by reason of another's violation of any provision of this article, suffers special damage to himself different from that suffered by any other property owners throughout the city generally, may bring any action to enjoin or otherwise abate an existing violation by contacting the city clerk and signing a complaint. Complaints will be investigated by the ordinance committee and if considered justifiable, action will be taken to correct the violation. 
(Ord. of 11-6-89, § 6) 
Secs. 7-26—7-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SAFE DRINKING WATER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Municipal utilities, § 8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 7-30. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Auxiliary intake: Any piping connection or other device whereby water may be secured from a source other than that normally used. 
By-pass: Any system or piping or other arrangement whereby the water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant. 
Cross-connection: Any physical connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building, in such manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or back-pressure valves, or because of any other arrangement. 
Interconnection: Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, or other device which does or may contain sewage or other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
Person: As defined in section 1-2, includes any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
Public water supply: The waterworks system furnishing water to the city for general use and which supply is recognized as the public water supply by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources/Environmental Protection Division. 
(Ord. of 12-12-88, § 1) 
Sec. 7-31. - Compliance with state rules and federal law by city. 
The city public water supply is to comply with Chapter 391-3-5-.13 of the Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water and PL 93-523, the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, legally adopted in accordance with this Code, which pertains to cross-connections, and establish an effective, on-going program to control these undesirable water uses. 
(Ord. of 12-12-88, § 2) 
Sec. 7-32. - Cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes and interconnections—Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or interconnection to be made; or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 12-12-88, § 3) 
Sec. 7-33. - Same—Statement and agreement. 
Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the public water supply, and who also has on the same premises a separate source of water supply or stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from which the water stored therein is circulated through a piping system, shall file with the superintendent of the water commission of the city a statement of the nonexistence of unapproved or unauthorized cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or interconnections. Such statement shall also contain an agreement that no cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or interconnection will be permitted upon the premises. 
(Ord. of 12-12-88, § 4) 
Sec. 7-34. - Same—Time for remedying prohibited conditions. 
Any person who now has cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or interconnections in violation of the provisions of this article shall be allowed a reasonable time within which to comply with the provisions of this article. After a thorough investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required to complete the work, the amount of time shall be designated by the superintendent of the water commission of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-12-88, § 7) 
Sec. 7-35. - Inspection; right of entry; access to information. 
The superintendent of the water commission or the superintendent's authorized representative shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the city public water supply for the purpose of inspecting the piping systems thereof for cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or interconnections. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections. 
(Ord. of 12-12-88, § 6) 
Sec. 7-36. - Inspection of water supply where cross-connections with public water supply exist, required. 
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of the water commission to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross-connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the superintendent of the water commission. 
(Ord. of 12-12-88, § 5) 
Sec. 7-37. - Protective devices. 
(a)  Where the nature of use of the water supplied a premises by the water department is such that it is deemed: 
(1)  Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation; 
(2)  That the owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot or is not willing to demonstrate to the official in charge of the system, or the official's designated representative, that the water use and protective features of the plumbing are such as to propose no threat to the safety or potability of the water supply; 
(3)  That the nature and mode of operation within the premises are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing; 
(4)  There is a likelihood that protective measures may be subverted, altered, or disconnected; 
the superintendent of the water commission, or the superintendent's designated representative, shall require the use of an approved protective device on the service line serving the premises to assure that any contamination that may originate in the customer's premises is contained therein. The protective device shall be a reduced pressure zone type backflow preventer approved by the superintendent of the water commission as to manufacture, model, and size. The method of installation of backflow protective devices shall be approved by the superintendent of the water commission prior to installation and shall comply with the criteria set forth by the superintendent of the water commission. 
(b)  The installation shall be at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(c)  The department shall have the right to inspect and test the devices on an annual basis or whenever deemed necessary by the superintendent of the water commission or the superintendent's designated representative. Water service shall not be disrupted to test the device without the knowledge of the occupant of the premises. 
(d)  Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations or protection of life, property, or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the protective devices. Where only one unit is installed and the continuance of service is critical, the superintendent of the water commission shall notify, in writing, the occupant of the premises of plans to discontinue water service and arrange for a mutually acceptable time to test and/or repair the device. The water system shall require the occupant of the premises to make all repairs indicated promptly, and the expense of such repairs shall be done by the owner or occupant of the premises. These repairs shall be made by qualified personnel, acceptable to the superintendent of the water commission. 
(Ord. of 12-12-88, § 8) 
Sec. 7-38. - Protection of potable water supply. 
The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified herein. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
"W A T E R U N S A F E 
F O R D R I N K I N G" 
Minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters one inch high located on a red background. 
(Ord. of 12-12-88, § 9) 
Sec. 7-39. - Violations. 
Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day of continued violation after conviction shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the fines and penalties, the superintendent of the water commission shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection, and service shall not be restored until such cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or interconnection has been discontinued. 
(Ord. of 12-12-88, § 10) 
ARTICLE IV. - TIRE STORAGE, HANDLING AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 7-40. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Scrap tire. All tires which are no longer suitable for their original, intended purposes because of wear, damage, or defect. 
Scrap tire generator. Any person, firm, business, or corporation which generates, on average annually, in excess of 20 scrap tires per month. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, auto scrap/salvage/junk yards, private company maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments. 
Structural cover. A permanent shelter designed to shield or to protect from natural elements in order to prevent water pooling. 
Tire retailer. Any person engaged in the business of selling new, retreaded, or used replacement tires. 
Used tires. A tire which has a minimum of one-sixteenth inch of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose or is suitable for retreading. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 7-41. - General requirements. 
(a)  All scrap tires or used tires located upon any lot or parcel within the city shall be stored under a structural cover. 
(b)  The owner, occupant, tenant, and/or lessee shall be responsible for the sanitary and lawful handling and disposition of scrap tires or used tires upon any lot or parcel and may be cited for any violation of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to burn, to bury, to place in any creek, river, pond, lake, or other state waters, or otherwise to dispose of any scrap tires or used tires except as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 7-42. - Special requirements of scrap tire generators. 
(a)  All scrap tire generators in the city shall obtain a scrap tire generator identification number from the Georgia Department of Environment Protection Division. 
(b)  All scrap tire generators shall initiate a manifest to transport scrap tires from the point of generation to an end user or an approved scrap tire processing or disposal, in accordance with EPD rules. 
(c)  All scrap tire generators shall maintain accurate records of the information used for manifests, including, but not limited to, the total tonnage of scrap tires transported, names and permit numbers of carriers, dates of transport, and destinations of scrap tires. 
(d)  All scrap tire generators shall assure than any person collecting and transporting scrap tires holds a valid scrap tire carrier permit required pursuant EPD rules. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 7-43. - Collection site at Murray County Landfill. 
The Murray County Landfill will provide a collection site for scrap tires for individual residents of the city and for other entities within the city which generate less than 20 scrap tires per month for a fee equal to the cost of transferring said tires to a scrap tire processor. All other entities shall dispose of all tires in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20, the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 7-44. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Jurisdiction for the enforcement of this article shall be in the Municipal Court of Chatsworth. 
(b)  Any person authorized by general law or specifically by the city to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any private or public property, lot, or parcel, upon reasonable cause and at reasonable time, in order to inspect for compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 7-45. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating this article shall be guilty or a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or by imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(b)  In the sound discretion of the municipal court of the city, any person convicted hereunder may be required to take such action as necessary to abate or to remedy any such violation hereunder. 
(c)  Each day that a violation of this article continues, or is permitted to be continued, shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2002, § 1) 
Secs. 7-46—7-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NUISANCE—DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 7-60. - The City of Chatsworth nuisance abatement ordinance. 
This article is known as and may be cited as "The City of Chatsworth Nuisance Abatement Ordinance". 
( Ord. of 6-6-11(1), § 7-40 ) 
Sec. 7-61. - Intent and purpose. 
The mayor and council of the City of Chatsworth hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform and exclusive summary procedure for use in the abatement of public nuisances in the corporate boundaries of the City of Chatsworth. The provisions hereof are adopted pursuant to the authority provided by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et. seq. As amended by the 2001 and 2004 Sessions of the General Assembly, and may be further amended from time to time. It is the further purpose and intent of this article that the procedures established hereunder shall comply with the minimum provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et. seq. 
( Ord. of 6-6-11(1), § 7-41 ) 
Sec. 7-62. - Conflicting law. 
Should a conflict between the provisions of this article, dealing with dwellings, buildings and structures, and provisions for the abatement of a nuisance found elsewhere in this code, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
( Ord. of 6-6-11(1), § 7-42 ) 
Sec. 7-63. - Findings. 
The mayor and council that there exist within the corporate boundaries of the city properties which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; which have other conditions that render such properties unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county; or which are vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes. 
( Ord. of 6-6-11(1), § 7-43 ) 
Sec. 7-64. - Definitions. 
As used throughout this article, the term: 
Applicable codes means (1) any housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A., title 8, ch. 2, including standard minimum codes as adopted now or hereafter by city ordinance, or other property maintenance or building standards or codes as adopted now or hereafter by city ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; and (2) any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A., title 25, ch. 2. Any such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provide by law. 
Closing means causing a property to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A., title 16, ch. 13, art. 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act" as amended from time to time. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court. Interested party shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Owner means both the current owner of record and any current mortgagee holding legal title by virtue of a security instrument as shown by a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia. 
Property means any lot, tract, or parcel of real estate whether improved or unimproved. It shall include any dwelling, building, structure, or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouse, improvement, and appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term shall expressly include, for means of amplification and not limitation, swimming pools and wells. Also as used in this article, the term shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Public authority means any member of the mayor and council, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the city government relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning properties in the city; however, in no event shall any such public authority who files a request for investigation under section 83-7 be the public officer exercising the powers conferred upon public officers under this article. 
Public officer means either the director of community development or his or her designee, the director of public safety or his or her designee, or the director of the county board of health or his or her designee. 
Repair means altering or improving a property so as to bring any dwelling, building, or structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and/or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create unsanitary and unsafe conditions which are an endangerment to the public health or safety in or about any property. 
Resident means any person residing in the city on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
( Ord. of 6-6-11(1), § 7-44 ) 
Sec. 7-65. - Duties of property owners. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every property located within the corporate limits of the city (1) to construct and maintain such property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the corporate limits of the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any property in violation of such codes or ordinances; and (2) to keep such property reasonably clean and free of any materials or conditions which create a health or safety hazard either on such property or to surrounding persons or properties. 
(b)  No owner shall allow any property located within the corporate limits of the city to be used in the commission of drug crimes. 
( Ord. of 6-6-11(1), § 7-45 ) 
Sec. 7-66. - Nuisance abatement procedure. 
(a)  Appointment and designation of public officer. Each of the following is hereby appointed and designated as a public officer with the authority to carry out the powers and duties of this article; the director of community development, the director of public safety, and the director of the county board of health. Such appointment and designation shall include the designees of such persons. 
(b)  Complaint and investigation. Whenever a request is filed with a public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any property: 
(1)  Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer with whom the request is filed shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific property to determine if such conditions exist under applicable codes. The public officer shall have the authority to enter upon premises to conduct an inspection, provided such entry is made with the least possible inconvenience to the person(s) in possession. If such an inspection is necessary, the public officer shall endeavor to obtain the permission of the owner to conduct such inspection. If permission is withheld, the public officer may seek the assistance of the city attorney's office to obtain an inspection warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The public officer may determine under existing ordinances that a property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use upon a finding of conditions on the property which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants, occupants of neighboring properties, or other residents of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; and uncleanliness. The public officer may determine that the property is being used in the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency. 
(c)  Judicial complaint and summons. If the public officer's investigation or inspection confirms that any property meets one or more of the three enumerated standards from subsection (b), the public officer may file in a court of competent jurisdiction a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property wherein the nuisance complained of exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(d)  Time of hearing. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held no sooner than 15 days and no later than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. However, in the event that service upon the probate judge is necessary under the provisions of section 7-47, the hearing will be held no sooner than 30 days following service upon the probate judge, though still in no event shall the hearing be held more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint. 
(e)  Right to be heard. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(f)  Order. If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the property in question meets one or more of the standards enumerated in subsection (b) so as to constitute a public nuisance, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order which does one of the following: 
(1)  If the repair of the said property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to its present value, the order shall require the owner, within a specified time, to repair such property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to effect a closing of any structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair of the said property in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value thereof, the order shall require the owner, within a specified time, to demolish and remove the noncompliant dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, in cases in which the nuisance complained of is a dwelling, building, or structure of any kind, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors with a current business license to do work in the city, or qualified building inspectors with a current business license to do work in the city, without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations. 
(g)  Remedies of public officer in the event of noncompliance with order. 
(1)  The order entered under subsection (f) shall further provide that, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, demolish, or close the property within the specified time, the public officer may cause such property to be repaired, demolished, or closed. Such abatement action shall commence within one year after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the one year period in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer is also authorized to file a motion for attachment for contempt against the owner with the court which issued the order as an alternate or additional remedy. 
(2)  If the public officer chooses to have the work done as ordered on any dwelling building or structure, he or she shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words, including the Spanish translation: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(h)  Salvage. If the public officer has a structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. Neither the public officer nor the city shall have any liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(i)  Lien for costs. The order shall provide that the amount of all costs associated with the abatement actions shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such costs shall include but not be limited to the cost of demolition, reasonable attorney's fees and all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, restoration to grade of the real property should it be demolished, and title examination costs. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition, in the office of the clerk of superior court, and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 83-8(b). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien for costs of abatement on the general execution docket. Such lien should cross-reference the order and include the original caption and case number from the nuisance abatement action. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid in full. 
(j)  Enforcement of lien. 
(1)  Upon a final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer shall transmit to the tax commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the general fund of the city. 
(2)  Enforcement of liens may be initiated at any time following receipt by the tax commissioner of the final determination of costs. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(3)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the city and the tax commissioner in the enforcement of the lien. Redemption of the property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(k)  Waiver and lien. The mayor and council may waive and release any such lien imposed on property of the owner for costs incurred by the city up to the time of the entry of the order and any additional costs incurred subsequent thereto in attempting to bring the property into compliance by entering into a contract with the owner in which the owner agrees to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrates the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(l)  Appellate procedure. Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a property shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(m)  Alternate remedies. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to limit or impair the authority of public officers or other city employees under existing and future ordinances to issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and to seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this code section. The issuance of a citation for a violation of any such codes shall not be required as a prerequisite to issuing a complaint in rem under this section. 
( Ord. of 6-6-11(1), § 7-46 ) 
Sec. 7-67. - Service and notice. 
(a)  Copies of the complaint and summons shall be served in each of the following ways as applicable: 
(1)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  For an interested party whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(b)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint and summons shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
( Ord. of 6-6-11(1), § 7-47 ) 
Cross reference— Abatement of unsafe buildings authorized, § 2-38(12); O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 
Chapter 8 - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Floodplain, defined, § 4-6; connection to water and sewer systems; exception, § 4-7; cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, and inter-connections, § 7-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Water and sewer service installation charges. 
(a)  Water: The following charges shall be made by the city for water installation, where available, upon application thereof, which charges include the furnishing of a water meter, labor and material for installation from the city's water main in its street, or wherever located, to the user's property line: 
(1)  Inside city ..... $400.00 
(2)  Outside city ..... 500.00 
However, if the cost of water installation exceeds the above charges, the water installation fee will be equal to the cost of said installation, including the furnishing of a water meter, labor and material for installation from the city's water main in its street, or wherever located to the user's property line. The charge for installation is payable when application for meter and connection is made. Water installation fees for the following roads, for which the city has existing petitions, will remain at $400.00 for a period of 60 days past completion of each particular line. After the said 60-day period the water installation fee will increase to $500.00. The said roads are as follows: 

 
(b)  The following charges shall be made by the city for sewer service installation, where available, upon application thereof, which charges include the furnishing of pipe, labor and other materials for installation from the city's sanitary sewer in the street or wherever located to the user's property line as follows: 
(1)  Inside city ..... $400.00 
(2)  Outside city ..... 500.00 
For the purpose of this chapter, sewer service shall be considered as available when there is accessible within 200 feet of the property upon which the water user's building (or buildings) is located, a public sanitary sewer pipe line of the city in operation, or where any person discharges sewage into the sanitary sewer system of the city. All sewer service installation outside the city must be approved by the mayor and council. 
The charge for installation shall be payable when application for the connection is made. 
(Ord. of 12-1-75, §§ 3, 8, 9; Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Sec. 8-2. - Application for water and sewer service, deposit. 
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service, in person, at the city hall, and at the same time shall make a cash security deposit of $20.00 for water service, which shall include sewer service. 
(Ord. of 10-30-73, § 2) 
Sec. 8-3. - Water and sewer rate schedules. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted the following water and sewer rate schedules for the city: 
(1)  Water rate schedule: 
a.  Inside city: 
1.  0—2,000 gals., minimum ..... $5.20 
2.  Over 2,000 gals., per 1,000 gals. ..... 1.40 
b.  Outside city: 
1.  0—2000 gals., minimum ..... 8.40 
2.  Over 2,000 gals., per 1,000 gals. ..... 2.65 
(2)  Sewage rate schedule: 
a.  0—2,000 gals., minimum ..... 5.20 
b.  Over 2,000 gals., per 1,000 gals. ..... 1.40 
(3)  Other charges: 
a.  Re-connect fee during regular business hours ..... 10.00 
b.  Re-connect fee after regular business hours ..... 20.00 
(b)  The rate schedule set forth above contemplates a single user, such as one-family dwelling, one-farm dwelling with appurtenances, or one-commercial operation. 
(c)  Extraordinary circumstances, such as multiple dwelling units, industrial users, and fire protection, shall be governed by special contract agreements made by the governing body on recommendation of the city engineer. Charge one minimum each unit. 
(Ord. of 10-30-73, § 1; Ord. of 12-1-75, §§ 1, 2, 7; Ord. of 3-3-86(1), § 1; Ord. of 11-6-89) 
Sec. 8-4. - Charges for automatic sprinklers. 
In addition to any other charges set forth herein, all persons owning or occupying premises served by an automatic sprinkler system shall be required to pay a charge as follows: 
(1)  Inside city, per month, per sprinkler head ..... $0.10 
(2)  Outside city, per month, per sprinkler head ..... 0.12 
(Ord. of 12-1-75, § 4) 
Sec. 8-5. - Charges for storage tanks. 
In addition to any other charges set forth herein, any water user owning or occupying premises on which is located a water storage tank for use in connection with fire protection shall be required to pay a charge as follows: 
(1)  100,000 gallons or less, per month ..... $30.00 
(2)  Each additional 100,000 gallons or part thereof, per month ..... 30.00 
(Ord. of 12-1-75, § 5) 
Sec. 8-6. - Charges for fire hydrants. 
In addition to the charges set forth herein, any water user owning or occupying premises on which is located a fire hydrant which is connected to the city's water line shall be required to pay a charge as follows: 
(1)  Inside city, per month ..... $16.00 
(2)  Outside city, per month ..... 16.00 
(Ord. of 12-1-75, § 6) 
Sec. 8-7. - Use of water on lot to which furnished; free water. 
Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Ord. of 10-30-73, § 4) 
Sec. 8-8. - City's responsibility and liability as to water. 
The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 8-1(a), will be made for a five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee above will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. 
(1)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable cost for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(2)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or backflow. 
(4)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-30-73, § 5) 
Sec. 8-9. - Industrial cost recovery charge. 
(a)  Established: All persons or contributors discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers shall be assessed a prorated charge, in addition to the sewer service charge. The charge shall be that proportionate part of the construction costs, paid by the city water works commission for the sanitary sewerage facilities constructed under the project designated as sewerage system improvements (Contract "A") the industrial wastes occupy in the facilities in relation to the design capacity of the facilities. 
(1)  The charge for the facilities based on twenty-four-hour constant flow shall be computed as follows: Flows discharged to the system in less than 24 hours will be prorated accordingly. 

 
*Total cost includes engineering but does not include the 75% federal grant. 
**Proportionate factor for these facilities is the ratio of the amount of the industrial waste to the design capacity of the facility, both in MGD. 
X = Industrial flow in MGD. 
(b)  Basis: The amount of the surcharge shall be based on the population equivalent (PE) the waste occupies in the sewage treatment plant. One PE shall be defined as 0.17 pounds of biochemical oxygen demand per day or 0.17 pounds suspended solids or 100 gallons (13.33 cubic feet) per day of flow, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Rate: The sewage treatment plant, designed for a PE of 7,500 costs $36,400.00 yearly to operate and maintain at the present time. This cost of operation will vary each year and therefore is subject to change. The cost using the above figure is $4.85 per PE per year. The rate of surcharge shall therefore be $0.40 per PE per month which amounts to persons discharging industrial waste to the public sewers paying for the capacity their waste occupies in the sewage treatment plant in excess of the values stated above in subsection (a)(1) and (a)(2). 
(d)  Future waste contributors: When it becomes necessary after July 1, 1976, to increase the capacity of any of the above facilities to provide sewerage service and sewage treatment to any future industrial contributor, or to increase the capacity due to an increase in flow and/or strength of the waste of any industrial contributor being served as of the date of the enactment of this section, such future and existing industrial contributor shall pay its prorata share of such improvements plus its prorata share of the costs listed under subsection (a)(1) and (2) above. 
(Ord. of 11-22-76(1); Ord. of 6-7-77(1)) 
Sec. 8-10. - Consumer's responsibility and liability as to water. 
Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of the consumer's household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, or other purpose, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(1)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(2)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(3)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state department of human resources. 
(4)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Ord. of 10-30-73, § 6) 
Sec. 8-11. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement or right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Ord. of 10-30-73, § 7) 
Sec. 8-12. - Discontinuing service by consumer; changing occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make such person liable for paying for the water consumed since the preceding meter reading. 
(Ord. of 10-30-73, § 8) 
Sec. 8-13. - Billings; collecting. 
Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at the water department building; a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent or relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment within ten days from the due date will ensure a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. 
(2)  Nonpayment within 15 days from the date due will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 45 days after original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate agreement, and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply, any water under the agreement. 
Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the governing body is made, and a service charge of $10.00 is paid for each meter reconnected. 
(Ord. of 10-30-73, § 9) 
Sec. 8-14. - Suspension of service. 
When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(1)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bill, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(2)  The city reserves a right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
a.  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
b.  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
c.  Emergency repairs. 
d.  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
e.  Legal processes. 
f.  Direction of public authorities. 
g.  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Ord. of 10-30-73, § 10) 
Sec. 8-15. - Complaints; adjustments. 
If the consumer believes the bill to be in error, such owner may present a claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and such payment shall not prejudice the claim. 
(1)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee of $0.00 provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual cost of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of the previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Ord. of 10-30-73, § 11) 
Secs. 8-16—8-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF SEWER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 10, 1996, amended Art. II in its entirety, in effect deleting Art. II and enacting a new Art. II to read as set out. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Sept. 10, 1990, Arts. 1—13. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-20. - Purpose and policy. 
This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code #1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(6)  To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance; and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 1.1) 
Sec. 8-21. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated by the superintendent to other city personnel. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 1.2) 
Sec. 8-22. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
• BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
• CFR - Code of Federal Regulations 
• COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand 
• EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
• gpd - gallons per day 
• mg/l - milligrams per liter 
• NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
• POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
• RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
• SIC - Standard Industrial Classification 
• TSS - Total Suspended Solids 
• U.S.C. - United States Code 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 1.3) 
Sec. 8-23. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or the Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority shall mean the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Georgia. 
Authorized representative of industrial user shall mean the authorized representative of an industrial user may be: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, productions, or operations facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second quarter 1980), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Authority shall mean the City of Chatsworth. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under EPA approved laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees C, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection. 
Categorical standards shall mean the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment Standard, which are found in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N. Parts 405-471. 
City shall mean the governing authority of the City of Chatsworth, GA or the board of the Chatsworth Water Works Commission or their designated agent. 
Cooling water shall mean the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Control authority shall mean the City of Chatsworth. 
Combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Customer shall mean every person who is responsible for contracting with the city and in obtaining, having, or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through said system. Said terms shall include the occupants of each unit of and multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
Direct discharge shall mean the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Georgia. 
Department head shall mean the person designated by the authority as head of the water and pollution control department. 
Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others, and/or a granted right to go in, upon, and over all or any part of the property for the purpose of inspecting, sampling, to insure and protect the environment, POTW, or anything covered in this article. 
Environmental Protection Agency, of EPA shall mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Floatable oil is oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil or fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Flush toilet shall mean the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving foods. 
Grab sample shall mean a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Health officer shall mean the director of the county board of health, the department head of the water and pollution control department, or other person designated by the city and their duly appointed assistants. 
Holding tank waste shall mean any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge shall mean the discharge or introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307 (b) or (c) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317) into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial user shall mean a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to Section 402, of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
Industrial waste shall mean the wastewater from industrial processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary waste. 
Industrial waste surcharge shall mean the charge made in excess of the sewer service charge for all wastewater over and above normal wastewater. 
Infiltration/inflow shall mean the groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes or other openings. 
Interference shall mean a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, it's treatment processes or operations or it's sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is cause of a violation of the authority's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any State Sludge Management Plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Medical waste shall mean isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and displays wastes. 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Pretreatment Standards shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA on accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial user. 
National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or Prohibitive Discharge Standard shall mean any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5. 
Natural outlet shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body surface of groundwater. 
New source shall mean: 
(1)  Any building, facility; or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating process of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new sources as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program (*) any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment: or (**) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable period of time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit shall mean a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
Noncontact cooling water shall mean water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Normal wastewater shall mean wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentrations do not exceed the following: BOD-300 mg/l, - Tss-300 mg/l, NH3-N-40 mg/l; and the total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
Pass through shall mean a discharge which exits the POTW into water of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the authority's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person shall mean any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, governmental entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
pH shall be the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Pit privy shall mean shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a flytight slab on which is securely located a flytight riser covered with hinged flytight seat and lid. 
Pollution shall mean the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
Pollutant shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment rock sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharge into water. 
Pretreatment or treatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or by process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section part 403(d). 
Pretreatment requirements shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user. 
Pretreatment standards or standards shall mean pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges shall mean absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 8-27. 
Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) shall mean a treatment works as defined by Article 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C.> 1292) which is owned in this instance by the authority. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the authority who are, by contract or agreement with the authority, users of the authority. 
POTW treatment plant shall mean that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Public sewer shall mean a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Septic tank shall mean a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: (a) A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed; connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out: and (b) A subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Septic tank waste shall mean any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage shall mean the spent water of a community. The equivalent term is "wastewater" (see Suspended solids). 
Sewage works (sewage) shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
Shall shall mean mandatory; "May" shall mean permissive. 
Significant industrial user shall mean: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards or; 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average flow of 25,000 gallons or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, or boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the authority on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or equipment. 
(3)  Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operations or for violating any pretreatment standard, or requirement, the authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour concentrations of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) shall mean a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
State shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Storm drain, sometimes termed storm sewer shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying water, ground-water, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source. 
Stormwater shall mean any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Superintendent shall mean the water and wastewater Superintendent for the City of Chatsworth, or the authorized representative. 
Suspended solids shall mean the total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to art nonfilterable residue. 
Toxic pollutant shall mean any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulatory promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection agency (EPA) under the provision of CWA 307(1) or other Acts. 
Unpolluted water shall mean the waste of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
User shall mean any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city POTW. 
Wastewater shall mean the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant shall mean the portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
Watercourse shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
Working day shall mean Monday through Friday. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 1.4) 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 8-24. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  All premises shall be provided, by the owner thereof, with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain or well penetrating, water bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(d)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(e)  The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at the owners' expense to install suitable toilet facilities herein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within thirty days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(f)  All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer; provided that where no sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health officer may be used. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 2.1) 
Sec. 8-25. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 8-24, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of the city and the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
(b)  Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health officer. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(c)  No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tank unless he shall hold a valid permit for such work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of such a permit pending the inspection and approval by the health officer of the site and location of the proposed work. Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than that required by the health officer. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved, nor in any place where the health officer deems the use of same to be a menace to human health or well being. 
(f)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days after notice except that by special petition to the city, the private disposal system may remain in operation until such time as it malfunctions. Any property where a public sewer is available and is served by public water shall be charged for sewer service. 
(g)  The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(h)  No subsurface disposal facilities shall be installed in any place where the health officer deems the use of such facilities to be a menace to human health or well being. 
(i)  Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer where available or to a septic tank. Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(j)  No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  Where a public sewer is assessable to the premises involved; or, 
(2)  In areas where the health officer deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; or 
(3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or, 
(4)  Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(k)  Any premises that has a septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system, located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within 30 days from the receipt of written notification from the health officer that said system is not functioning in a sanitary manner, and order that said system be corrected. 
(l)  Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. 
(m)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 2.2) 
Sec. 8-26. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the city and at such times as are established by the city. Such waste shall not violate section 2-27 or any other requirements established by the city. The city may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(b)  The superintendent shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The superintendent may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The superintendent also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the superintendent. The superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 2.3) 
Sec. 8-27. - Restricted use of public sewer. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Part 405-471 are hereby incorporated. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-up flashpoint of less than 140 F (60 C) using the test methods specified in specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 (or more than 9.0), or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference (but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in dimension); 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees F (66 degrees C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees F (40 degrees C); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points designated by the superintendent in accordance with section 8-26; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 milligrams per liter (100 mg/l); 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(c)  Local limits. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following: 

 
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances and conventional pollutants are for "total" metal and conventional pollutants unless indicated otherwise. The superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. 
(d)  State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharge shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations of those in this article. 
(e)  City's right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(f)  Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(g)  Surcharge limits. The following limits when exceeded will be assessed as follows: 

 
SUSPENDED SOLIDS 
Rates and limits same as above for BOD 
AMMONIA NITROGEN 

 
ALKALINITY 
Failure to maintain enough alkalinity to comply with requirements of Alkalinity (minimum) = ((10 + (7 × N(NH3) mg/l)) will result in the industry paying the pro rata cost incurred by the water works commission to add enough alkalinity at the qpc plant to effect the necessary treatment. 
The reasoning for this assessment is to help the POTW recap out added cost of operation. These assessment charges will be billed on a separate statement monthly when occurring. The rates at which these assessments are charged are listed on a separate schedule which is on file at the City of Chatsworth Water Works office, as well as listed in each permit. 
*Rates figured on daily maximum flow. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 2.4) 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 8-28. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent of the Chatsworth Water Works Commission. 
(b)  The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnish by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as specified elsewhere shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection or the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway; the front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any single connection aforementioned. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in construction shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provision or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and the Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within city supervision: 
(1)  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe; American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal, or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe, ASTM Specification D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe. Bolted mechanical joints may be required by the superintendent where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
(2)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eight inch per foot. Furthermore the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) shall be followed. 
(3)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(4)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfilling shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(5)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM Specification C-564. Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber "O"-ring gasket having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including oils), and groundwater which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. Installation of gaskets shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instruction using all the necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the superintendent. 
(6)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly locate "Y" branch is available, the city shall, at the owners expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45 degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one tenth foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor, but above the top of the manhole of the manholes upstream and downstream from the connection. Where such a connection is not possible, the city assumes no responsibility for damage to property from backups in the sewer due to blockages, flooding, collapse of the line or other unavoidable situations. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any load bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(i)  The applicant for the building permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(j)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(k)  The superintendent will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(l)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation. 
(m)  If any house sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the house sewer. 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property. 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, Art. 3) 
DIVISION 4. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 

Sec. 8-29. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibition set out in section 8-27 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated; and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 4.1) 
Sec. 8-30. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The superintendent may require may person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(e)  Where pretreatment of flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes; they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(f)  Any industry discharging to the city sewer system more than 25,000 gallons per day or any discharger so designated as a potential problem by the city shall comply with the following: 
(1)  In order to provide for accurate sampling and measurement of industrial wastes, each designated discharger shall provide and maintain, on each of its industrial waste outlet sewers, a large manhole or sampling chamber with a key furnished to the city. There shall be ample room provided in each sampling chamber to enable convenient inspection and sampling by the city, or its agent. The city will require all industries to install a monitoring manhole and a separate line for industrial waste discharging. This applies to all significant industrial users. 
(2)  Each sampling chamber shall contain a partial flume, accurate weir, or similar device, with a recording and totalizing register for measurement of the liquid quantity; or the metered water supply to the industrial plant may be used as the liquid quantity where it is substantiated that the metered water supply and waste quantities are approximately the same, or where a measurable adjustment can be made in the metered supply to determine the liquid quantity. The measuring, totalizing, recording devices are to be supplied, installed, and maintained by the owner. The city requires any measuring device to be calibrated by a certified/trained outside party whenever the city can fairly determine that the measurement results they have been receiving are inaccurate. 
(3)  Samples shall be taken every hour, properly refrigerated and composited in proportion to the flow for a representative 24-hour sample. Such sampling shall be repeated on as many days as necessary to insure representative quantities for the entire reporting period. Industrial plants with wide fluctuations in quantities of wastes, will require an automatic sampler placed automatically by the flow-measuring device. Minimum requirements for representative quantities shall include reevaluation during each quarterly period. The determination of representative quantities shall include not less than three consecutive days of 24-hour composite samplings taken during periods of normal operation, together with acceptable flow measurements. The frequency of sampling, sampling chamber, metering device, sampling methods, and analysis of samples shall subject, at any time, to inspection and verification by the city. Sampling and measuring facilities shall be such as to provide safe access for authorized personnel of the authority for making such inspection and verification. Plans for sampling chambers, with their location shown on a site plan shall be submitted to the city. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 4.2) 
Sec. 8-31. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
At least once every two years, the superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the superintendent may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 8-52; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 4.3) 
DIVISION 5. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION 

Sec. 8-32. - Wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the superintendent, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 5.1) 
Sec. 8-33. - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the superintendent, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 8-34 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The superintendent may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in divisions 11 through 13 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 5.2) 
Sec. 8-34. - Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 30 days after said date, apply to the superintendent for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 8-36, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 60 days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 5.3) 
Sec. 8-35. - Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 8-36, must be filed at least 180 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 5.4) 
Sec. 8-36. - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The superintendent may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by subsection 8-49(b); 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the superintendent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 5.5) 
Sec. 8-37. - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 5.6) 
Sec. 8-38. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The superintendent may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 5.7) 
DIVISION 6. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS 

Sec. 8-39. - Wastewater discharge permit duration. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the superintendent. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 6.1) 
Sec. 8-40. - Wastewater discharge permit contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 8-43, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not to be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  Limits on average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(2)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(3)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
(4)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
(5)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
(7)  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
(8)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Superintendent to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 6.2) 
Sec. 8-41. - Wastewater discharge permit modification. 
The superintendent may modify wastewater discharge permit for a good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 6.3) 
Sec. 8-42. - Wastewater discharge permit transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if their permittee give at least 30 days' advance notice to the superintendent and the superintendent approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and; 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 6.4) 
Sec. 8-43. - Wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
The superintendent may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the superintendent of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to section 8-51; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the superintendent timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit of this article. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 6.5) 
Sec. 8-44. - Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. 
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 8-36, a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 6.6) 
Sec. 8-45. - Regulations of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the superintendent shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (a), above, the superintendent shall request the following information from the contributing municipality; 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the superintendent may deem necessary. 
(c)  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (a), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in subsection 8-27(c). The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at lease an annual basis; 
(3)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the superintendent with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(4)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(5)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(6)  A provision ensuring the superintendent access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the superintendent; and 
(7)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 6.7) 
Sec. 8-46. - Conditions for special agreements. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 6.8) 
DIVISION 7. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 8-47. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operators and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants: 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 8-56. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 8-57. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 8-48. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 8-37. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.1) 
Sec. 8-48. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection 8-48(b)(7): 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.2) 
Sec. 8-49. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report containing the information described in subsections 8-47(b)(4) through (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 8-37. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.3) 
Sec. 8-50. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the superintendent but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 8-37. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the superintendent, using the procedures prescribed in section 8-57, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.4) 
Sec. 8-51. - Reports of changed conditions. 
Each user must notify the superintendent of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least two days before the change. 
(1)  The superintendent may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 8-36. 
(2)  The superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 8-38 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 8-42 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.5) 
Sec. 8-52. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the superintendent, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the even of a discharge described in subsection (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.6) 
Sec. 8-53. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the superintendent as the superintendent may require. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.7) 
Sec. 8-54. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the superintendent monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the superintendent samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user received the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.8) 
Sec. 8-55. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 7-51. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 8-47, 8-49, and 8-50. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA, identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.9) 
Sec. 8-56. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in questions, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.10) 
Sec. 8-57. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.11) 
Sec. 8-58. - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.12) 
Sec. 8-59. - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 7.13) 
DIVISION 8. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 

Sec. 8-60. - Right of entry: inspection and sampling. 
The superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the superintendent ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the superintendent will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installations of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The superintendent may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated when deemed necessary to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the superintendent access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 8.1) 
Sec. 8-61. - Search warrants. 
If the superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Superintendent may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Murray County Magistrate Court of Murray County, GA. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 8.2) 
DIVISION 9. - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 

Sec. 8-62. - Information and date. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the Superintendent inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 4 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, Art. 9) 
DIVISION 10. - PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE 

Sec. 8-63. - Publication of noncompliance. 
The superintendent shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the superintendent believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance, or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § Art. 10) 
DIVISION 11. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 

Sec. 8-64. - Notification of violation. 
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, as wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 11.1) 
Sec. 8-65. - Consent orders. 
The superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 8-67 and 8-68 and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 11.2) 
Sec. 8-66. - Show cause hearing. 
The superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the superintendent and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action; the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 11.3) 
Sec. 8-67. - Compliance orders. 
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 11.4) 
Sec. 8-68. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 11.5) 
Sec. 8-69. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(b)  The user shall be subject to having a lien filed against his property for all unpaid charges, fines, and penalties, after a 90-day period. 
(c)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the superintendent to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the superintendent may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any Interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The superintendent may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(d)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 11.6) 
Sec. 8-70. - Emergency suspensions. 
The superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  An user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 8-71 are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the superintendent prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under section 8-66 or 8-71. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 11.7) 
Sec. 8-71. - Termination of discharge. 
In addition to the provisions in section 8-44, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in division 2 of this article. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 8-66 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 11.8) 
DIVISION 12. - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 

Sec. 8-72. - Injunctive relief. 
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may petition the Murray County Magistrate Court through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The superintendent may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 12.1) 
Sec. 8-73. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The superintendent may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 12.2) 
Sec. 8-74. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. 
(b)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least $1,000.00, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(c)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. 
(d)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than $3,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than three years, or both. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 12.3) 
Sec. 8-75. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the superintendent may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the superintendent is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 12.4) 
DIVISION 13. - SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION 

Sec. 8-76. - Performance bonds. 
The superintendent may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, In a sum not to exceed a value determined by the superintendent to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 13.1) 
Sec. 8-77. - Liability insurance. 
The superintendent may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 13.2) 
Sec. 8-78. - Water supply severance. 
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 13.3) 
Sec. 8-79. - Public nuisances. 
A violation of any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other, pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the superintendent. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City Code {Section 1-8 General Penalty and continuous violations Abatement Nuisance/Section 7-1 Abatement of Nuisance} governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 13.4) 
Sec. 8-79.1. - Contractor listing. 
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods on services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 13.5) 
DIVISION 14. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 8-79.2. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (c), below, are met. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period on noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(f)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility, is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 14.1) 
Sec. 8-79.3. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in subsection 8-27(a) or the specific prohibitions in subsection 8-27(b)(3) through (17) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 14.2) 
Sec. 8-79.4. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operations. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  (1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the superintendent, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the superintendent of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standard within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  (1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the superintendent may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  The superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the superintendent determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 14.3) 
DIVISION 15. - WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES 

Sec. 8-79.5. - Rates. 
The rates for wastewater treatment are set by the city for the following: 
(1)  All expenses to maintain all building and equipment. 
(2)  Manpower and maintenance to operate equipment. 
The city reserves the right to increase or decrease rate as it feels necessary to recover cost of operations. The city may increase or decrease rates without prior notice. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, Art. 15) 
DIVISION 16. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-79.6. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 16.1) 
Sec. 8-79.7. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be effected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 10-10-96, § 16.2) 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Apr. 19, 1999, amended §§ 8-81—8-85, in effect deleting §§ 8-81—8-85 and enacting §§ 8-81—8-91 to read as set out. Former §§ 8-81—8-85 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Nov. 7, 1949, § 2. 

Sec. 8-80. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Commercial wastes: Wastes from boilers or remnants from buildings or manufacturing companies or establishments. 
Garbage: Domestic wastes composed of meat, vegetable and fruit scraps, cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, rags, ashes, and other waste materials similar to the above, as is normally disposed of from residences, churches, schools, small businesses and related establishments. All other wastes shall not be considered garbage unless specified to be such by the city. 
Other wastes: Animal, fowl and fish excrement, entrails, bones, carcasses in whole or part of dead animals. 
Trash: Yard wastes such as weeds, grass, leaves, small brush, small limbs and similar objects. 
(Ord. of 11-7-49, § 1) 
Sec. 8-81. - Disposal of construction materials. 
Contractors and property owners will be responsible for disposing of any and all debris resulting from remodeling, roofing, repairing, demolition or construction of any type. 
(Ord. of 4-19-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-82. - Dumpsters. 
The city will not furnish any dumpster to any person or business and will only empty dumpsters that were being emptied by the city prior to January 1, 1999. 
(Ord. of 4-19-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-83. - Weight of containers. 
Garbage picked up by the city, both residential and commercial, must be in containers with a capacity of no more than 34 gallons and weighing not more than 100 pounds when filled with garbage, with the exception of containers which are picked up mechanically. 
(Ord. of 4-19-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-84. - Contract required. 
Each business which desires city garbage pickup, must contract with the city for garbage service. The contract will include the monthly charge, which will be determined by the amount of garbage generated. 
(Ord. of 4-19-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-85. - Billing. 
Businesses will be billed for garbage service on the first of each month. Failure to pay by the last day of the month will cause a termination of the garbage service. To renew the service, the outstanding charge, plus a $50.00 service charge, must be paid to the city. 
(Ord. of 4-19-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-86. - Exemptions. 
There will be no exemptions to the charge schedule other than residential. Business establishments, state and federal offices, churches, hospitals, and any other organizations, profit and nonprofit, will be billed for services provided. 
(Ord. of 4-19-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-87. - Labeling of containers. 
If garbage containers from more than one business are placed adjacent to each other, the containers must be labeled by the respective businesses to avoid confusion. 
(Ord. of 4-19-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-88. - Garbage or trash from outside the city. 
It will be unlawful for anyone to bring garbage or trash from outside the city and deposit it into trash containers inside the city limits. 
(Ord. of 4-19-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-89. - Charge schedule. 
Containers will be emptied daily, or as needed, Monday through Friday except on holidays. 
One to two containers per day ..... $18.00 per month 
Three to four containers per day ..... 25.00 per month 
Over four containers per day ..... 35.00 per month 
(There is a minimum charge per month of $18.00) 
Dumpsters covered by the ordinance will be emptied once per week based on the following schedule: 
Four cubic yards per week ..... $20.00 per month 
Six cubic yards per week ..... 28.00 per month 
Eight cubic yards per week ..... 35.00 per month 
Additional pickups will be calculated by the number of pickups per week times the rate for one pickup per week. 
(Ord. of 4-19-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-90. - Annual adjustment. 
The charge schedule will be re-evaluated annually by the sanitation committee and may be adjusted upon the mayor's approval. 
(Ord. of 4-19-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-91. - Violation. 
A violation of this article is punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or up to six months in jail. 
(Ord. of 4-19-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-92. - Yard trimmings. 
(a)  Yard trimmings disposal regulations. Definitions: 
Commercial solid waste. All types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting. The controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system. A system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste. Any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility. Any facility or locations where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill. A disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings. Leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and green house vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. 
(b)  Placement and disposal of yard trimmings: Prohibitions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings and municipal solid waste within the city. 
(2)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion owned in full or part by the city. 
(c)  Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in separate sections from household garbage. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1997, § 1) 
Secs. 8-95—8-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CROSS-CONNECTIONS, AUXILIARY INTAKE, BY-PASSES AND INTER-CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 8-101. - Definitions. 
That the following definitions and terms shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article. 
Auxiliary intake. Any piping connection or other device whereby water may be secured from a source other than that normally used. 
By-pass. Any system or piping or other arrangement whereby the water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant. 
Cross-connection. Any physical connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or back-pressure valves; or because of any other arrangement. 
Inter-connection. Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, or other device which does or may contain sewerage or other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
Person. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including, any individual firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
Public water supply. The waterworks system furnishing water to the City of Chatsworth for general use and which supply is recognized as the public water supply by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources/Environmental Protection Division. 
(Ord. of 4-13-98, § 1) 
Sec. 8-102. - Compliance. 
The City of Chatsworth Public Water Supply is to comply with Chapter 391-3-5-.13 of the Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water and (PL 93-523) of the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, legally adopted in accordance with this code, which pertains to cross-connections; and establish an effective, ongoing program to control these undesirable water uses. 
(Ord. of 4-13-98, § 2) 
Sec. 8-103. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection to be made: or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 4-13-98, § 3) 
Sec. 8-104. - Filing with city required. 
Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the public water supply, and who also has on the same premises a separate source of water supply or stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from which the water stored therein is circulated through a piping system, shall file with the superintendent of the water commission of the city a statement of the non-existence of unapproved or unauthorized cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connections. Such statement shall also contain an agreement that no cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection will be permitted upon the premises. 
(Ord. of 4-13-98, § 4) 
Sec. 8-105. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the city public water supply to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross-connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspection based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the superintendent of the water commission of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-13-98, § 5) 
Sec. 8-106. - Right of entry. 
The superintendent of the water commission or his authorized representative shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the city public water supply for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-pass, or inter-connections. On request the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections. 
(Ord. of 4-13-98, § 6) 
Sec. 8-107. - Violations to be corrected within a reasonable time frame. 
Any person who now has cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connections in violation of the provisions of this article shall be allowed a reasonable time within which to comply with the provisions or this article. After a thorough investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required to complete the work, the amount of time shall be designated by the superintendent of the water commission of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-13-98, § 7) 
Sec. 8-108. - When use of an approved protective device on the service line required. 
Where the nature of use of the water supplied a premises by the water department is such that it is deemed: 
(1)  Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation. 
(2)  That the owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot or is not willing to demonstrate to the official in charge of the system, or his designated representative, that the water use and protective features of the plumbing are such as to propose no threat to the safety or potability of the water supply. 
(3)  That the nature and mode of operation within a premises are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing. 
(4)  There is a likelihood that protective measures may be subverted, altered, or disconnected. 
The superintendent of the water commission of the city, or his designated representative, shall require the use of an approved protective device on the service line serving the premises to assure that any contamination that may originate in the customer's premises is contained therein. The protective devices shall be a reduced pressure zone type backflow preventer approved by the superintendent of the water commission as to manufacture, model, and size. The method of installation of backflow protective devices shall be approved by the superintendent of the water commission of the city prior to installation and shall comply with the criteria set forth by the superintendent of the water commission. 
The installation shall be at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(1)  Reduced pressure principle backflow devices and double check valve assemblies shall be tested and inspected at least annually. 
(2)  Periodic testing shall be performed by the department's certified tester or another certified tester approved by the department. This testing will be done at the owner's expense. 
(3)  Backflow testing shall be conducted during the department's regular business hours. Exceptions to this, when at the request of the owner, may require additional charges to cover the increased costs to the department. 
(4)  Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test will be repaired or replaced, at the owner's expense. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of the repair the device will be re-tested at owners expense to insure correct operation. High hazard situations will not be allowed to continue unprotected if the backflow preventer fails the test and cannot be repaired immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not more than 30 days after the test date will be established. The owner is responsible for spare parts, repair tools, or a replacement device. Parallel installation of two devices is an effective means of the owner insuring that uninterrupted water service during testing or repair of devices and is strongly recommended when the owner desires such continuity. 
(5)  Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than specified in subsection (b)(1) above, in cases where there is a history of test failures and the department feels that due to the degree of hazard involved, additional testing is warranted. Cost of the additional tests will be born by the owner. 
Where only one unit is installed and the continuance of service is critical, the superintendent of the water commission shall notify, in writing, the occupant of the premises of plans to discontinue water service and arrange for a mutually acceptable time to test and/or repair the device. The water system shall require the occupant of the premises to make all repairs indicated promptly, and the expense of such repairs shall be born by the owner or occupant of the premises. These repairs shall be made by qualified personnel, acceptable to the superintendent of the water commission of the city. 
Fees and Charges 
Fees and charges for testing and repair work are as follows: 
(1)  Testing fees ..... $30.00 
(2)  Re-testing fees ..... 30.00 
(3)  Repair work,  plus parts unless provided by owner. ..... 25.00  per hour 
(4)  Charges for after-hours inspection or repair ..... 40.00/  inspection,  $35.00/hr  repair. 
(Ord. of 4-13-98, § 8) 
Sec. 8-109. - Protection from possible contamination required. 
The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply be protected from possible contamination as specified herein. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE 
FOR DRINKING 
Minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters one-inch high located on a red background. 
(Ord. of 4-13-98, § 9) 
Sec. 8-110. - Violation. 
Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00, and each day of continued violation after conviction shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing fines and penalties, the superintendent of the water commission of the city shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection, and service shall not be restored until the public water supply has been adequately protected from cross-connections or backflow conditions. 
(Ord. of 4-13-98, § 10) 
Secs. 8-111—8-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER 
DIVISION 1. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 8-131. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and, 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to section 8-132 below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
b.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
c.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the zoning administrator or designee to be a hotspot land use; or, 
d.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items a. and b. above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(2)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
c.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the zoning administrator. 
(c)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The zoning administrator or designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(e)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(f)  Stormwater design manual. The zoning administrator will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this ordinance. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
( Ord. of 12-1-14(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 8-132. - Definitions. 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the City of Chatsworth or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the zoning administrator or designee to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
( Ord. of 12-1-14(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 8-133. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this ordinance prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the zoning administrator or designee a permit application on a form provided by the zoning administrator or designee for that purpose. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection 8-133(b); 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection 8-133(c); 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection 8-133(d), if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with subsection 8-133(e), if applicable; and, 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with subsection 8-133(f). 
(b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer [shall] meet with the zoning administrator for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting should [shall] take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information should [shall] be included in the concept plan which should [shall] be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
Local watershed plans, the city greenspace projection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this ordinance, including the performance criteria set forth in section 8-134 below. 
This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this ordinance are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site; 
(2)  Vicinity map; 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. 
The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Section 4; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in Section 4 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Section 4; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or the city's soil and erosion, sedimentation and pollution control ordinance. Or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the zoning administrator or designee as provided in subsection 8-133(d) below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance subsection 8-133(d). 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the zoning administrator or designee that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(d)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the zoning administrator or designee requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the zoning administrator execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the zoning administrator or designee prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the zoning administrator or designee may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 8-136 of this article. 
The zoning administrator or designee in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this ordinance and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(e)  Performance and maintenance bonds. Implementing and requiring the posting of bonds or other security to guarantee performance of construction and/or maintenance obligations will be under the discretion of the zoning administrator or designee. 
(f)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the zoning administrator or designee. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection 8-133(a) above (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(3)  The zoning administrator or designee shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the zoning administrator or designee shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subparagraph (3) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the zoning administrator or designee that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the zoning administrator or designee may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this ordinance and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The zoning administrator or designee shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the zoning administrator or designee; and, 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by subsection 8-135(b). 
(g)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the zoning administrator or designee and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(h)  Modifications for off-site facilities. The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the zoning administrator or designee which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator or designee that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
( Ord. of 12-1-14(1), § 3 ) 
Sec. 8-134. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(a)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the zoning administrator or designee are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(b)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(c)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection 8-134(b) is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(d)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24 hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(e)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from zoning administrator or designee before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the stormwater permitting authority may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(f)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection 8-134(a). The applicant may, if approved by the zoning administrator designee take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(g)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and, 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(h)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
( Ord. of 12-1-14(1), § 4 ) 
Sec. 8-135. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the zoning administrator or designee or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the zoning administrator or designee. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and, 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the zoning administrator or designee is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
( Ord. of 12-1-14(1), § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-136. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the zoning administrator or designee shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the zoning administrator or designee, may correct the violation as provided in subsection 8-136(d) hereof. 
Inspection programs by the zoning administrator or designee may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the zoning administrator or designee to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this ordinance is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this ordinance. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the zoning administrator or designee. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the zoning administrator or designee, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The zoning administrator or designee may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
( Ord. of 12-1-14(1), § 6 ) 
Sec. 8-137. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(a)  Notice of violation. If the zoning administrator or designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the zoning administrator or designee by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
(b)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the zoning administrator or designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the zoning administrator or designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order —The zoning administrator or designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy —The zoning administrator or Designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit —The zoning administrator or designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated [upon such conditions as the zoning administrator or designee may deem necessary] to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties —In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the zoning administrator or designee shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the zoning administrator or designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the zoning administrator or designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties —For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, the zoning administrator or designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. of 12-1-14(1), § 7 ) 
Secs. 8-138—8-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POST DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 12-1-14(2), §§ 1—7, adopted December 1, 2014, amended division 2, §§ 8-151—8-157 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 2, §§ 8-151—8-157, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of 12-1-14(2), §§ 1—7 . 

Sec. 8-151. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this division is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This division seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace. 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and, 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  This division shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (2) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
b.  Redevelopment that includes the addition of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
c.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the permit administrator or designee to be a hotspot land use; or, 
d.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items a. and b. above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(2)  The following activities are exempt from this division: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
c.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the zoning administrator. 
e.  Re-development that does not create additional impervious cover or increase stormwater runoff above existing land use. 
(c)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The zoning administrator or designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this division. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This division is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this division are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this division imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(e)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this division shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this division. 
(f)  Stormwater design manual. The zoning administrator will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this division. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
( Ord. of 4-6-15(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 8-152. - Definitions. 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the City of Chatsworth or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the zoning administrator or designee to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this division, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
( Ord. of 4-6-15(1), § 2 ) 
Sec. 8-153. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this division prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically exempted by this division, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the zoning administrator or designee a permit application on a form provided by the zoning administrator or designee for that purpose. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this division, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection (b); 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection (c); 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection (d); 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with subsection (e), if applicable; and, 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with subsection (f). 
(b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer [shall] meet with the zoning administrator for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting should [shall] take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this ordinance, including the performance criteria set forth in section 8-154 below. 
This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this ordinance are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 8-154; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 8-154; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or the city's soil and erosion, sedimentation and pollution control ordinance. Or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(9)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(10)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the zoning administrator or designee as provided in subsection (d) below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance subsection (d). 
(11)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the zoning administrator or designee that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(d)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the zoning administrator or designee requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the zoning administrator execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the zoning administrator or designee prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the zoning administrator or designee may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 8-156 of this division. 
The zoning administrator or designee in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this division and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(e)  Performance and maintenance bonds. Implementing and requiring the posting of bonds or other security to guarantee performance of construction and/or maintenance obligations will be under the discretion of the zoning administrator or designee. 
(f)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the zoning administrator or designee. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection (a) above (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(3)  The zoning administrator or designee shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the zoning administrator or designee shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subparagraph (3) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the zoning administrator or designee that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this division, the zoning administrator or designee may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this ordinance and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The zoning administrator or designee shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the zoning administrator or designee; and, 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by subsection 8-155(b). 
(g)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the zoning administrator or designee and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(h)  Modifications for off-site facilities. The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the zoning administrator or designee which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator or designee that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
( Ord. of 4-6-15(1), § 3 ) 
Sec. 8-154. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this division: 
(a)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the zoning administrator or designee are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(b)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(c)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection (b) is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(d)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24 hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(e)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from zoning administrator or designee before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the stormwater permitting authority may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(f)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (a). The applicant may, if approved by the zoning administrator designee take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(g)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and, 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(h)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
( Ord. of 4-6-15(1), § 4 ) 
Sec. 8-155. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the zoning administrator or designee or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the zoning administrator or designee. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and, 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the zoning administrator or designee is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
( Ord. of 4-6-15(1), § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-156. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this division. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the zoning administrator or designee shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the zoning administrator or designee, may correct the violation as provided in subsection (d) hereof. 
Inspection programs by the zoning administrator or designee may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the zoning administrator or designee to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this ordinance is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this ordinance. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the Zoning Administrator or Designee. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the zoning administrator or designee, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The zoning administrator or designee may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
( Ord. of 4-6-15(1), § 6 ) 
Sec. 8-157. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this ordinance or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(a)  Notice of violation. If the zoning administrator or designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this division without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this division and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the zoning administrator or designee by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
(b)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the zoning administrator or designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the zoning administrator or designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The zoning administrator or designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The zoning administrator or designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The zoning administrator or designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated [upon such conditions as the zoning administrator or designee may deem necessary] to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the zoning administrator or designee shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the zoning administrator or designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the zoning administrator or designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, the zoning administrator or designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. of 4-6-15(1), § 7 ) 
Chapter 9 - OCCUPATION TAXES; ADMINISTRATIVE AND REGULATORY FEES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Feb. 13, 1995, repealed §§ 9-1, 9-6, and 9-7 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 9-1, 9-6, and 9-7 pertained to business and professional registration and licensing, generally and license fees for pawnshops and derived from an Ord. of July 13, 1987 and § 1 of an Ord. of Dec. 3, 1973. Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Feb. 13, 1995, added §§ 9-1—9-7 and 9-16—9-24. Inasmuch as provisions existed prior to adoption of said ordinance designated as §§ 9-20—9-24, said sections have been redesignated as §§ 9-19.1—9-19.4 at the editor's discretion. Also, said ordinance renumbered §§ 9-2—9-5 as §§ 9-8—9-11 and §§ 9-8—9-11 as §§ 9-12—9-15. 

Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the following meaning: 
Administrative fee: A component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
City: The City of Chatsworth. 
Employee: An individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Location or office: Any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
Occupation tax: A tax levied for revenue-raising purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business in the city. 
Occupation tax certificate: A document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations: Individuals that are listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18) but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fee: A fee required as an exercise of the city's police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an the occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2-13-95, § 1; Ord. of 1-26-96) 
Sec. 9-2. - Administrative fee. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $50.00 is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-3. - Regulatory fee. 
(a)  Businesses and individuals engaging in the occupations or businesses set forth in Appendix I must pay a nonrefundable regulatory fee in accordance with the rate set forth in Appendix I. 
(b)  If a business or individual initially engages in an activity regulated by the city on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. 
(c)  Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this article shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-1-99) 
Editor's note— Appendix I is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 9-4. - Occupation tax levied; limitations. 
(a)  An occupation tax based upon number of employees in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state in accordance with the following schedule: 
Per employee 
First 10 employees ..... $18.00 
Next 10 employees ..... 13.50 
Next 10 employees ..... 10.13 
Next 10 employees ..... 5.06 
Next 10 employees ..... 2.53 
Next 10 employees ..... 1.27 
(b)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(c)  A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to correct payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax if: 
(1)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(2)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in Georgia where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)  A business or practitioner which has locations in Georgia subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in Georgia shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local government(s). 
(4)  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(d)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(e)  If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees, which are the basis of this occupation tax, will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than December 31, the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city clerk. 
(f)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(g)  Independent insurance agencies or brokers doing an insurance business not taxed under Chapter 9, Article II of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Chatsworth, shall be subject to the occupation tax based on number of employees as set out in section 9-4 of this article. 
(h)  Prior to the initial issuance and/or annual renewal of an occupation tax certificate, any food service establishment or food sales establishment governed either by the rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources or the Georgia Department of Agriculture shall obtain a written approval from a duly authorized representative of the Chatsworth Waterworks commission which confirms that such entity is in compliance with all rules and/or requirements concerning its use of any sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1; Ord. of 10-6-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 9-5. - Occupation tax certificate. 
Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-6. - Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations as defined in this article shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 9-4 above or shall pay an occupation tax of $200.00 per practitioner. On the tax return for 1995 or such later time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-7. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(10)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-8. - Financial institutions business license tax—Authority; annual levy; definitions. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for each year, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the city at a rate of one-fourth of one percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. 
(b)  "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. "Depository financial institutions" shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Res. of 1-1-87, § 1; Ord. of 7-13-87; Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-9. - Same—Minimum. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 9-2 shall be $1,000.00. 
(Res. of 1-1-87, § 2; Ord. of 7-13-87; Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-10. - Same—Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city clerk on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The city shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to hereto based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Res. of 1-1-87, § 3; Ord. of 7-13-87; Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-11. - Same—Due date. 
Taxes levied pursuant to section 9-2 shall be due not later than 30 days after filing of the return unless extended by the city. 
(Res. of 1-1-87, § 4; Ord. of 7-13-87; Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-12. - Pawnshops and pawnbrokers—Records and reports. 
Every pawnshop or pawnbroker shall keep a written record of every transaction and shall furnish the police department a weekly report in writing of the transactions of the preceding week. The record shall include serial numbers, make and model if available and name of person pawning item. 
(Ord. of 12-3-73, § 2; Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-13. - Same—Compliance with firearms laws. 
All pawnshops and pawnbrokers shall comply with all state and federal laws governing the purchase and sale of firearms and ammunition for same and obtain all licenses required by the state. 
(Ord. of 12-3-73, § 3; Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-14. - Taxicabs. 
(a)  All taxicabs shall be plainly marked on each side with either the word "taxi" or "cab" or both in combination. All taxicab operators before being licensed by the city shall file with the city clerk a certified copy of liability insurance coverage. Such coverage shall conform with the minimum standards set forth under the state laws. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a cab driver to deliver alcoholic beverages to a minor. 
(c)  Rate card. Every taxicab operated pursuant to this article shall have a rate card setting forth the authorized rates of fare displayed such that it is in clear view of all passengers. 
(d)  Taximeters. Every taxicab operated pursuant to this article shall be equipped with a taximeter fastened in from of the passengers, for the purpose of measuring mechanically or digitally the distance driven and time upon which a fare is based, visible to the passengers at all times, day and night; and after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. 
(e)  Refusal of passenger to pay. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the posted fare of any taxicab operated pursuant to this article after having hired such taxicab, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any taxicab with intent to defraud payment for such service. 
(Ord. of 5-1-67; Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1; Ord. of 5-4-2009, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 9-15. - Parks and recreation center. 
It shall be unlawful for any private vendors of candy, soft drinks, food of any kind or sundries to roll any handwagon or any motorized vehicle through the city recreation center or on the public streets bordering the city parks and city recreation center for the purpose of soliciting business or of selling any of the products described in this section. 
(Ord. of 7-13-87; Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-16. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person who is licensed under Title 43 of the O.C.G.A. by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-17. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-18. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)  On or before January 1 of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to this occupation tax ordinance shall file with the city clerk on a form approved by and available from the city a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
(b)  Individuals, business and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fee(s). 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-19. - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-19.1. - Date due; penalty. 
(a)  Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
(b)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-19.2. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  It is the duty of the city clerk and the police department to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the chief of police of the city upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the city and the Laws of Georgia. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the Laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. 
(c)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(d)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or both. 
(e)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to the suspension of the right to conduct business within the city. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-19.3. - Public hearing. 
After January 1, 1996, the city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate specified in section 9-4. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-19.4. - Prior ordinance. 
To the extent that any occupation taxes or regulatory fees are owed pursuant to an ordinance passed prior to this one, such amounts remain due and owing and the provisions of that prior ordinance will remain in effect with respect to such unpaid occupation taxes or regulatory fees until such time as they are paid in full. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 9-19.5. - Additional revenue. 
In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year for the city, the city shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. of 1-26-96) 
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE BUSINESS 

Sec. 9-20. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 12-5-83, § 1; Ord. of 7-13-87) 
Sec. 9-21. - Insurers' license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1992 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 9-22, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $40.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 12-5-83, § 1; Ord. of 7-13-87; Ord. of 11-4-91, § 1) 
Sec. 9-22. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $14.00 per location for the year 1992 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. of 12-5-83, § 2; Ord. of 7-13-87; Ord. of 11-4-91, § 2) 
Sec. 9-23. - Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1992 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 9-21 hereof in the amount of $40.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. of 12-5-83, § 3; Ord. of 7-13-87; Ord. of 11-4-91, § 3) 
Sec. 9-24. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1992 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. "Gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 9-21 of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-5-83, § 4; Ord. of 7-13-87; Ord. of 11-4-91, § 4) 
Sec. 9-25. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1992 and for each year thereafter an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the city in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. "Gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Ord. of 12-5-83, § 5; Ord. of 7-13-87; Ord. of 11-4-91, § 5) 
Sec. 9-26. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 9-21, 9-22 and 9-23 of this article shall be due and payable on the tenth day of February, 1992 and on February 10 of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. of 12-5-83, § 6; Ord. of 7-13-87; Ord. of 11-4-91, § 6) 
Sec. 9-27. - Administrative provisions. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the insurance commissioner of the state within 45 days of its enactment. 
(Ord. of 11-4-91, § 7) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 4, 1991, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of § 7 of said ordinance as § 9-27 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 9-28, 9-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Feb. 13, 1995, repealed §§ 9-30—9-41 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 9-30—9-41 pertained to billiard and pool halls, family recreation centers and derived from § 187 of the 1926 Code; §§ 1, 3—7, 9, 16 of Art. I and §§ 1, 2 of Art. II of an ordinance adopted July 18, 1977; an ordinance adopted Feb. 2, 1981; and an ordinance adopted July 13, 1987. 

Secs. 9-30—9-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BARTENDERS 

Sec. 9-50. - License required; approval, fee. 
All persons working in any tavern where alcoholic beverages may be consumed on the premises shall obtain a bartender's license from the city clerk after being approved by the chief of police. The fee for this license will be as set out in chapter 9, article I, subsection 9-3(a) herein. 
(Ord. of 12-30-99, § 1) 
Sec. 9-51. - Conviction of felony disqualifies. 
No person will be issued a bartender's license who has been convicted of a felony within the past five years. 
(Ord. of 12-30-99, § 1) 
Sec. 9-52. - Habitually offending disqualifies. 
No person will be issued a bartender's license, if during the preceding three years such person has been habitually offending against the laws of the state or ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-30-99, § 1) 
Sec. 9-53. - Appeal of license denial. 
The applicant may appeal the denial of a license to the governing body. 
(Ord. of 12-30-99, § 1) 
Sec. 9-54. - Suspension of bartender's license; causes, appeal. 
Any bartender guilty of any of the following will have such person's license suspended by the police department: 
(1)  Drinking while working 
(2)  Failing to call the police promptly when there is violence or the threat of violence in the establishment and including any disorderly act that originates in the establishment and continues outside within the close proximity of the establishment. 
(3)  Failure to cooperate with the police when they are investigating any complaint at or near the establishment. 
The suspension may be appealed to the governing body. 
(Ord. of 12-30-99, § 1) 
Sec. 9-55. - Suspension of establishment license. 
Any establishment which does not abide by this article may have the business license suspended by the police department until the next governing body meeting at which time the governing body will determine whether the license should be reinstated or revoked permanently. 
(Ord. of 12-30-99, § 1) 
Sec. 9-56. - Prosecution of offending bartenders and proprietors. 
Any person working without a bartender's license in an establishment covered by this article will be cited to court for violation of this article. The person holding the establishment's business license will be cited to court for permitting an unlicensed person to work in the establishment. 
(Ord. of 12-30-99, § 1) 
Secs. 9-57—9-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Feb. 13, 1995, repealed §§ 9-60—9-68 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 9-60—9-68 pertained to dancing regulations and derived from §§ 1—8, 10 of an ordinance adopted Aug. 5, 1974, and an ordinance adopted July 13, 1987. 

Secs. 9-60—9-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 1, adopted October 18, 2010 , repealed article VI, §§ 9-70—9-78, which pertained to malt beverages and derived from Code 1926, §§ 10, 11; Ord. of 1-10-55; Ord. of 7-1-72; Ord. of 7-9-73; Ord. of 1-13-75; Ord. of 5-19-75; Ord. of 7-8-85, § VI; Ord. of 2-6-2006, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-4-2009, § 4. 

Secs. 9-70—9-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 1, adopted October 18, 2010 , repealed article VII, §§ 9-80—9-99, which pertained to wine and derived from Ord. of 8-7-72, §§ 1—13, 15—17, 20—22; Ord. of 2-6-2006, §§ 3, 4. 

Secs. 9-80—9-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Feb. 13, 1995, repealed §§ 9-110—9-120 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 9-110—9-120 pertained to peddlers and solicitors and derived from §§ 1—9, 12 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 1, 1976, and an ordinance adopted Apr. 6, 1987(2). 

Secs. 9-110—9-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - GARAGE, YARD AND CARPORT SALES 

Sec. 9-130. - Scope of article. 
(a)  This article shall govern all sales usually defined as garage, yard or carport sales. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, any sale of household goods conducted at a residential dwelling not considered a commercial establishment shall fall under the jurisdiction of this ordinance. 
( Ord. of 3-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 9-131. - Permit-required. 
Every person desiring to conduct a garage, carport or yard sale within the city limits is required to produce a permit under the provisions of this article. 
Exception : Permit fees shall not be required for the following types of yard, carport or garage sales: 
(a)  Any nonprofit origination. 
(b)  Any benefit sale. 
(c)  Any senior citizen or disabled citizen. 
( Ord. of 3-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 9-132. - Same—Application. 
(a)  Applications for permit shall be made to the city marshal at least seven days before said sale shall be scheduled. The application shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance and can be procured from the city marshal's office. 
(b)  Each application shall contain the following information. 
(1)  Name and address of the individual applying for the permit and at whose address said sale shall be held. 
(2)  Date said sale shall be conducted. 
(3)  Signature of the city marshal or zoning administrator approving the application. 
( Ord. of 3-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 9-133. - Same—Fees. 
Upon issuance of the permit a fee of $15.00 shall be paid to the city marshal or zoning administrator to partially cover administrative costs involved in issuance and policing of this permit program. 
( Ord. of 3-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 9-134. - Same—Period. 
The permit shall be issued only for a continuous 72 hour period and only one during any six-month period. No subsequent permit shall be issued to the place or person sooner than six months from the sale time. 
( Ord. of 3-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 9-135. - Same—Display. 
The necessary permit shall be displayed in a prominent location at the site of the sale, easily observed from the public roadway at the address of the sale. 
( Ord. of 3-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 9-136. - Parking. 
Sufficient parking area shall be available to allow access to the sale without interfering with the flow of traffic. 
( Ord. of 3-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 9-137. - Setback of items from street. 
Household goods offered for sale shall not be placed on display after six p.m. or any closer to a public roadway than setback requirements of the zoning district in which the sale is conducted. 
( Ord. of 3-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 9-138. - Signs. 
(a)  Only one sign no larger than four square feet shall be displayed at the location of such sale which shall be set back from the roadway at least ten feet. 
In addition, only two directional signs no larger than two square feet shall be allowed for the purpose of directing traffic to the sale location. 
(b)  At the conclusion of the sale all signs shall be taken down by the individual whose name appears on the permit. 
( Ord. of 3-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 9-139. - Penalties. 
Any person required by the provisions of this article to obtain a permit for the conduct of a garage, carport, yard or similar sale but who does not obtain said permit, or who fails to abide by any requirements of this article, may be stopped or enjoined from carrying on such sale and charged with a misdemeanor and fined $100.00 for each violation of the ordinance. 
( Ord. of 3-1-09(1), § 1 ) 
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 10-18-10(1), § 1, adopted October 18, 2010 , repealed article X, §§ 9-140—9-146, which pertained to wine and derived from rd. of 10-7-91, §§ 1—6; Ord. of 5-4-2009, § 5. 

Secs. 9-140—9-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FLEA MARKETS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 1, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ I—X of said ordinance as §§ 9-150—9-159 herein was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 9-150. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended. 
Flea market: A market, indoors or out-of-doors, where new or used items are sold from individual locations, with each location being operated independently from the other locations. Items sold include but are not limited to household items, antiques, rare items, decorations, used books and used magazines. 
Flea market seller A person, firm or corporation selling items or offering items for sale at a flea market. 
Market: A place where goods are sold to the public. 
(Ord. of 11-1-93, § I) 
Sec. 9-151. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall operate the business of renting space or allocating space to flea market sellers without first obtaining a license therefor. Applications for licenses shall be made to the city clerk on forms to be provided by the city clerk. Only one license shall be required for each flea market, and the individual flea market sellers shall not be responsible or required to obtain a license under this section. The fee for such license shall be $200.00 per year. 
(Ord. of 11-1-93, § II) 
Sec. 9-152. - Records to be kept by licensee. 
Each person required by this article to obtain a license shall keep accurate records of the names and addresses of each flea market seller together with a brief description of the type of merchandise offered for sale by that seller. 
(Ord. of 11-1-93, § III) 
Sec. 9-153. - Secondhand stores excepted. 
No person, firm or corporation having a license as a secondhand store shall be required to obtain a license under this article for the same business location. 
(Ord. of 11-1-93, § IV) 
Sec. 9-154. - More than one market. 
Any person, firm or corporation renting or allocating space to flea market sellers in more than one place of business shall be required to obtain a license for each place of business provided that one license shall be adequate for locations that are on the same lot, adjacent lots or lots separated only by an alley. 
(Ord. of 11-1-93, § V) 
Sec. 9-155. - Unlawful transactions. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale at any flea market any goods known to be stolen. Firearms, ammunition, and related items are prohibited without proper permits. 
(Ord. of 11-1-93, § VI) 
Sec. 9-156. - Purchases from children. 
No flea market seller shall purchase any used household item, antique or used article whatsoever from any person under the age of 18 years unless such person is accompanied by the person's parent or guardian. 
(Ord. of 11-1-93, § VII) 
Sec. 9-157. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. of 11-1-93, § VIII) 
Sec. 9-158. - Public display. 
There shall be no display of merchandise after 6:00 p.m. daily, except in the following instances: 
When items to be sold are so large as to make it economically impossible to completely weatherproof those items such as boats, cars, and trailers. These shall be enclosed by a privacy fence that allows limited view from the street, such fences shall be subject to the approval of the building inspector. Display material shall not be kept outside after business hours. 
(Ord. of 11-1-93, § IX) 
Sec. 9-159. - Attendant. 
The licensee shall provide a fulltime adult attendant upon the licensed premises during business hours. The attendant will be responsible for keeping the vendor log and notifying the city of any illegal activity. 
(Ord. of 11-1-93, § X) 
ARTICLE XII. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES 

Sec. 9-160. - Purpose and intent. 
The city finds and declares that the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter are necessary to further significant city interests in that: 
(a)  Prolonged liquidation or "going out of business" sales could tend to create, or leave the impression of, blighted or economically depressed conditions in and around the location of the sale; and 
(b)  Liquidation or forced sales are frequently characterized by large banners or signs which can result in visual blight, and the presence of a large number of persons which can result in traffic congestion, noise, and litter. 
(c)  The city's public officer or designee will regulate, license, and monitor this form of business to protect consumers from misleading or fraudulent practices. The law prohibits conducting a going-out-of-business sale for more than 90 days. After this time limit has expired, it is against the law to do business in any other manner contrary to representations that were made about the nature of the sale. 
( Ord. of 11-5-12(1) ) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. 10-1-393(b)(24) 
Sec. 9-161. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to, affect, the following: 
(a)  Estate sales by an authorized agent of the deceased, according to the law or by the provisions of the will; 
(b)  Sales of property conveyed by security deed, deed of trust, mortgage or judgment, or ordered to be sold according to the deed, mortgage or judgment order; 
(c)  Sales of all agricultural produce and livestock arising from the labor of the seller or other labor under the seller's control, on or belonging to the seller's property, and not purchased or sold for speculation; 
(d)  All sales under legal process; 
(e)  Sales by a pawnbroker or loan company selling or offering for sale unredeemed pledges of goods, as provided by law; and 
(f)  Sales of automobiles by an auctioneer licensed under the laws of the state of Georgia; 
(g)  Duly licensed auctioneers selling at an auction; 
( Ord. of 11-5-12(1) ) 
Sec. 9-162. - Going out of business requirements. 
(a)  Restriction on stock offered for sale: The stock offered for sale by any person under the designation of "closing out of business sale," "discontinuance of business sale," or "removal sale," or under any other description of like meaning, not involving bankruptcy or insolvency, shall be held to include only the goods, wares, furniture, fixtures, jewelry, merchandise or personal property actually in the stock or place of business of the person conducting the sale, at the operating of the sale. 
(b)  Adding to stock: It shall be unlawful to add to the stock, under the provisions of this article, by shipping in goods, wares or merchandise from the other sources, unless such replenishment is publicly advertised or clearly indicated as such by items. 
(c)  Change of ownership not to affect status of sale: No change of ownership of the goods, wares, furniture, fixtures, jewelry, merchandise or property offered in sale as prescribed in this article and no change of ownership of the capital stock of a corporation conducting such sale shall affect the status of the sale as a governed by this article. 
If an owner of a place of business discontinues the business, the owner can not reopen at the same location, under the same ownership and name of the closed business for six months. 
(d)  Misrepresenting sales: Any person advertising by newspaper, radio, posters, or otherwise, representing that he/she is operating, offering or maintaining fire sales, wreck sales, bankrupt sales, closing out or going out of business sales, removal sales and similar businesses, whereby the public is led to believe that they are being offered merchandise at reduced rates on account of fires, wrecks, bankruptcies, or closing out or discontinuance of business, when in fact such sales are not bona fide, but are fakes and frauds, and the advertisements and representations are untrue and false, shall be held guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable, upon conviction, in accordance to this ordinance, and each day that such sale of business is conducted in violation of the terms of this section shall constitute as separate offense. 
( Ord. of 11-5-12(1) ) 
Sec. 9-163. - Permit required. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any sale without first having obtained a permit from the city to conduct the sale; 
(2)  An application for the permit required by this chapter shall be filed with city hall at least 20 days prior to the date on which the sale is commenced; 
(3)  The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $15.00 and a permit fee of $50.00, as established by resolution of the city mayor and council; 
(4)  The application shall be signed and under penalty of perjury, by the person conducting the sale or by an authorized representative of the business entity conducting the sale; 
(5)  The application shall contain the following information; 
(6)  The address of the location at which the sale is to be conducted; 
(7)  The dates and times during which the sale is to be conducted; 
(8)  The type of ownership of the business and, if other than a sole proprietorship, the position held with the business entity by the person signing the application; 
(9)  The reason for, and the nature of, the sale; 
(10)  An inventory statement setting forth the quantity and description of all goods and merchandise to be sold at the sale with sufficient information to permit identification of the goods and merchandise upon inspection; 
(11)  Such other information as the public officer or designee may deem necessary in determining whether to issue the permit; 
(12)  At the time the application is filed, applicant shall grant permission to the public officer to enter, during normal business hours, the property or premises on which the sale is to be conducted for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of the inventory statement required by this article; 
(13)  The public officer or designee shall grant the permit upon a determination that the statements in the application are true and the proposed sale does not violate and city ordinance or state law. The decision to grant or deny the permit shall be made at least ten days prior to scheduled commencement of the sale. The public officer may impose conditions on the permit as are necessary or appropriate to protect the interests of the city and persons residing or working near the location of the sale. 
( Ord. of 11-5-12(1) ) 
Sec. 9-164. - Permit/term and conditions: 
A permit issued by the public officer to the first application shall be valid for period of 60 days, and shall be subject to the conditions specified in this article and conditions imposed by the public officer. Business's participating in these types of sales will be required to obtain a permit from the city's land use and development office. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued only one permit per year, to approved applicants. No subsequent permit shall be issued to a business to extend or any sooner than one year; 
(b)  All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions; 
(c)  The permittee shall comply with all applicable city ordinances and state laws; 
(d)  Permittee shall sell only the goods specified in the original inventory or the statement describing goods ordered, but not received; 
(e)  Permittee shall not engage in a false, fraudulent or deceptive business practice in the conduct of the sale; and advertising shall not be no more than 90 days as state law requires; 
(f)  Additional conditions may be imposed on the permit subsequent to issuance if, in the opinion of the public officer, those conditions are necessary or appropriate to protect in the interests of the city or persons residing or working near the location of the sale; 
(g)  A permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable; 
( Ord. of 11-5-12(1) ) 
Sec. 9-165. - Enforcement/violations. 
Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make available truthful and accurate statements the city request or requires, for determining applicability information needed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or conditions imposed on the permit, the city will revoke or will ask to surrender the business license issued to him/her for the business being discontinued. 
Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefore, shall be fined not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00, and each day of continued violation after conviction shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. of 11-5-12(1) ) 
Sec. 9-166. - Appeals process. 
The applicant may appeal the denial of a license to the governing body, by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within five business days after the date of the denial notice. The city council shall hear the appeal and shall render a decision within five business days of the hearing. 
The decisions of the city mayor and council shall be final. 
( Ord. of 11-5-12(1) ) 
State Law reference— Georgia's Fair Business Practices Act (FBPA), O.C.G.A. § 10-393(b)(24). 
CITY OF Chatsworth 
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE 

 
Complete this application in its entirety and submit to the City Clerk's Office with: 
1)  a copy of the applicant's inventory; 
2)  a copy of the applicant's registration with the Georgia Department of Revenue; 
3)  a copy of the Corporate Form from the Secretary of State if applicable; 
4)  applicable fees; and 
5)  required department and ordinance approvals as listed at end of application. 
Name(s) of Licensee:  (If a corporation or limited liability company list corporate name)  (If partnership, list names of all partners.) 
Trade Name of Business (D/B/A): ____________ 
Georgia Sales Tax I.D# ____________ 
Business Address: ____________ Business Phone: ____________ 
Mailing Address: Street Address  City  State  Zip 
Address where sale will be held: ____________ 
Phone: ____________ 
Nature of Occupancy: ____________ Leased ____________ Subleased ____________ 
Termination Date of Occupancy: ____________ Sale dates - From: ____________ To: ____________ 
Reason for Going Out of Business Sale: ____________ 
List any other business license(s) and location(s): ____________  _____ 
As required by law, I agree to provide a complete inventory of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for sale, a copy of which is attached to and made part of application. 
Are you liable for reporting state and city sales tax? □ Yes □ No 
If yes, have you applied for a sales tax account number or a city business license ? 
If no, give the name and address (account number, if possible) of individual or firm responsible for payment of sales tax: ____________ 
This permit will expire on the 60 th consecutive day following the day of issuance, including Sundays and legal Holidays, and will not be transferable. 
Whom may we contact regarding the close of your business after sale has ended? 
Name of Contact: ____________ Phone: ____________ 
SWORN AFFIRMATION 
I hereby certify that the statements made by myself and constituting part of this application are true and correct. I am fully aware that any misrepresentation of any information on this application may be grounds for denial of a license. I have been furnished with, and am familiar with, the ordinances and regulations pertaining to this application. I further understand that any violation of the laws of the State of Georgia, or the Ordinances of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia, can result in denial of this application, or suspension/revocation of my license. 
AUTHORIZATION FOR RELEASE OF INFORMATION 
I hereby authorize and consent to the release of information and all known records including criminal convictions, if any, to authorized agents of the Chatsworth Police Department, City Clerk's Office, and any other department requiring the information for approval of this license. This authorization shall be valid for the duration of my license, and any renewals thereof. 
Dated: ____________       Signature(s) of Applicant 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ 
My Commission Expires: ____________ Notary Public 
REQUIRED APPROVAL BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE:        =_; 
Chapter 10 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Alcoholic beverages—Drinking on public, school or recreation property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic beverage on any street or other right-of-way within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic beverage on school grounds and recreation properties in the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage outside of any place of business or parking lot thereof, which place of business sells any alcoholic beverage. 
(d)  It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section where any person is in the possession of any alcoholic beverage in an unsealed container in any of the places aforementioned. 
(Ord. of 6-23-80, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference— Possession on school grounds, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21.1; public intoxication, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 10-2. - Same—Being drunk and disorderly. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be drunk and disorderly in the city. 
(Code 1926, § 177) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to so provide, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 10-3. - Damaging city property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously damage, deface, break or destroy any property of the city. 
(Code 1926, § 234) 
State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 10-4. - Damaging, etc., electric poles, etc. 
It shall be an offense to cut, break, or in any other manner damage or interfere with any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other pole in the city used for the support of electric wires, or to throw at, break or in any other manner damage or interfere with any fixture, wire, lamp or other thing placed thereon; or to tie any horse, mule or other animal of any sort to any such pole. 
(Code 1926, § 229) 
State Law reference— Damaging utility property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 10-5. - Damaging property in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the walks laid out in any public park and trespass upon the grass, or to deface any of the seats, fountains or other property therein by cutting or whittling thereon with a knife or other instrument, or by writing or marking thereon with a pen, pencil or other instrument, or to cut or damage any of the shade trees in such park. 
(Code 1926, § 225) 
Sec. 10-6. - Cutting trees; trespass on public lots. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut down any tree, or otherwise trespass on any public lot or square in the city. 
(Code 1926, § 195) 
Sec. 10-7. - Attaching signs, etc., on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tack, nail or otherwise affix any paper, cardboard, tin, sign or any other thing upon any utility pole, post, or any other thing upon any street or sidewalk right-of-way within the city. 
(Ord. of 10-3-60) 
Cross reference— Sign permits, § 4-5, App. A, Art. IX, § D. 
Sec. 10-8. - Attaching signs to trees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tack or nail any paper, cardboard, tin or any other thing upon any shade tree within the city. 
(Code 1926, § 198) 
Sec. 10-9. - Quarreling, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of quarreling or otherwise acting in a disorderly manner. 
(Code 1926, § 176) 
State Law reference— Fighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-32. 
Sec. 10-10. - Discharging firearm. 
It shall not be lawful to shoot any gun, pistol or other firearms within the city except by permission of the mayor and mayor pro tem, or three members of the governing body. 
(Code 1926, § 178) 
Sec. 10-11. - Obscene language. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of using obscene language, publicly and loudly, in the hearing of others, in the city. 
(Code 1926, § 179) 
Sec. 10-12. - Lewdness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of open lewdness or any notorious act of public indecency, tending to debauch the morals, within the city. 
(Code 1926, § 180) 
State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 10-13. - Contempt of council. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of contemptuous or disorderly conduct towards the governing body, or in its presence. 
(Code 1926, § 188) 
Sec. 10-14. - Throwing objects. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pitch, throw, or cast any stone or missile at or upon any house, window, lamp, electric light or telephone pole or fixture, or shade tree. 
(Code 1926, § 189) 
Sec. 10-15. - Business establishments engaged in retail sale of alcoholic beverages; minors. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "business establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages" means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other business entity which derives from its retail sale of alcoholic beverages at least 75 percent of its total annual gross income. 
(b)  No one under the age of 21 years shall enter or remain on the premises of any business establishment engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages or by the drink, nor shall any business establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages or by the drink, permit anyone under the age of 21 years to enter into or remain on its business premises. 
(Ord. of 3-6-95) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 6, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of substantive provisions of said ordinance as § 10-15 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 10-16. - Loitering. 
It shall be unlawful for any two or more persons to loiter, to congregate, to gather, or to remain in or near any public right-of-way or other place open to the public in a manner and under such circumstances manifesting the purpose of creating a public nuisance, creating loud noises, or otherwise disturbing the peace in any manner, including, but not limited to fighting, riotous conduct, and/or obstructing in any manner the free passage of the general public in going to or from, or in or out, of such places of public accommodation. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 10-17. - Penalties for violation. 
Unless otherwise specifically set forth therein, the penalty for the violation of all ordinances of the city shall be as follows: Any person violating any provision of the Code of Ordinances of the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2001, § 2) 
Sec. 10-18. - Garage, yard and carport sales within the city. 
(a)  Definitions. This section shall govern all sales usually defined as garage, yard or carport sales. For the purposes of this section, any sale of household goods conducted at a residential dwelling not considered a commercial establishment shall fall under the jurisdiction of this section. 
(b)  Applications for permit. Every person desiring to conduct a garage, carport or yard sale within the city limits is required to procure a permit under the provisions of this section. Applications for permit shall be made to the city building inspector at least seven days before said sale shall be scheduled. The application shall conform to the requirements of this section and can be procured from the city building inspector's office. 
(c)  Contents for application of permit. Each application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the individual applying for the permit and at whose address said sale shall be held. 
(2)  Date said sale shall be conducted. 
(3)  Signature/stamp of the building inspector approving the application. 
(d)  Fees. Upon issuance of the permit a fee of $15.00 shall be paid to the city building inspector to partially cover administrative costs involved in issuance and policing of this permit program. 
(e)  General requirements. 
(1)  After procurement of the necessary permit, said permit shall be displayed in a prominent location at the site of the sale easily observed from the public roadway at the address of the sale. 
(2)  Said permit shall only be issued for a continuous 72-hour period during any six-month period. No subsequent permit shall be issued to the place or person sooner than six months from the sale time. 
(3)  Sufficient parking area shall be available to allow access to sale without interfering with the flow of traffic. 
(4)  Household goods offered for sale shall not be placed on display any closer to a public roadway than setback requirements of the zoning district in which the sale is conducted. 
(5)  Only one sign no larger than four square feet shall be displayed at the location of such sale which shall be set back from the roadway at least ten feet. In addition, only two directional signs no larger than two square feet shall be allowed for the purpose of directing traffic to the sale location. 
(6)  At the conclusion of the sale all signs shall be taken down by the individual whose name appears on the permit. 
(Ord. of 7-7-1997, §§ 1—5) 
Secs. 10-19—10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES REGARDING CHATSWORTH CITY PARK 

Sec. 10-36. - Rules concerning park. 
(a)  Park hours: 
(1)  The Chatsworth City Park, consisting of the city block located at the northeast intersection of Second Avenue and Peachtree Street shall be closed to the public each evening from 11:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m. the following day. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be present at the Chatsworth City Park during the hours of 11:01 p.m. until 4:59 a.m. the following day. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages are prohibited in the park. 
(c)  No organized games or team sports are allowed inside the park. 
(d)  Bicycles, skate boards, roller blades and roller skates are prohibited in the park. 
(e)  Swimming or wading in the fountain is prohibited. 
(f)  All dogs must have immunization tags on collars and must be on a leash and must be under the complete control of the owner at all times. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2000, § 1; Ord. of 9-9-2002, §§ I, II) 
Sec. 10-37. - Preserving natural beauty of park. 
(a)  All trash or litter is to be placed in designated containers. 
(b)  Plants, trees and all other landscape is not to be defaced, destroyed or removed. 
(c)  It is unlawful to offer items for sale in the park. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2000, § 2) 
Sec. 10-38. - Provisions for violations. 
Any person who violates any subsection of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Upon first offense: 
a.  By a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00, or 
b.  By having to perform a certain number of hours of designated community service not to exceed 40 hours; or 
c.  By both subsections (a) and (b) under this first offense; 
(2)  Upon second offense: 
a.  By a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00; or 
b.  By having to perform a certain number of hours of community service not to exceed 100 hours; or 
c.  By both subsections (a) and (b) under this second offense. 
d.  Enforcement of this article may be accomplished by the city in any manner authorized by law. 
(3)  Pursuant to the provisions contained in O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b), the maximum punishment for violation of this article shall not exceed a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment for ten days, or both. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2000, § 3; Ord. of 9-9-2002, § III) 
Secs. 10-39—10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 10-51. - Definitions. 
Automatic dialing device means any device connected to an alarm system which automatically sends a pre-recorded message or coded signal indicating the activation of the alarm system to a predetermined location. 
Automatic response alarms systems means a device intended to detect and signal intrusion in a closed premise or upon a premise or to signal a robbery, in which signal and alarm system business, monitoring station or other entity. 
False alarm means the activation of a burglary and/or robbery alarm at a time when no burglary or robbery is being committed or attempted on the premises. 
Independent alarm system means a device intended to detect and signal intrusion into a closed premise or a robbery, in which does not automatically signal an alarm system business, monitoring station or other entity. 
Multiple alarm sites means more than one alarm system on the premise. 
Response means the dispatch of the Chatsworth Police Department or members of the Chatsworth Fire Department, either paid or volunteer, to the premise where an alarm system has been activated indicating a burglary and/or robbery in progress on those premises. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 10-52. - Automatic dialers: automatic response alarm systems. 
It shall be unlawful to key automatic dialer burglar alarms or robbery alarms, or any automatic response alarm system (burglary or robbery) to any Chatsworth Police Department telephone number, including 911, or location. Such alarm shall only be keyed to a private answering service who can then notify the Chatsworth Police Department or 911. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 10-53. - False alarms. 
Fees for response. Per Chatsworth Police Department's response to any false alarm of any automatic alarm response system or independent alarm system, the Chatsworth Police Chief or his lawful officers shall charge and collect from the person, business or legal entity, using or maintaining the automatic response alarm system or independent alarm system, fees as follows: 
(1)  For a first or second response to a premises at which no other false alarm has occurred within a calendar year, no fee shall be charged. 
(2)  For a third response to a false alarm within a calendar year, no fees shall be charged, but notice shall be given to the person or business using or maintaining the alarm system of the false alarms and the requirements of this article, including the fee requirement for any subsequent response to a false alarm response by the Chatsworth Police Department within the calendar year. 
(3)  Upon a fourth response to a false alarm at the premises within a calendar year, a fee of $50.00 shall be charged to the person occupying the premises. 
(4)  Upon a fifth response to a false alarm within the calendar year, a fee of $75.00 shall be charged; and for all succeeding responses within the calendar year a fee of $100.00 shall be charged per response. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002, § 3) 
Sec. 10-54. - Automatic cutoff system. 
All audible alarms, sirens, bells, or horns shall have an automatic cutoff so that the alarm will not operate for more than 30 minutes after activation. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002, § 4) 
Sec. 10-55. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall be fined as provided by section 10-53 above by the Chatsworth Municipal Court of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia for each such offense. No fine or penalty shall be assessed for acts of God, nature or beyond control as determined in the sole discretion of the Chatsworth Police Officer responding to the alarm. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002, § 5) 
Secs. 10-56—10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TELEGRAPH OR TELEPHONE COMPANY 

Sec. 10-61. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The City of Chatsworth hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in paragraphs (8) and (9) of subsection (b) of Section 46-5-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights of way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
( Ord. of 7-6-09(1), § 1 ) 
Chapter 11 - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1—11-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOCIAL SECURITY 

Sec. 11-20. - Election of coverages. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal social security administration, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this article, the benefits of the system of old-age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act, the state enabling act, and amendments thereto. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-6-60, § 1; Ord. No. 8-1-77, § 1) 
Sec. 11-21. - Execution of agreements. 
The mayor, or other chief executive officer of the city, is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with employees' retirement system of the state for coverage of such employees and officials as provided in section 11-20, including firemen, that are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner by such law provided. 
(Ord. of 6-6-60, § 2; Ord. of 8-1-77, § 2) 
Sec. 11-22. - Withholdings. 
Withholdings from salaries and wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in section 11-20 hereof are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(Ord. of 6-6-60, § 3; Ord. of 8-1-77, § 3) 
Sec. 11-23. - Contributions. 
There shall be appropriated from general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, and administrative expenses, and such funds shall be paid over to the employees' retirement system of the state in accordance with regulations established by such agency. 
(Ord. of 6-6-60, § 4; Ord. of 8-1-77, § 4) 
Sec. 11-24. - Records and reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-6-60, § 5; Ord. of 8-1-77, § 5) 
Sec. 11-25. - Unauthorized persons excluded. 
There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-6-60, § 6; Ord. of 8-1-77, § 6) 
Sec. 11-26. - Amendment to plan—Release of escrow deposits. 
The mayor, or other designated official of the city, is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement amending the original plan and agreement with the employees' retirement system of the state, in substantially the form attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived, as Exhibit ``A,'' providing for the release of social security escrow deposits. 
(Ord. of 3-2-81, § 1) 
Sec. 11-27. - Same—Abiding by rules. 
The city agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the employees' retirement system of the state, hereinafter called the state agency, in regard to collections from city employees in making reports and payments to the state agency. 
(Ord. of 3-2-81, § 2) 
Sec. 11-28. - Same—Pledging amounts by city. 
The city hereby pledges an amount which it would receive in state grant funds as security for assurance that it will make collections from its employees, submit required reports, and remit payments to the state agency as agreed to in its plan of coverage of employees for social security benefits. The city further agrees that if the amount of state grant funds which it is entitled to receive in a calendar year is less than its annual payment to the state agency, as may be determined by the state agency, then, the city shall deposit in escrow, when so notified in writing by the state agency and in accordance with its rules and regulations, an amount which, when added to the city's state great funds, would total an amount sufficient to meet its obligations of reporting and remitting collections to the state agency. 
(Ord. of 3-2-81, § 3) 
Secs. 11-29—11-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RETIREMENT PLAN 

Sec. 11-40. - Adopted by reference. 
A retirement plan for the employees of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia, the joint trust agreement and the contract for the administration of said plan by the city and the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System as provided by O.C.G.A. section 47-5-1 et seq., is adopted by reference herein as if fully set out. 
(Ord. of 9-10-90(2), § 1) 
Chapter 12 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— For zoning procedures law, see O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-1. - Municipal planning commission—Created; membership; organization. 
There is created a municipal planning commission, with powers as authorized by law. This commission shall be known as the City of Chatsworth Planning Commission and it shall consist of five members who are citizens of this city. The commission members shall serve terms varying from one to five years when first organized, and as terms expire the appointments shall be for five-year periods. All appointments to the commission, compensation to members, adoption into law of the recommendations of the commission shall be made by the governing body as authorized by law. 
(Ord. of 6-2-58) 
Sec. 12-2. - Same—Duties. 
During the first year of operation, the commission shall have studied the basic problems of land use, the problems of existing thoroughfares and traffic congestion, of existing community facilities and public improvements, shall have made recommendations concerning the adoption of subdivision regulations, and shall have made recommendations concerning a master plan, and the adoption and protection thereof. It shall have such duties as provided by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-2-58) 
Sec. 12-3. - Joint planning commission—Established. 
The city hereby establishes the Chatsworth-Murray County Joint Planning Commission. 
(Ord. of 5-20-74) 
Sec. 12-4. - Same—Membership. 
The joint planning commission shall consist of nine members; four members shall be residents of this city appointed by the governing body of the city; and one member shall be a resident of the City of Eton, appointed by the governing body of that city; and four members shall be residents of the county appointed by the governing body of the county. The terms of the members shall be for four years, except that the initial members appointed by the city shall have served for terms ending December 31, 1974; December 31, 1975; December 31, 1976; and December 31, 1977, respectively; their successors thereafter to serve for full four-year terms. Any vacancy in membership appointed by the city shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing body of the city, which shall also have the authority to remove any city-appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Ord. of 5-20-74, § 1) 
Sec. 12-5. - Same—Organization, rules, staff; finances. 
The joint planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of chairman shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The joint planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of either municipality or the county. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the joint planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the joint planning commission shall be a public record. The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the joint planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing body of the cities and county. 
(Ord. of 5-20-74, § 2) 
Sec. 12-6. - Same—Powers and duties. 
When the joint planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers, and shall have adopted its rule of procedure, then it shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2. 
(Ord. of 5-20-74, § 3) 
Sec. 12-7. - Area planning commission—Created and established. 
In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the municipality and the northwest Georgia area which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, that the Coosa Valley Area Planning and Development Commission, hereinafter referred to as the area planning commission, is hereby created and established as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2. 
(Ord. of 12-29-60) 
Sec. 12-8. - Same—Membership. 
The area planning commission shall consist of two members from each of the counties participating in the area planning commission. Of the members from each county, one shall be appointed by the governing body of the municipality wherein the county seat is located and the other member shall be appointed by the governing authority of the county. The term of office for all members shall be five years, except that the initial appointment by the governing body of this city shall be for a term of four years. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing body making the appointment which has become vacant. The appointing authority shall also have the power to remove any member it may appoint for cause, or written charges, after public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. of 12-29-60, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 12-9. - Same—Organization; rules; staff; finances. 
The area planning commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from among its appointive members. The term of office of the chairman and vice chairman shall be for one year or until reelected or their successors are elected. The commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an employee of the commission. The commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairman and at such other time as the chairman or board may determine, shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, or transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work. In the performance of its duties, the commission may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, or local public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations, may spend such funds, and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. It may make expenditures for the purchase of required equipment and supplies. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts to the commission and contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the participating governing authorities. 
(Ord. of 12-29-60, § 3) 
Sec. 12-10. - Same—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the function and duty of the commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of the entire northwest Georgia area and each political subdivision therein. In general, the commission shall have such powers and duties and responsibilities as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2. 
(Ord. of 12-29-60, § 4) 
Chapter 13 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Restoration of street surface after sewer connection, § 8-51(c). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Street dedication requirements. 
(a)  All future roads, streets and/or major thoroughfares dedicated and conveyed to the city for public use shall have a width of right-of-way of not less than 60 feet. 
(b)  Such dedications and conveyances shall grant the city the right to slope banks, make fills and construct drainage ditches for short distances back of the right-of-way lines where necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of such roads, streets and/or thoroughfares. 
(c)  Such dedications and conveyances of roads, streets and/or thoroughfares shall be in compliance with minimum design standards set forth in the city-county subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-1-72) 
Sec. 13-2. - Removal of dirt. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or haul any dirt from any street or other ground of the city, without permission of the governing body. 
(Code 1926, § 192) 
Sec. 13-3. - Private use; placing obstructions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to convert any pubic street in the city to such person's use, or place any obstruction thereon, such as wood, barrels, boxes, timber or lumber, except necessarily for building purposes. Any such obstruction shall be moved by the city at the expense of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1926, § 193) 
Sec. 13-4. - Placing objects on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain on any sidewalk any goods, wares or merchandise, vegetables or fruits, or place any barrels, boxes or other articles on such sidewalk, except within three feet from the wall of such person's house or store. 
(Code 1926, § 199) 
Sec. 13-5. - Obstructing drains. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fill up any ditch or drain in any of the streets of the city or purposely place any obstruction therein to prevent the free flow of water. 
(Code 1926, § 194) 
Sec. 13-6. - Street design and specifications. 
Prior to dedication and acceptance thereof by the city, all city streets shall be constructed to meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  The base shall be constructed to a compacted depth of not less than six inches graded aggregate base (G.A.B.) pug mix. 
(2)  All drainage piping within any city right-of-way shall be concrete class 3 or metal, which shall be fully asphalt coated. 
(3)  All pipe, including utilities, shall be compacted to not less than 95 percent. Graded aggregate base shall be compacted to not less than 97 percent. 
(4)  All paving shall require a two inch minimum asphalt concrete binder type B and one and one-half inches minimum asphalt concrete topping E or F mix. 
(5)  All streets shall have a painted double center line unless directed in writing otherwise by the road superintendent. 






(Ord. of 4-10-2006, § 1; Ord. of 3-3-2008, App. D) 
Sec. 13-7. - Street solicitations. 
(a)  General; permit required. No person shall sell any goods or services in, along, upon or over the public streets, roads, alleys or thoroughfares of the city unless specifically allowed elsewhere in this code and no person shall solicit for the contribution of money for charitable purposes in, along, upon or over the public streets, roads, alleys or thoroughfares of the city unless such person shall have a permit from the city for such purpose. The foregoing sentence shall not be applicable to duly licensed vendors of goods sold from rolling vendors. 
(b)  Permit requirements and process. The chief of the Chatsworth Police Department or his delegate may issue a permit to an (sic) person petitioning to solicit for the contribution of money for charitable purposes in, along, upon, or over the public streets, roads, alleys or thoroughfares of the city in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The person or persons petitioning must be joined in their petition by a sponsoring organization which is a qualified charitable organization recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service under section 501 (c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and where the solicitation is purely for raising funds for a stated charitable purpose or cause; 
(2)  The sponsoring organization holds a current and valid policy of insurance providing compensation for any bodily injury to any member or participant or member of the general public suffering bodily liability arising out of the activity of solicitation in an amount not less than $2,000,000.00 single limit or its equivalent. The city shall be an additional named insured on such policy during all solicitation periods and the sponsoring organization shall provide the city with a certificate from the insurer to that effect; 
(3)  Any person or persons involved in such charitable solicitation must be over the age of 18 years and execute and deliver a wavier and release of any liability in favor of the city prior to solicitation; 
(4)  No location shall be permitted which shall be in violation of, or cause a violation of, state law. No location shall be permitted other than the location approved by the chief of the Chatsworth Police Department or his delegate; 
(5)  No permit shall allow the permitted activity at any time other than on a Saturday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.; 
(6)  As a condition for obtaining the permit, the applicant and sponsoring organization shall publicize in the legal organ of Murray County, Georgia, not less than one week prior to the date of the sale or solicitation that it shall be engaged in such solicitation giving the date, the hours of such activity, and the location. 
(7)  Any sponsoring organization or person seeking a permit for charitable solicitation under this section shall file for such permit on forms to be specified and provided by the chief of the Chatsworth Police Department and shall pay a $25.00 application-processing fee. 
(8)  No person or sponsoring organization shall be provided more than six permits during any calendar year. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who sells any goods or services or solicits for the contribution of money for charitable purposes or otherwise in, along, upon, or over the public streets, roads, alleys or thoroughfares of the city in violation of this section shall be fined up to $250.00 for each offense upon conviction in the municipal court of the City of Chatsworth. 
( Ord. of 1-3-11(2) ) 
Secs. 13-8—13-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—6 of an ordinance adopted Apr. 4, 1994 was not specifically amendatory to the Code. Said ordinance has been designated as §§ 13-20—13-25 and is included herein at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 13-20. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Street Excavations Ordinance of the City of Chatsworth." 
(Ord. of 4-4-94, § 1) 
Sec. 13-21. - Terms defined. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, wording and their derivations shall have the meaning set forth herein. 
Applicant is any person making a written application to the mayor and council for an excavation permit hereunder. 
City is the City of Chatsworth. 
Excavation work is the excavation and other work permitted under an excavation permit and required to be performed under this article. 
Mayor and council is the governing body of the City of Chatsworth. 
Permittee is any person who has been granted and has in full force and effect an excavation permit issued hereunder. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, other governmental entity or authority or any organization of any kind. 
Street is any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, or other public way or public grounds in the city. 
Street superintendent is the appointed supervisor of the City of Chatsworth Street Department. 
(Ord. of 4-4-94, § 2) 
Sec. 13-22. - Unlawful to excavate without permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine, or in any manner alter any city street, public alley, or sidewalk or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any city street, public alley, or sidewalk for any purpose or to place deposit, or leave upon any street any earth or any other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the person shall have obtained a permit therefor in advance from the street superintendent, or his or her designee. A condition of the permit shall be that all work shall be accomplished in accordance with all applicable specification promulgated by the city street department from time to time, as amended. 
(Ord. of 4-4-94, § 3; Ord. of 4-2-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 13-23. - Issuance of a permit. 
An applicant shall make a written application to the street superintendent for the issuance of an excavation permit at least one full business day prior to the time in which the applicant desires to commence an excavation. Such written application may be received by and processed by the city clerk and shall be upon such forms as provided by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 4-4-94, § 4; Ord. of 4-2-2001, § 2) 
Sec. 13-24. - Completion of excavation; damage to existing improvements. 
The permittee shall return any city street, public alley, or sidewalk to its condition immediately preceding the excavation work upon completion thereof. In the event that an excavation or removed portion of a city street, public alley, or sidewalk is not satisfactorily replaced and approved by the street superintendent or his or her designee, the city shall proceed immediately to repair or to replace said excavation or removed portion of said city street, public alley, or sidewalk at the expense of the application, and/or property owner or record for whose benefit said permit was granted. 
(Ord. of 4-4-94, § 5; Ord. of 4-2-2001, § 3) 
Sec. 13-25. - Failure to comply. 
Failure to comply with the terms of this article shall be cause for refusal to grant any future permit to any person until such person shall post a surety bond for the performance of any liabilities hereunder and for any future work to be performed under any future application. Said surety shall be in an amount satisfactory to the mayor and council and reasonably related to the excavation work to be performed and with surety satisfactory to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 4-4-94, § 6) 
Secs. 13-26—13-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. 

Sec. 13-30. - Intent and purposes. 
The City of Chatsworth is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, and economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article 9, Section. 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A §36-35-3, and O.C.G.A §32-4-92(10), has adopted this ordinance for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-31. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the right- of-way as provided herein. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-32. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Chatsworth, Georgia. 
Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring, and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Director means the road superintendent of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage of loss of real or personal property. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in on above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below; any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder; and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise; of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing; which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-33. - Registration required. 
Each utility which occupies, uses, or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease, or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of this article. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-34. - Registration procedure. 
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right of way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-35. - Incomplete registration. 
If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time not more than 90 days, in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-36. - Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. 
Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-37. - Facilities in place without registration. 
Beginning one year after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained, unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance, taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way, prosecuting the violator, and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-38. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit in accordance with the terms of this article. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-39. - Permit procedures. 
Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city clerk may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the city. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of Facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines; pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representatives). 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public: caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal [agreements] that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-40. - Permit fees. 
Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-41. - Issuance of permit. 
If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this chapter; and 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic-flow, and other users of the right of way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-42. - Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the' affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-43. - Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)  The permit shall remain in place construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is [determined] that a utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
c.  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-44. - Cancellation for cause. 
If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-45. - Expiration of permit. 
If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-46. - Utility accommodation manual adopted. 
The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including an references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from tine to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the. provisions of this ordinance and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Chatsworth municipal equivalents. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-47. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
Unless specifically provided in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices, and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right of way or the right of way itself. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-48. - Grading. 
If the grades or lines of any street within the city right of way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break: through, remove, alter, or relocated all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-49. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-50. - No blasting or excavation except under certain circumstances. 
As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-51. - Repairs to rights-of-way. 
Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-52. - Restoration of rights-of-way. 
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-53. - Inspection. 
The utility shall make the construction site available to the director to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-54. - Stop work order. 
At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-55. - Completion. 
When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-56. - Additional permits required. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the emergency as defined herein. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-57. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Sec. 13-58. - Reservation of regulatory police powers. 
(a)  The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the constitution and laws of the. United States, State of Georgia and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility, by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(b)  This article shall become effective following its enactment by the mayor and council of the City of Chatsworth, the public health, safety, and welfare requiring it. 
(c)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(d)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council of the City of Chatsworth that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this article are severable and if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases herein. 
( 8-3-09(1) ) 
Chapter 14 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Creation of noise by vehicles, § 7-5(1),(6),(7),(8). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Adoption of state law by reference. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372, §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, known as the "Uniform Rules of the Road," are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 3-1-82) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court of violations of driver's license statute, O.C.G.A. § 40-5-124; of unregistered motor vehicle statute, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-22. 
Sec. 14-2. - Dangerous driving. 
(a)  Any person who drives a motor vehicle upon any street of the city at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger, or likely to endanger, life, limb, or property of any person shall be guilty of dangerous driving, in violation of this Code. 
(b)  Dangerous driving within the meaning of this section shall be deemed to include the following offenses, which are expressly prohibited: 
(1)  Driving a motor vehicle when not under complete control, or with inadequate or improperly adjusted brakes. 
(2)  Driving to the left of the center of the street. 
(3)  Passing or attempting to pass two other vehicles abreast, moving in the same direction. 
(4)  Backing into the line of traffic without ascertaining if the way is clear. 
(5)  A failure to give adequate and timely signals of intention to turn and/or slow down or stop. 
(6)  Exceeding a reasonable speed under the circumstances of traffic conditions obtaining at the time. 
(7)  Passing other vehicles going in the same direction while crossing at an intersection, or while pedestrians are passing, or about to pass, in front of either of such vehicles. 
(8)  Driving a vehicle out of an alley, or from behind a building, across a sidewalk into a street without bringing such vehicle to a full stop immediately before crossing such sidewalk, and sounding the horn. 
(Ord. of 9-3-51, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-390. 
Sec. 14-3. - Riding or driving on sidewalks. 
It shall not be lawful for any person to ride, propel or run any bicycle or motor vehicle on any sidewalk, except to cross the sidewalk on a driveway. 
(Code 1926, § 197) 
Sec. 14-4. - Speed limits. 
The following speed zones are hereby established with the speed limits set out as follows: 
Charles Road: From State Route 52 Alternate to Green Road, 0.91 mile, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. of 3-1-82; Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93) 
Chestnut Street: 
(1)  From Green Road to State Route 61, 0.90 mile, 30 miles per hour. (Ord. of 8-1-83) 
(2)  From Green Road (C.R. 134) to North Sixth Avenue (C.S. 605), 0.63 mile, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 3-1-95, 5-1-95) 
(3)  From North Sixth Avenue (C.S. 605) to State Route 2, 0.27 mile, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. of 3-1-82; Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 3-1-95, 5-1-95) 
Green Road: 
(1)  From northwest city limits to Market Street, 1.2 miles, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. of 8-5-85) 
(2)  From C.S. 556 (Green Road) at Charles Road to G. I. Maddox Parkway, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93) 
(3)  From Charles Road (C.R. 134) to West Market Street, 0.71 mile, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. of 8-5-85; Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93) 
(4)  From State Route 52 to West Market Street, 0.91 mile, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 3-1-95, 5-1-95) 
Industrial Boulevard: From Highway 411 to Duvall Road, 0.60 mile, and from Duvall Road to dead end, 0.50 mile, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. of 4-6-87(1)) 
Old Dalton-Ellijay Road: From a point 50 feet west of Rollie Avenue (C.S. 653) to State Route 52, 0.65 mile, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. of 8-5-85; Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 3-1-95, 5-1-95) 
State Route 52 (U.S. 76): 
(1)  From milepost 4.66 (200 feet east of Doogan Road, C.R. 37) to milepost 5.95 (State Route 61), 1.29 miles, 50 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 3-1-95, 5-1-95) 
(2)  From milepost 3.36 (Central Way, C.R. 429) to milepost 4.66 (200 feet east of Doogan Road, C.R. 37), 1.30 miles, a statutory 55 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 3-1-95; 5-1-95) 
(3)  From milepost 5.06 (west city limits) to milepost 5.92 (State Route 61, U.S. 411), 0.86 mile, 50 miles per hour. 
(4)  From milepost 7.34 (State Route 61, U.S. 411) to milepost 7.46 (S. First Avenue), 0.12 mile, 25 miles per hour. 
(5)  From milepost 7.46 (S. First Avenue) to milepost 7.66 (east city limits), 0.20 mile, 35 miles per hour. 
(6)  School speed zone: From milepost 5.20 (800 feet west of C.R. 36, Dalton-Ellijay Road) to milepost 5.50 (800 feet east of C.R. 36 Dalton-Ellijay Road), 0.30 mile, 45 miles per hour effective on school days only from 30 minutes prior to commencement time to 30 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time p.m. (Ord. of 3-1-82; Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93) 
State Route 52 Alternate: 
(1)  From milepost 4.50 (50 feet west of Charles Street, C.R. 134) to milepost 4.88 (School Street, C.S. 624), 0.38 mile, 45 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93) 
(2)  From milepost 4.88 (School Street, C.S. 624) to milepost 5.15 (S. Fifth Street, C.S. 613), 0.28 mile, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93) 
(3)  From milepost 5.15 (S. Fifth Street, C.S. 613) to milepost 5.35 (State Route 2), 0.20 mile, 25 miles per hour. (Ord. of 3-1-82; Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93) 
State Route 61: 
(1)  From milepost 11.07 (350 feet north of C.R. 33, Leonard Bridge Road) to milepost 12.06 (350 feet south of Olive Street, C.S. 303), 0.99 mile, 45 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93) 
(2)  From milepost 12.06 (350 feet south of Olive Street, C.S. 303) to milepost 12.31 (Pine Street, C.S. 903), 0.25 mile, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93) 
(3)  From milepost 12.31 (Pine Street, C.S. 903) to milepost 12.39 (State Route 2), 0.08 mile, 25 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93) 
(4)  From milepost 12.57 (Cherokee Street), to milepost 12.77 (Walnut Street), 0.20 mile, 35 miles per hour. 
(5)  From milepost 12.77 (Walnut Street) to milepost 13.00 (Old Federal Road), 0.23 mile, 40 miles per hour. 
(6)  From milepost 13.00 (Old Federal Road) to milepost 14.11 (Industrial Blvd.), 1.11 miles, 45 miles per hour. 
(7)  From milepost 14.11 (Industrial Blvd.) to milepost 14.81 (north city limits), 0.70 mile, 55 miles per hour. (Ord. of 3-1-82) 
(8)  From milepost 18.03 (50 feet north of Duval Road, C.R. 34) to milepost 18.76 (Industrial Blvd., C.S. 621), 0.73 mile, 55 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 3-1-95, 5-1-95) 
(9)  From milepost 18.76 (Industrial Blvd., C.S. 621) to milepost 19.76 (200 feet north of Old Federal Road, C.R. 19), 1.00 mile, 45 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 3-1-95, 5-1-95) 
(10)  From milepost 19.76 (200 feet north of Old Federal Road, C.R. 19) to milepost 20.01 (Locust Street, C.S. 619), 0.25 mile, 40 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 3-1-95, 5-1-95) 
(11)  From milepost 20.01 (Locust Street, C.S. 619) to milepost 20.27 (W. Cherokee Street, C.S. 607), 0.26 mile, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 3-1-95, 5-1-95) 
(12)  From milepost 20.27 (W. Cherokee Street, C.S. 607) to milepost 20.45 (State Route 52 Alternate), 0.18 mile, 25 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 3-1-95, 5-1-95) 
(13)  From milepost 20.45 (State Route 52 Alternate) to milepost 20.58 (S. First Avenue), 0.13 mile, 25 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 3-1-95, 5-1-95) 
(14)  From milepost 20.58 (S. First Avenue) to milepost 20.90 (790 feet east of Holly Street, C.S. 629), 0.42 mile, 35 miles per hour. (Ord. No. 9-9-93, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 3-1-95, 5-1-95) 
U.S. 411: From Long's St. to north city limits. (Ord. of 5-6-68) 
The corporate limits of the city along Third Avenue known as Knoxville-Atlanta Highway: 25 miles per hour. (Ord. of 2-3-41(2)) 
Cross reference— Speed of trains, § 14-20. 
Sec. 14-5. - No-parking zones. 
(a)  There shall be no parking on the alley between Second Avenue and Third Avenue from Fort Street to Market Street, a distance of four hundred (400) feet, except for deliveries only. (Ord. of 6-1-87, § 1) 
(b)  There shall be no parking on Third Avenue and immediately in front of the courthouse steps leading to Third Avenue, the zone to be 16 feet wide and to be plainly marked across Third Avenue; within such marked space no vehicle shall be permitted to park on either the east or west side of Third Avenue. (Ord. of 2-3-41(1)) 
(c)  There shall be no parking on either the west side or east side of Third Avenue (U.S. Highway 411), from the north side of Cherokee Street, north to the end of the present curbing and guttering at the north line of land of Clyde Powell. (Ord. of 10-5-70) 
(d)  There shall no parking on the east side of State Route 61 (U.S. Highway 411) from mile post 12.492 (72 feet south of Cherokee Street) to milepost 12.505 (the southeast corner of Cherokee Street and State Route 61), this area being in front of the Chatsworth Times Newspaper office. (Ord. of 7-6-82) 
(e)  There shall be no parking on that portion of first Avenue located north from its intersection with the southern right-of-way of Peachtree Street (if extended) to the northern right-of-way of Walnut Street (if extended); that portion of Peachtree Street located east of the eastern right-of-way of Second Avenue to the western right-of-way of First Avenue; that portion of Walnut Street located east of the eastern right-of-way of Second Avenue to the western right-of-way of First Avenue; and that portion of Second Avenue located north of the southern right-of-way of Peachtree Street (if extended) to the northern right-of-way of Walnut Street (if extended). Provided that, prohibition of parking on the above described roadways shall only apply during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 2-3-41(1); Ord. of 10-5-70; Ord. of 4-11-77(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-6-82; Ord. of 6-1-87, § 1; Ord. of 9-9-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 14-6. - Truck routes. 
It shall be unlawful for a truck with a load capacity in excess of one (1) ton to be driven on the following designated streets at any time, except for deliveries on such streets: 
(1)  Green Road from city limits to Market Street, 
(2)  Market Street from Fourth Avenue to Charles Road, 
(3)  Chestnut Street from Green Road to Third Avenue, 
(4)  Old Dalton Ellijay Road from city limits to intersection with G.I. Maddox Parkway, 
(5)  Fourth Avenue from Fort Street to Meir Street, 
(6)  Fourth Avenue from Market Street to end of street, 
(7)  Fifth Avenue, 
(8)  Sixth Avenue, 
(9)  Seventh Avenue, 
(10)  Ninth Avenue, 
(11)  Olive Street, 
(12)  Pine Street, 
(13)  Thompson Street, 
(14)  Cherokee Street, 
(15)  Peachtree Street, 
(16)  Walnut Street, 
(17)  Oak Street, 
(18)  Locust Street, 
(19)  Second Avenue from Pine Street south to intersection of Third Avenue, 
(20)  Second Avenue from Market Street to intersection of Hyde Tyler Road, 
(21)  Charles Road, 
(22)  Elm Street, 
(23)  Long Avenue, 
(24)  Tenth Avenue. 
(Ord. of 3-3-86(2)) 
Secs. 14-7—14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RAILROADS 

Sec. 14-20. - Speed limit. 
The speed limits of trains of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad Company, Atlanta Division, a branch of the Seaboard Systems Railroad, running through the city are hereby set at 45 miles per hour from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. from milepost C 376.4 to milepost C 377.6 and at 60 miles per hour from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. from milepost C 376.4 to milepost C 377.6. 
(Code 1926, § 222; Ord. of 9-12-83) 
Sec. 14-21. - Blowing whistle. 
It shall be an offense to run a train within the city after approaching within 100 yards of the first public crossing, without plainly and distinctly blowing the whistle or sounding the horn while the train is in motion. 
(Code 1926, § 220) 
Sec. 14-22. - Obstructing crossing. 
It shall be unlawful to obstruct any public street or crossing by engines or cars of any description being allowed to stand still on any portion of the ground laid out for such street or crossing for the space of 15 minutes, or by switching engines or cars within the limits of such street or crossing, or in any other way to obstruct or to interfere with the free passage of persons or vehicles on any part of such street; it being the true intent and meaning of this section that railroads have the necessary right of passing their engines and trains over such streets or crossings in their actual and necessary business, but that they have no right to obstruct the streets beyond their actual necessity of passing; and any building of switches or using of any street for switching cars or allowing cars of engines to stand thereon shall be a violation of this section. 
(Code 1926, § 221) 
Sec. 14-23. - Persons subject to punishment. 
The engineer or person in charge of any engine, as well as the conductor or other person under whose order the act is done, and all other persons concerned in violating any section of this article, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-8. 
(Code 1926, § 223) 
Secs. 14-24—14-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sections A—G of an ordinance adopted Apr. 4, 1994 was not specifically amendatory to the Code. Said ordinance has been designated as §§ 14-40—14-46 and included herein at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 14-40. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as ``The Downtown Parking District Ordinance.'' 
(Ord. of 4-4-94, § A) 
Sec. 14-41. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to assure that all residents of and visitors to the city have equal access to parking spaces within the herein created downtown parking district. The intent of this ordinance is to create a two hour time limit parking zone not limited in scope to individual parking spaces. Said two hour parking zone shall be known as the downtown parking district. 
(Ord. of 4-4-94, § B) 
Sec. 14-42. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, wording and their derivations shall have the meaning set forth herein: 
Automobile is a self-propelled vehicle used for transportation. 
City is the City of Chatsworth. 
Downtown parking district is all the parking spaces along the side of the streets within the city limits of the city except those parking spaces immediately surrounding the Murray County Courthouse and except those parking spaces on municipal property designated for public parking. 
No parking zone is any area within the downtown parking district in which parking shall not be permitted unless otherwise indicated. Any such area shall be identified by appropriately erected signs giving notice thereof. 
Parking spaces is all side street parking within the city. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, other governmental entity or authority or any organization of any kind. 
Street is any street, highway, sidewalk, or other public way or public grounds in the city. 
(Ord. of 4-4-94, § C) 
Sec. 14-43. - Two-hour parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park an automobile for more than two hours within the downtown parking district between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. The moving of an automobile from space to space within the downtown parking district is contemplated and is hereby specifically prohibited after the two-hour time limit has expired. 
(Ord. of 4-4-94, § D) 
Sec. 14-44. - No parking zone. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park an automobile within an appropriately designated no parking zone. 
(Ord. of 4-4-94, § E) 
Sec. 14-45. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this article shall be provided by the Chatsworth Police Department. 
(Ord. of 4-4-94, § F) 
Sec. 14-46. - Fines, penalties and procedure. 
Any person who parks an automobile within the downtown parking district in violation of this article shall be cited and fined $25.00. Said fine shall be due and payable to the city at the Chatsworth Police Department within 30 days from the date of said citation. Persons failing to voluntarily appear and pay said $25.00 fine(s) may be cited to the municipal court of Chatsworth, Georgia, for failure to pay such fine. 
Any person convicted in the municipal court of Chatsworth, Georgia, of failure to pay any fine(s) assessed under this article shall promptly pay into the court any past due fines along with $25.00 per unpaid fine, and any court costs generated by failure to pay said fine(s). 
( Ord. of 4-4-11(1), § 1 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDING VEHICLES 

Sec. 14-47. - Impounding vehicles authorized. 
Under the following circumstances, the chief of police, or his designee, shall be authorized to order the impoundment of any vehicle to an appropriate location: 
(1)  Any vehicle left abandoned and unattended due to the arrest of the driver thereof, when no other responsible, lawful driver designated by the owner shall be readily available; 
(2)  Any vehicle that is evidence in any ongoing law enforcement investigation; 
(3)  Any vehicle not properly tagged, titled, registered, or insured; 
(4)  Any vehicle inoperable or abandoned pursuant to section 14-50. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 14-48. - Delegation of authority. 
The chief of police may delegate his authority set forth herein with respect to impounding vehicles to any certified peace officer employed by the police department. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 14-49. - Responsibility for towing or other charge(s). 
Any wrecker bill, towing, storage, or other related charge(s) for a vehicle impounded pursuant to this article shall be paid by the owner of such vehicle. Such fees shall not exceed the maximum towing fees permitted by the Georgia Public Service Commission and shall be approved by the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 14-50. - Inoperable and abandoned vehicles. 
No vehicle shall be abandoned or left unattended upon a public street or highway or other public property, whether operable or not, for a period of more than 24 hours. Any vehicle so abandoned or left inoperable may be impounded by the police department at the owner's expense, and the owner may be subject to fine. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 14-51. - Unauthorized removal of impounded vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove a towed and stored vehicle from the place of storage designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, § 1) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
ZONING ORDINANCE 
CITY OF CHATSWORTH, GEORGIA 
An Ordinance of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia, regulating the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the density and distribution of population, the uses of buildings, structures, land and water for trade, industry, commerce, residences, recreation, public activities or other purposes, creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the method and administration and amendment; creating and defining the powers and duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals; providing penalties and remedies for violation; and repealing all amendments thereto and all conflicting Ordinances; and for other purposes. 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF CHATSWORTH, GEORGIA: 
REGULATING THE LOCATION, CONSTRUCTION, AND USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND LAND: AND FOR DIVIDING THE INCORPORATED AREA INTO DISTRICTS FOR SUCH PURPOSES AND ESTABLISHING BOUNDARIES THEREFORE: PROVIDING FOR THE METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT: AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF ITS PROVISIONS. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 10-09, adopted October 2009 , amended appendix A in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Appendix A, articles I—XVII, and appendices A—C, pertained to Zoning. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. The zoning ordinance, dated October 2009, is set out herein as it appears in pamphlet, in substance and for the most part in form. Words and figures in brackets have been inserted by the editor. 
Cross reference— Planning commissions, § 12-1 et seq.; sign restrictions, § 4-5. 
State Law reference— Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE 

Section A. - Short Title. 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia." 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish minimum standards for the use of land and improvements thereon in the incorporated area of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia. The Ordinance will serve as a tool to promote health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or the general welfare of the present and future residents of the City of Chatsworth; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population, to provide adequate transportation, water, sewerage, parks and open spaces and other public requirements; to protect properties against blight and depreciation; to promote desirable living conditions; to sustain the stability of neighborhoods and the value of buildings; to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings and other structures throughout the City; to protect and conserve irreplaceable natural resources; to secure economy in government expenditures; to minimize visual blight and enhance scenic characteristics and for other purposes, all in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan of the City of Chatsworth, or equivalent. 
Authority: The Mayor and Council of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia does hereby ordain and enact into law the following Articles, Sections and Maps of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Chatsworth in accordance with the authority contained in Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended. 
The requirements of these regulations are minimum permissible standards; and it is expected that developers and the Chatsworth Planning Commission will routinely strive for quality development which will exceed these minimum requirements. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Section A. - Rules. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular number include the plural and the plural, the singular; the word 'person' includes a firm, company, partnership or corporation; the word "building" includes the word "structure", the word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; the word "erected" includes the word "constructed", "moved", "located", or "relocated"; the word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied"; the word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel"; all measured quantities shall be to the nearest integral unit of measure, and if a fraction is one-half or greater, the next highest integral unit shall be used (note: except density computations which require the lowest, whole unit). "Map" means "Zoning Map" of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Use of Definitions. 
Any word not herein defined shall be as defined elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance or, if not defined elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance, as defined in Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language - Second College Edition, the said definition to be read in context with the purposes and provision of the part of the Ordinance it is being used to define. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section C. - Definitions. 

Figure 1: Accessory Structure
Accessory Building. A building subordinate or supplemental to the main building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to that of a main or principal building and located on the same lot. 
Accessory Structure. A structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building. See Figure 1: Accessory Structure. 
Accessory Use. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building, and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
Addition. (to an existing building). Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Adult Business. 1) any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage there at either by law or by the operators of such business; or 2) any business where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas, as further defined in the City Ordinance or engage in specified sexual activities, as further defined in the City Ordinance; or 3) any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services, products, or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Agricultural. The cultivation or growth from or on the land of horticultural, floricultural, forestry, dairy, livestock, poultry, or apiarian products. Included within the definition of "agriculture" shall be the importation, storage, or distribution in bulk, unpackaged form of raw materials directly to persons engaged in agriculture. "Raw materials" for purposes of this definition shall include organic materials such as straw, hay, animal feeds, sawdust, mulches, and like items. "Raw materials" shall also include inorganic dolomitic lime. "Raw materials" shall not include farm equipment, building materials, chemicals, fertilizer, manure not produced on the premises, packaged materials not produced on the premises, materials distributed for resale not produced on the premises, or materials not expended in the production of the above listed products. 
Alley. A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, columns, and girders, except such emergency change as may be required for safety purposes; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or, any movement of a building from one location to another. 
Amusements, Commercial. Businesses which operate for a profit by amusing or entertaining patrons through the use of electronic/video pinball games; pool/ping pong tables; miniature racetracks, gaming devices, etc.; services may include light food/refreshment services, but not including establishments serving alcoholic beverages or indoor/outdoor shooting ranges. 
Animal Hospital. A building used for the treatment, housing or boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds or fowl by a veterinarian. 
Animal Husbandry. The production of animals (livestock) and/or the by-product thereof. 
Animal Quarters. Any structure which surrounds or is used to shelter, care for, house, feed, exercise, train, exhibit, display or show any animals, other than fenced pasture land for grazing. 
Animal Shelter. See Kennel. 
Apartment. See Dwelling, Multi-Family. 
Aquifer. Any Stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Assisted Living Home/Facility. See "Personal Care Home." 
Auditorium. An open, partially enclosed, or fully enclosed facility used or intended to be used primarily for spectator sports, entertainment events, expositions, competitions, and other public gatherings. The term includes civic centers, trade centers, arenas, stadiums, assembly halls, and community centers, but shall not include a cinema/movie or drama/dance theater. 
Bed and Breakfast Home. A single family dwelling occupied by the owner as his/her principal residence that offers transient lodging accommodations and breakfast for compensation provided that: the rental occupants shall not reside at the bed and breakfast for more 7 consecutive days; breakfast is the only meal served and only to registered overnight guests; no person not a resident on the premises is employed; the exterior appearance of the dwelling is not altered from its residential character except for safety purposes; and, the identification sign shall be no larger than 2 square feet and not internally lighted. 
Bed and Breakfast Inn. A building, not necessarily owner-occupied, that offers transient lodging accommodations and breakfast for four (4) or more guest rooms for compensation provided that: 
a)  Compliance with the same licensing, inspection and taxation requirements as hotels, motels, and restaurants. 
b)  If within a residential district, the building shall be residential in character. 
c)  Breakfast is the only meal served and only to overnight guests. 
d)  The owners may have employees. 
e)  The owner shall provide one (1) off-street parking space for each rental room and one (1) space for each employee. 
f)  In a residential district, signage shall be limited to one (1) sign and maximum size of two (2) square feet. 
Berm. A mound of earth, or the act of pushing earth into a mound. See Figure 2: Buffer. 
Boarding House. A dwelling, permanently occupied by the owner or operator, where sleeping accommodation and meals, served upon the table family style with no provision for cooking in any of the occupied rooms, are provided for five (5) or more persons not of the same family by prearrangement for definite periods and for compensation. 
Buffer. A buffer is a portion of lot set aside for open space and/or screening purpose, to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances; to block physical passage to dangerous areas; or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter. A buffer may contain a barrier, such as a berm, wall or fence, where such additional screening is necessary to achieve the desired level of buffering between various activities. See Figure 2: Buffer. 

Figure 2: Buffer
Buffer, Natural. A natural buffer is an enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trail and picnic areas. 
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
Building Height. The vertical distance measured from the highest grade adjacent to the highest point of roof surface of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height between eaves and ridges of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. 
Building Line. A line parallel to the street right-of-way line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning district in which the lot is located. When the lot frontage is an arc and less than the minimum required lot width, the building line is parallel to the chord of the arc and located where the minimum lot width requirement is obtained between the side lot lines. (See Setback). 
Building, Principal. A building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which said building is located. 
Caliper. Diameter measurement of the trunk taken six (6) inches above ground level for trees up to and including four inch caliper size. 
Campground, Public or Private. Land or premises used or occupied for compensation by campers traveling by passenger vehicles and utilizing tents, campers, travel trailers, or other recreation vehicles. 
Cellar. A level within a building having more than on-half of its height on all sides below grade. 
Caretaker Dwelling or Employee Residence. An accessory single-family dwelling placed on an occupied tract for use by a farm worker or other tract owned by the same owner of the agricultural activity and that is a part of the same farming operation. 
Cattery. Any place that regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells or trades any cat. 
Cemetery, Private. Any plot of ground, building, mausoleum, other enclosure used for the burial of deceased persons of one collateral line of descent. 
Cemetery, Public. A plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure not located on property owned by or adjacent to a religious institution but used for the burial of deceased persons. 
Cemetery, Religious Institution. A plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure owned by or adjacent to a religious institution and used for the burial of deceased persons who are generally members of that religious institution. 
Child Care Facility. A building or portion of a building wherein is provided care and supervision of persons away from their place of residence for less than twenty-four hours per day on a regular basis for compensation; serves nineteen (19) or more persons and is licensed by the State of Georgia; for children, the outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence of not less than four (4) feet in height in the rear yard only. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term "Child Care" shall include but not be limited to the terms "Day Care", "Nursery School", "Early Learning Center", "Pre-kindergarten", "Private Kindergarten", "Play School", and "Pre-school". 
Child Care Home, Family. A customary home occupation which provides, for six (6) or less persons who are not residents of the premises; care and supervision by a state of Georgia registered resident adult for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. 
Child Care Center, Group. A building or portion of a building wherein is provided care and supervision of persons away from their place of residence for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day on a regular basis for compensation; serves seven (7) to eighteen (18) persons and is licensed by the State of Georgia. 
Church. A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship of the same faith and which is publicly designated as a church, but shall not include a parsonage, thrift or clothing store, food service, homeless shelters, or accessory uses of a church. 
Church, Accessory Use of. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a building as a church, including uses such as day care facilities, kindergartens, family exercise or sport facilities, mausoleums, and columbariums. 
Clinic. A building or a portion of a building, where patients are not lodged overnight, but are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians or dentists practicing together. 
Club, Private. A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational or recreational purpose but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Columbarium. A vault with niches for urns containing the ashes of cremated bodies. 
Combination Park. Any plot or tract of land on which both a manufactured home park and a travel trailer park are located or intended to be located. 
Commission. The Chatsworth Planning Commission or equivalent. 
Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners of Murray County, Georgia. 
Community Center. See Neighborhood Center. 
Comprehensive Plan. The Chatsworth comprehensive plan, or equivalent, currently known as Murray County, Chatsworth, and Eton Joint Comprehensive Plan, 2005-2025 , as adopted and as may be subsequently amended by the governing authority. 
Conditional Use. A use not ordinarily permitted but which may be permitted in a particular zone district upon the imposition of conditions related to the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding lands. Review of any conditional use is required by the procedures established by the Chatsworth Zoning Procedures and Standards Ordinance. (See Appendix) 
Condominium. A building or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
Convenience Store. Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, beverages, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same. 
Cultural Facility. A structure or portion of a structure used as art gallery, museum, historical display, legitimate theatre, library, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
Day Care Facility. A building or portion of a building wherein is provided care and supervision of persons away from their place of residence for less than twenty-four hours per day on a regular basis for compensation; serves nineteen (19) or more persons and is licensed by the State of Georgia. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term "day care" shall include but not be limited to the terms "child care", "nursery school", "early learning center", "pre-kindergarten", "private kindergarten", "play school", and "pre-school". 
Day Care Home, Family. A customary home occupation which provides, for six (6) or less persons who are not residents of the premises; care and supervision is provided by a state of Georgia registered resident adult for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. 
Day Care Center, Group. A building or portion of a building wherein is provided care and supervision of persons away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours a day on a regular basis for compensation; serves seven (7) to eighteen (18) persons and is licensed by the State of Georgia. 
DBH (diameter breast height). The diameter of a tree four and one-half (4½) feet above average ground level. 
Development. Subdividing a tract of land into two or more lots whether for sale or rental; construction, erection, or expansion of a structure; filling, grading, excavation or land disturbing activities affect more than one acre; recordation of a plat in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court (unless such recordation is to illustrate a deed line such as with a land boundary line agreement); or the location of a facility. 
District. A delineated section or sections of the City of Chatsworth for which the zoning regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform. 
Drive-In. Any use providing the opportunity of selling, serving, or offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in vehicles or customers who return to their vehicles to consume or use the goods or services while on the premises of the principal use. 
Dwelling. A building which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family, and multi-family residential buildings, rooming and boarding houses, fraternities, sororities, dormitories, manufactured homes, and industrialized homes but not including hotels and motels. 
Dwelling, Apartment. See "Dwelling, Multi-family." 
Dwelling, Loft. A dwelling unit, occupied by no more than four (4) persons, and located only on the floor above a ground level commercial business. 
Dwelling, Senior. A multi-family residence with eighty (80) percent or more of the dwelling units occupied by residents, ages 62 and over or handicapped; or couples where either the husband or wife is 62 years of age or older; does not include convalescent or nursing facilities. 
Dwelling, Single-Family Attached. A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units, each of which is deeded with separate ownership and has primary ground floor access to the outside and which are attached to each other by party walls without openings. The term can include fee-simple townhouses and condominiums. 
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached. A residential building containing not more than one (1) dwelling unit entirely surrounded by open space. A single family detached dwelling includes site-built houses and industrialized homes. (Manufactured HUD homes/housing and mobile homes are not single family detached dwellings). 
Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building designed as two or more separate units for or occupied exclusively by two (2) or more families. 
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms located within a building and forming a single habitable unit with individual permanent sanitary and kitchen facilities and is used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating purposes. Units in motels, or other structures designed for transient residence are not included. 
Easement. The right of a person, government agency, or public utility company to use public or private land owned by another for a specific purpose. 
Event Center. A facility used for weddings, anniversaries, birthdays, baby showers, weddings showers, reunions, recitals, dances, and ethnic and religious celebrations, or other similar events, etc. The facilities can include sleeping, eating, and recreation. The site shall be sufficient size to accommodate all off-street parking associated with an individual event and the facilities shall comply with those regulations related to group assembly. 
Existing Construction. Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of this ordinance. 
Family. Except as otherwise provided in this definition, family means one (1) or more persons related by blood, legal adoption, or marriage occupying a dwelling where such persons are related to each other within the fourth degree, as defined in O.C.G.A. §53-2-1, which includes parents, children, grandparents, grandchildren, brothers and sisters. Great-grandparents shall also be included in the definition of family. State of Georgia authorized foster children of a family member shall also be deemed a member of the family for this purpose, or not more than five (5) adults, not necessarily related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit where compensation is not made for housekeeping service for room and board to the owner or operator of such dwelling unit. In zones R-A and R-1, not more than two (2) adults, not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a single-family dwelling unit where compensation is not made for housekeeping service for room and board to the owner or operator of such dwelling unit will be considered a family for the purpose of this definition. 
For the purposes of this definition, a person shall be considered to reside in a dwelling unit if he or she stays overnight in a dwelling unit for more than 30 days within a 90-day period, receives mail at the dwelling unit, or lists the dwelling unit as his or her home address on any document. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
Fence. An artificially constructed barrier of any materials or combination of materials erected to enclosed or screen areas of lands. A privacy fence is one that is solid and of a height designed to effectively limit visibility. 
Flea Market. A building or open area in which stalls or sales areas are set aside, and rented or otherwise provided, and which are intended for use by various unrelated individuals to sell articles that are either homemade, homegrown, handcrafted, old, obsolete, or antique and may include the selling of goods at retail by businesses or individuals who are generally engaged in retail trade. 
Flood. A rise in stream flow or stage that results in temporary inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel. 
Floor Area, Gross. The gross heated areas of all floors, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of the building. 
Frontage, Lot. The distance a lot abuts on a street; the front lot line. (See Figure 3: Lot) 
Frontage, Street. The distance of a lot abuts on a street; the front lot line (See Figure 3: Lot). 
Fur Farm. Any place that regularly breeds and raises rabbits, mink, foxes or other fur or hide-bearing animals for the harvesting of their skins. 
Garage, Private. An accessory building designed or used for the storage of motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the buildings to which it is accessory. 
Garage, General Service. A building or portion thereof, other than a private, storage, or parking garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling, or incidental short term storing of motor-driven vehicles, but not including the storage of wrecked or junked vehicles, to which repairs are not intended to be made. 
Garage, Storage or Parking. A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for storage of motor-driven vehicles, and within which motor fuels and oils may be sold, but no vehicles are repaired, equipped, or sold. 
Grade. The average level of the finished ground surface adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
Group Home. A single-family dwelling, housing persons who are mentally/physically handicapped, elderly, terminally ill, AIDS/HIV victims, Alzheimer's patients, or children and teens with emotional problems, operating as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based on an intentionally structured relationship providing the organization and stability of a home environment. All group homes shall be approved and licensed by the State of Georgia, Department of Human Resources. 
Halfway House. A building for temporary residence by non-related persons, who are recovering from alcohol abuse or other chemical-based substances, with one or more surrogate parents that provide services that include room, meals, supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling to enable residents to move back into society and live independently. 
Hardship. An unusual situation on the part of an individual property owner which will not permit him/her to enjoy the full utilization of his/her property which is given to others within the county. A hardship exists only when it is not self-created, or when it is not economic in nature. 
Hazardous Waste. Any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations, promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. Section 261.3. 
Health Clubs. A facility designed for the major purpose of physical fitness or weight reducing which includes, but is not limited to, such equipment as weight resistance machines, whirlpools, saunas, showers, and lockers. This shall not include municipal or privately owned recreation buildings. 
Health Department. The Murray County Health Department and/or the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Health Officer. The legally designated health authority of Murray County, or the State of Georgia, or an authorized agent. 
Home Occupation. An occupation customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and operated in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
Horticulture. The cultivation of fruits, vegetables, flowers, and plants. 
Hospice. A building or portion thereof, in which terminally ill persons live, in order to receive appropriate Medicare-certified hospice services. 
Hotel. A building offering overnight sleeping accommodations for travelers; ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. Such use has eighty (80) percent of the rooms occupied by a different registered guest every five (5) days, provides patrons with daily maid service, twenty-four (24) hour desk/counter clerk service, and a telephone switchboard service to receive incoming/outgoing messages, and shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Murray County Health Department and O.C.G.A. Section 31-28-1 et. seq., and may provide additional services such as restaurants, retail gift shops, meeting rooms, swimming pools, and exercise facilities. 
Impervious Surface. A manmade structure or surface which prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Industrialized Building. A factory-fabricated dwelling or commercial unit built in one (1) or more sections designed to fit together on a permanent foundation, but which usually does not originally have wheels for movement, and which is constructed in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act, and which bears the seal of approval issued by the Commissioner of Community Affairs. (Includes the term "modular building"). 
Industrialized Home. Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the "Industrialized Building Act", Georgia Law 1982 pp. 1637-1643 (Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 2, Part 1). 
An industrialized home is a single-family detached dwelling and includes the term "modular building." 
Institution. A public or semi-public building occupied by a governmental entity, nonprofit corporation or nonprofit establishment for public use. 
Junk. Wrecked or inoperative (whether repairable or not) motor vehicle(s), scrap copper, scrap brass, scrap rope, scrap glass, scrap rags, scrap metal, scrap paper, scrap batteries, scrap appliance, scrap beds and bedding, scrap rubber, scrap tires, scrap motor vehicle parts, scrap furniture, scrap wood, scrap building materials, scrap tools or other used materials that have been abandoned from their original use but may or may not be used again in their present form or in a new form. 
Junk Vehicles. Any motor vehicle, vehicle, trailer of any kind or type, or mechanical contrivance or part thereof, which is in an inoperative or junk condition by reason of its having been wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned, discarded, or which does not have a valid license place attached thereto (when the same is required by law). For the purpose of this article, a vehicle is 'inoperative' if it is incapable of movement by its own power, and it remains in place for a period of more than seven (7) days, and is not within a carport/garage. 
Junkyard. Any such use involving the storage of disassembly of wrecked automobiles, trucks, or their vehicles; storage, baling or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, scrap metal, commercial/residential appliances, used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures and use brick, wood or other building materials. Such uses shall be considered junkyards whether or not all or part of such operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, addition to, or accessory to other uses of the premises. A junkyard shall be presumed to exist if two or more inoperative motor vehicles are maintained for more than forty-five (45) days, except vehicles being held pursuant to a law enforcement agency impoundment; however, this presumption may be rebutted if no part of the motor vehicle is outside of a completely enclosed building and no part of the motor vehicle can be viewed from any portion of any adjoining property, road, or street. 
Kennel. Any location where breeding, raising, boarding, caring for, and the keeping of more than three dog or cats or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters or animals not more than 6 months of age) is carried on for commercial purposes. 
Kindergarten. Any premises or portion thereof used for educational work or parental care of children of less than the age required for enrollment in the public or private school system. 
Land-Disturbing Activity. Any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land, clearing of vegetation; and any construction, rebuilding, or alteration of a structure. Land-disturbing activity shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single family dwelling, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Livestock. The "livestock" as used herein shall mean and include cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine, poultry, ducks, geese and other fowl; and rabbits, minks, foxes, and other fur or hide bearing animals customarily bred or raised in captivity for the harvesting of their skins; whether owned or kept for pleasure, utility or sale. 
Living Unit. One or more rooms within a building and forming a single habitable unit with permanent individual sanitary facilities but lacking a kitchen or cooking facilities. 
Loading Space. A space having a minimum dimension of 13.5 by 60 feet and a vertical clearance of at least 14.5 feet within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks. 
Lot. A portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description (such as on a subdivision plat of record or as a survey map or plat) or described by metes and bounds, and intended for use, transfer of ownership, or for building development. The word "lot" shall not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. Minimum lot size square footage calculations shall not include any areas reserved for easements or rights-of-way upon which, by the nature thereof, construction is prohibited (i.e., easements for ingress and egress to other lots or properties, major power line transmission easements, etc.). 
Lot size calculations shall not include strips of property with widths less than the minimum building line dimension of the particular use district intended to provide access to a given lot or parcel (ie. Flag pole of flag-shaped lots); provided, however, land less than the minimum building width requirements may be considered as part of the square footage lot size calculation in those instances where lots lines are radial to a curved street or cul-de-sac on a subdivision plat approved by the Chatsworth Planning Commission (ie. Pie-shaped lots). Lot, Corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 

Figure 3: Lot
Lot Coverage. The area of a lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory buildings. 
Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured within the lot boundaries. 
Lot Line, Rear. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line ten feet minimum in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
Lot Line, Side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
Lot of Record. A lot, which existed prior to the adoption or subsequent amendment of this ordinance, as shown or described on a plat or deed in the records of the local registry of deeds. (See Article III, Section O) 
Lot, Through. A lot other than a corner lot abutting two streets. 
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at the front (building) setback line. 
Lot Width (curvilinear street frontage). For a lot having frontage upon a curvilinear street, the lot width shall be the distance between the side lines of the lot where the minimum lot width is obtained, measured parallel to the chord of the arc formed by the two (2) outermost points of intersection of the side lines with the road right-of-way line. The lot width line is synonymous with the front setback line in this circumstance. 
Manufactured Home. A structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq. The definition at the date of adoption of this part is as follows: 
'Manufactured Home' means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical system contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph and the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under this title. 
Manufactured Home Lot. A parcel of land in a manufactured home park for the placement of a single manufactured home and for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Manufactured Home/Mobile Home Park. Premises where three (3) or more mobile home/manufactured home dwelling units are parked for living or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation, or where spaces or lots are set aside and offered for rent for use by mobile homes/manufactured homes for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure or facility used by occupants of mobile homes/manufactured homes on such premises. This definition shall not include mobile homes/manufactured homes sales lots. 
Manufactured Home Stand. A manufactured home stand is that part of a manufactured home lot or site which has been improved for the placement of a manufactured home. 
Mausoleum. A building where bodies are interred above ground in stacked vaults. 
Mini-Warehouse . A building in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access stalls or lockers for storing the excess personal property of an individual or family when such is not with their residence, such as a passenger motor vehicle, house trailer, motorcycle, boat, camper, furniture, limited commercial storage (items of local retail merchants, small contractors, and professionals), and other items of personal property generally stored in residential accessory structures. No business activities other than the rental of storage units shall be conducted on the premises. 
Mobile Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred and twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
Mobile Office. A factory fabricated structure designed to be transported on its own wheels, detachable wheels, flatbed or trailer and used or intended to be used or occupied for the transportation of business or the rendering of a professional service. 
Modular Home. See "Industrialized Building." 
Motel. A permanent building or group of permanent buildings in which overnight sleeping accommodations are provided for travelers and having a parking space near or adjacent to the entrance of the room. Such use has eighty (80) percent of the rooms occupied by a different registered guest every five (5) days, provides patrons with daily maid service, twenty-four (24) hour desk/counter clerk service, and a telephone switchboard service to receive incoming/outgoing messages, and shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Murray County Health Department and O.C.G.A. Section 31-28-1 et. seq., and may provide additional services such as restaurants, retail gift shops, meeting rooms, swimming pools, and exercise facilities. 
Motor Vehicle Repair Service, General. A building, lot, or both in or upon which comprehensive motor vehicle repair services are performed including painting, body and fender work, engine overhauling or other major repair; such facility commonly serves disabled or wrecked vehicles requiring occasional wrecker services and repair service time routinely exceeds more than 24-hours on-site, but excluding a junk yard and/or motor vehicle wrecking business. 
Motor Vehicle Repair Service, Specialty. A building, lot, or both in or upon which specialty repair services are provided quickly for operational motor vehicles; services may include but are not limited to removal and/or replacement of oils, fluids, filters, grease, minor parts like mufflers, shocks, and brakes; and may include tuning of engines; service repair time is routinely less than 24-hours on-site. 
Motor Vehicle Service Station. A building or lot for motor vehicle refueling using fixed dispensing equipment connected to pumps and storage tanks; where oils or accessories for the use of motor vehicles are dispersed, sold, or offered for sale at retail; and may include one or more service bays for vehicle washing, lubrication and minor replacement, or adjustment and repair services. 
Multi-family Dwelling. See "Dwelling, Multi-family." 
Neighborhood Center. A building or facility used to provide recreational, social, educational and cultural activities for an area of community, which is owned and operated by the management agency of that community, or the Homeowner's Association of that community. A community can be an incorporated area, a developed subdivision, or a planned development. 
New Construction. Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
Non-Conforming Use. The use of any building or land which was lawful at the time of passage of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, but which use does not conform, after the passage of this ordinance or amendment thereto, with the regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
Nursery School. See "Kindergarten." 
Nursing Home. An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. 
On-Site Sewerage Management System. See "Sewerage Management System, On-site." 
Parking Area. An open, unoccupied space used or required for temporary parking of vehicles exclusively and in which no gasoline or vehicular accessories are sold or no other business is conducted. 
Parking Lot. An open area used exclusively for the temporary storage of motor vehicles and within which motor fuels and oils may be sold and fees charged, but no vehicles are to be equipped, repaired, or sold. 
Parking Space. A space, enclosed or unenclosed, having an area of not less than 180 square feet (9' x 20') exclusive of access, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one vehicle and having access to a street or alley. 
Permit. Any written authorization for building, construction, alteration, development, occupancy, or other matter required by this Ordinance to be approved a designated commission, board, official, or employee. The person to whom such permit is issued shall be known as the "permittee." 
Personal Care Home or Home. A building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals and personal care, for non-family ambulatory adults. For the purpose of these Rules, Personal Care Homes shall be classified as: Family Care Personal Care Home, Group Personal Care Home, or Congregate Personal Care Home. This term does not include buildings which are devoted to independent living units which include kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. 
1.  " Family Personal Care Home " means a home for adults in a family type residence, noninstitutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons. 
2.  " Group Personal Care Home " means a home for adult persons in a residence or other type building(s), noninstitutional in character, which offers care to seven through fifteen persons. 
3.  " Congregate Personal Care Home " means a home for adults which offers care to sixteen or more persons. 
Planned Center, Shopping, Office or Industrial. Any planned concentration of at least three business establishments which also provides planned and shared parking, access, and service. 
Planning Commission. The Chatsworth Planning Commission or equivalent. 
Plat. A map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, lot, section, subdivision, or development indicating the location and boundaries of properties. 
Premises. A lot, together with all buildings and structures existing thereon. 
Principal Building. A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot in which said building is situated. 
Principal Use. The primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
Private Land. All lands and buildings not owned by governments. 
Putrescible Wastes. Wastes that are capable of being quickly decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of Putrescible wastes include but are not necessarily limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Recorded Plat. A plat recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Murray County. 
Recreational Facilities, Outdoor. Any commercial or non-commercial outdoor facility such as a miniature golf course, a golf or baseball driving range, tennis courts, swimming pools, drive-in theater, etc. 
Recreational Vehicles. A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes. 
Recycling Center. A non-commercial facility in which recoverable resources, such as papers, glassware, plastics, and metal cans, or any non-hazardous recycling materials, are collected, stored, flattened, crushed, or bundled, by hand or machines within a completely enclosed building. 
Recycling Collection Station. An incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources. No processing of such items would be allowed. This facility would generally be located in a commercial parking lot, or at other public/quasi-public areas, such as churches and schools. 
Residence Inn. A permanent building or group of buildings consisting of single room dwellings and other living units. No more than 20 percent of the units may be living units as opposed to dwelling units. 
Right-of-Way. An area or strip of land, either public or private, on which a right of use has been recorded. A right of way, as distinguished from an easement, is owned in fee-simple title by the City of Chatsworth or other government, a duly organized homeowners' or property owners' association, or any other person. 
Right-of-Way Line. The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous right of way. 
Rooming House. A dwelling, permanently occupied by the owner or operator, where only sleeping accommodation is provided for three (3) or more permanent occupants not of the same family by prearrangement for definite periods and for compensation and which makes no provision for cooking in any of the occupied rooms. 
Salvage Yard. See "Junk Yard". 
Satellite Dish Antenna. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include but not be limited to what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROs (television reception only satellite dish antennas), and satellite microwave antennas. 
Schools, Private, Parochial and other Elementary. Any places for teaching children grades one to eight, inclusive, which are not a part of the State of Georgia, but which teach the subjects commonly taught in the common elementary schools of the State. 
Schools, Public. Any place for teaching children grades kindergarten to twelve inclusive and no other, and a part of the public school system as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Senior Housing. A multi-family residence with eighty (80) percent or more of the dwelling units occupied by residents, ages 62 and over or handicapped; or couples where either the husband or wife is 62 years of age or older; does not include convalescent or nursing facilities. 
Service Station. Any building, structure, or land use primarily for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail any automobile fuels, oils, or accessories, but not including major repair work such as motor overhaul, body and fender repair or spray painting. 
Setback. The mean horizontal distance between the front street right-of-way line and the front line of the building or the allowable building lines as defined by the front yard regulations of this ordinance. 
Setback Line (or Building Line). The line that is the required minimum distance from the street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the area within which walls of the principal structure must be erected or placed. The minimum measurement is to the wall, not the eave/overhang, and a cantilever building design measures to any wall projecting nearest to the property lines. The area contained within the boundaries formed by the setback lines is considered the buildable area of the lot. 
Sexual Activities. Includes any of the following: 1) Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 2) Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 3) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 4) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 5) Torture; 6) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; 7) Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented beating or the infliction of pain; or 8) Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Sports Arena. See "Auditorium." 
Sewerage Management System, On-Site. A sewerage management system other than a public or community sewerage system, serving single or multiple buildings, manufactured or mobile homes, residences or other facilities designed for human occupancy or congregation, as approved by the County Board of Health. 
Sewerage Treatment System, Public or Community. Any sewerage treatment system, including pipe lines or conduits, pumping station, force mains and all other constructions, devices, and appliances appurtenant thereto, designed for treating or conducting sewerage for treatment and disposal into lakes, streams or other bodies of surface water. 
Shopping Center. A group of two or more commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements. 
Start of Construction. Means erection of temporary forms, pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piers or columns; or the actual start of a building or altering a structure either temporary or permanent. 
Stockyard. A place where transient cattle, sheep, swine, or horses are kept. 
Story. That portion of a building between the surface of a floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling. 
Story, Half. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor areas is finished off for use. A half-story containing independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 
Street. A public or private thoroughfare which meets locally established design standards and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property however designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, or place. 
a.  Minor or Local Street. Street used primarily for access to the abutting properties and serving travel demands in the immediate area. 
b.  Collector. Those streets so designated on the County Functional Classification System Map, and those streets which otherwise function to serve local traffic movements by collecting or distributing traffic from or to local, other collector, and/or arterial streets. Such a street includes the principal entrance and circulation streets of a subdivision and may also function to provide access to abutting properties in the same manner as a local street. 
c.  Major Thoroughfare or Arterial. Those streets so designated on the County Functional Classification System Map and those streets which otherwise function to move high volumes of traffic between principal traffic generators (such as residential, commercial, and industrial sectors) at moderate speeds and with minimum conflict to movements. 
Street Line. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and the right-of-way of a contiguous street. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, signs, billboards, back stops for tennis courts, fences, radio and water towers, grain and feed elevators. 
Subdivision. For the purpose of this ordinance, a subdivision is the division, re-division, or separation of one parcel of land into two or more parcels, lots, building sites, or other divisions of land whether for the purpose of sale, legacy, or building development. 
Temporary Structure. A structure with neither foundation nor footings, which is removed when either the designated time period or activity or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. (See Article VIII- Supplementary Regulations, Section G.) 
Tower, Telecommunications. A structure, such as a self-supporting lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers. The term excludes any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height and owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, and satellite earth station antenna one meter in diameter or less, any receive-only home television antenna, and any satellite earth station antenna two meters or less in diameter which is located in a commercial or industrialized zoning district. 
Townhouse. A single family attached dwelling that is erected in a row as part of a single building, on adjoining lots, each being separated from adjoining units by approved fire resistant wall extending from the basement of cellar floor to the roof along the dividing lot line. Each unit shall have its own front door, which opens to the outdoors, but no access between adjoining units. 
Travel Trailer. See "Recreational Vehicle." 
Travel Trailer Park. See "Campground, Public or Private." 
Tree. A woody perennial plant having a single (usually elongate) main stem including but not limited to a shrub or vine of arborescent form. 
Vendor Stands. Any cart, table, equipment, or apparatus which is not a structure, which is designed and intended so as to not be a permanent fixture on a lot, and which is used for the retail sale, display, and accessory advertising of merchandise or food. 
Water System. 
1.  Public Water System - a system for the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption, if such system has at least fifteen service connections, or regularly serves an average of at least twenty five individuals daily, at least sixty (60) days out of the year in accordance with the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-5, "Rules for Safe Drinking Water." 
2.  Governmental Water System - a public water system, which is owned and operated by a governmental entity, or a legislatively-created authority. 
3.  Non-Governmental Water System - a public water system, which is owned and operated by any non-governmental entity. 
4.  Community Water System - a system serving more than one single-family dwelling but fewer than the connections and/or persons required to be considered a public water system. Such systems are subject to approval of the Murray County Health Department. 
5.  " Individual Water Supply System " means a system of piping, pumps, tanks, or other facilities, which utilizes groundwater to supply a single-family dwelling. 
Wild Animal. Any living member of the animal kingdom, including those born or raised in captivity; but excluding human beings, livestock, dogs and cats, rodents, hybrid animals that are part wild, captive-bred species of common cage birds and aquarium-kept fish, amphibians and reptiles. 
Yard. An open space on a lot situated between the principal building or use on the lot and a lot line and unoccupied by any structure except as otherwise provided herein. See Figure 10: Yard. 
Yard, Front. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the right-of-way line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
Yard, Rear. An open space on the same lot with a principal building or use, unoccupied except by an accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building or use projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, Side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, located between the building or use and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. See Figure 10: Yard. 
Zone, Overlay. A district which applies supplementary regulations to land which is classified into a specific zoning district. 
Zoning. The power of the City of Chatsworth to provide within its territorial boundaries for the zoning of property for various uses and the prohibition of other or different uses within such zones or districts and for the regulation of development and the improvement of real estate within such zones or districts in accordance with the uses of property for which said zones or districts were established. (See Appendix - Zoning Procedures and Standards Ordinance.) 
( Ord. of 10-09 ; Ord. of 6-6-16(2), § 1 ) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section A. - Use of Land: 
No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Location of Buildings: 
Every building hereafter erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined except as approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals under Article XVI. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section C. - Use of Buildings: 
No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered, or used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building or structure is located. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section D. - Height of Buildings: 
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which such building is located. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section E. - Dimensional Regulations: 
No building or use shall be erected, converted, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the minimum space requirements (i.e., the lot area, floor area, and building height, etc.) for the district in which such building is located. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section F. - Use of Yards: 
The minimum yards, parking spaces, and open spaces required by this ordinance for each building existing at the time of passage of this ordinance, or for any building hereafter erected or structurally altered, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard, parking space or open space required for any other structure. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section G. - Off-Street Parking and Loading: 
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulations of Article XI. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section H. - Signs: 
No sign shall be erected, converted, enlarged reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with the Chatsworth Sign Ordinance. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section I. - Accessory Structures: 
No permanent accessory structure shall be located, constructed, or moved upon a lot until the construction of the main building has actually been commenced. [See Article VIII, Section B (1).] 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section J. - Use and Construction of Temporary Buildings: 
Temporary buildings other than provided herein shall not be allowed in any district except that temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work or pending completion of a permanent building for a period not to exceed one (1) year may be permitted in any district but shall be removed when the construction has been substantially completed. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section K. - Requirements for Building Permit: 
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except upon application for and issuance of a building permit by the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section L. - Rights of Way. 
No DOT, City, public, or private utility, or any other right-of-way not owned by the owner of a property may be utilized in the calculation of any setback, or any part of a setback, as required by Article V, Summary Zoning District Schedule. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section M. - Density: 
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered to house a greater number of dwelling units per acre; nor shall any lot area be reduced below the lot area per family requirements of this ordinance for the district in which such lot is located except as otherwise provided in this ordinance; or to occupy a greater percentage of lot area. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section N. - Street Frontage: 
No principal building shall be erected on any lot which does not have immediate frontage on at least one public or private street or road for a distance of not less than fifty (50) feet. For lots that front on a private street, the building permit shall contain a signed statement that the petitioner acknowledges the private access to his property and understands that the city of Chatsworth will not accept or maintain such access until such street is upgraded fully to public standards by the property owners having access to such private street; failure by the petitioner to provide such statement shall not void the requirements of this Section. [Exception: for townhouses or single family attached dwellings, the minimum frontage applies to the total lots contained in a single building, not the individual dwelling unit(s).] 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section O. - Lots of Record: 
Any lot of record which is legal at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, may be used, subject to the following exceptions and modifications. 
Single Lots: Where the owner of a lot at the adoption of this Ordinance or his successor in title thereto does not own sufficient land, in width or area, to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this ordinance, such lot may be used as a building site for a minimum building (ie. Single family detached home in residential zone districts) that is allowed in the district where the lot is located. 
For such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width building, the Zoning Board of Appeals is empowered to hear the request for a minimum variance. 
Adjoining Lots: If two or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of this ordinance and such lots individually are too small to meet the yard, width, and area requirements of the district in which they are located, such groups of contiguous lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size and the lot or lots in one ownership shall be subject to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES 

Section A. - Establishment of Districts: 
In order to carry out the intent and purpose of this ordinance, Chatsworth is hereby divided into the following districts: 
R-A Residential Agriculture: This district encourages a compatible relationship between low density residential development and limited mixed uses in fringe areas of the city where development is generally sparse and the growth pattern is not yet well established. Historical land patterns include larger than average lots and limited livestock, along with small-scale agricultural and horticultural practices. Multiple buildings may occur per lot/parcel depending on the lot/parcel size. 
R-E Residential Estate: This district encourages a low density estate environment for single family detached homes where the minimum square footage per home is larger than any other zone district in Chatsworth. Homes in this district shall maintain a roof pitch not less than four (4) feet to twelve (12) feet. Only one principal building is allowed per lot, along with customary accessory uses. 
R-1 Low Density Residential: A district designed to protect single family detached dwellings, developed at a moderate density, from unrelated and incompatible uses. The lots are characterized by one principal building per lot with customary accessory uses allowed. 
R-2 Medium Density Residential: A medium density zone district allowing a mix of single family detached homes, multi-family dwellings, and other related compatible uses at an approximate maximum density of six (6) dwelling units per acre. The intensity of the multi-family uses is limited to not more than four (4) dwelling units per building and the district design limits the allowed permitted uses to one principal building per lot. 
R-3 High Density Residential: A high density zone district allowing typical residential dwelling types, all multi-family developments, and other uses compatible with such residential character. Multiple buildings per lot are allowed and the maximum density is twelve (12) dwelling units per acre. As such, the provision of both public water and sewer is required to serve the uses allowed in this zone district. 
O-R Office Residential: A district generally characterized by low-traffic commercial uses oriented to busy streets where limited residential uses are transitioning to commercial function. A mix of residential and commercial uses is allowed but the commercial uses are generally less intensive and of smaller scale than the use found in general commercial zones. Residential conversions to commercial function are common so parking in the side yard or rear yard is desirable. 
MHP Manufactured Home Park: A district designed to encourage the placement of multiple manufactured homes on a large lot. A manufactured home park, based upon allowed density, is similar to a multi-family development, thus issues related to ingress/egress, internal streets, infrastructure, waste collection, recreation, and other support facilities are a consideration, as well as the relationship with other surrounding land uses. 
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial: A district catering to retail and service businesses often beneficial to the short distance needs of neighborhoods. The district can serve as a small-scale transition area between residential areas and more intense commercial areas, but the district is characterized by distinct commercial uses and does not mix residential uses, except loft-living. The district can be suitable to locations at intersections where local streets join collector streets. 
C-2 General Commercial: A district offering the broadest and most intense mix of commercial uses in the community, including professional offices, retail and service businesses, institutional uses, light wholesaling, and shopping centers, all oriented to major streets. The district combines large and small tracts with multiple buildings allowed per lot to create maximum shopping and service opportunities for local residents. Cross-access easements for access between uses are desirable to improve traffic safety. 
C-3 Commercial Parkway District: A district allowing a broad and intense mix of commercial uses, but excluding some institutional uses and wholesaling activities. Major streets, often collectors or arterial in nature, characterize this district and lots are conventional in design with multiple buildings allowed per lot. Cross-access easements for access between uses are desirable to improve traffic safety. 
CBD Central Business District: The central business district is the traditional center for commercial retail and service uses, financial, office, government, and limited residential uses of the city. The district is characterized by shared parking and loading, and buildings typically occupy the full area of the lot, sharing common walls with adjacent buildings. The CBD is the core activity center around which the city has historically developed and remains central to the development success of the entire community and trade area as a whole. 
M-1 Light Industry: This district provides a mix of commercial and light industrial uses that typically create a minimum of environmental pollution in the form of traffic, noise, odors, smoke, fumes, glare, or heat. Tract sizes can be larger than a general commercial area, helping to minimize impacts on adjacent properties. Multiple buildings are allowed per tract. 
M-2 Heavy Industry: This district allows the heaviest, most intense industrial uses. Characterized by large tracts of land occupied by large buildings or multiple buildings per tract, the district is dedicated to full manufacturing, processing, assembly of raw materials, fabrication, or warehousing. Some operations occur continuously, around the clock and delivery by truck or rail may be a necessary by-product of the uses allowed in this district. Some uses in this district can be considered incompatible to residential uses, and those that emit any noise, odors, smoke, dust, fumes, or other incompatibilities shall meet general environmental requirements of the local, State, or Federal governments. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Zoning District Map: 
The boundaries of zoning districts are shown upon the map designated as the "Zoning District Map." The Zoning District Map and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon are a part of this ordinance and have the same force and effect as if the Zoning District Map and all the notations, references, and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described herein, which Zoning District Map is properly attested and is on file with the City Clerk of Chatsworth, Georgia. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section C. - District Boundaries: 
The district boundaries shown on the Zoning District Map age generally intended to follow streets, alleys, or lot lines; where the districts designated on said map are bounded by such street, alley or lot line, the centerline of the street or alley or the lot line shall be the boundary of the district unless such boundary is otherwise indicated on the map. In all other cases, the district boundary line shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the Zoning District Map. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE V. - SUMMARY ZONING DISTRICT SCHEDULE 

 
FOOTNOTES: 
1.   Required minimum heated square footage for single family dwellings: 1,400 sq. ft. 
2.   Required minimum heated square footage for single family dwellings: 1,600 sq. ft. 
3.   Required minimum heated square footage for single family dwellings: 1,400 sq. ft. 
4.   Required minimum heated square footage for single family dwellings: 850 sq. ft. 
5.   Required minimum heated square footage for a single family detached dwelling is 850 square feet; multi-family/townhouses/condominiums shall meeting minimum heated square footage as follows: one-bedroom, 500 sq. ft.; two- bedroom, 900 sq. ft.; and three-bedroom 1,100 sq. ft. 
Special Requirements. No building, structure or land in the commercial parkway district (C-3) shall be used or occupied except in conformance with the following requirements: 
A.  Rear setbacks may be less than 15' if the lot abuts an alley. 
B.  Side yard setbacks may be 0' on one side of a lot, provided that the building has a four hour fire wall on that side, and has a 12' setback on the other side. An automatic sprinkler system may be substituted for the fire wall. 
C.  Location of Off-Street Parking Spaces 
(1)  Parking spaces may be located in the required front, rear, and side yards in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Twenty-percent (20%) of the required font yard must be provided for green areas that shall be landscaped and maintained at all times. 
(b)  No spaces shall be arranged so as to permit a vehicle to back into any publicly dedicated right-of-way other than an alley. 
(c)  In no case shall any space be located within five (5) feet of the front property line and within three (3) feet of any side or rear property lines. 
(2)  Parking facilities on adjoining lots may be interconnected in order to allow patrons easier access. 
D.  Required Buffers and Visual Screening 
Where a commercial use in a C-3 district abuts any conforming residential district or use, the owner shall provide one of the following: 
(1)  A buffer area along the abutting side and/or rear property line as required in Article VI; or 
(2)  When a commercial use employs a rear setback of 15 or less feet as permitted in Article VI, a wall or barrier constructed of stone, brick or block, wood, or other materials which will have a uniform surface and provide 90% visual blockage of at least six feet (6') in height, may be provided in lieu of (a) above along any adjoining rear property lines. Concrete block walls shall have a painted surface with struck mortar joints or a stucco or other finished surface on the side of such wall facing property adjacent to the property for which the permit for such wall was issued. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE VI. - BUFFER REQUIREMENTS 
A buffer shall be required whenever two adjoining properties are in dissimilar zone districts as shown in the following Table 6.1. 
TABLE 6.1 
DEVELOPING PROPERTY 
Least Intensive Uses ..... Most Intensive Uses 

 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 

Section A. - Determination of Buffer Requirements Between Residential, Commercial and Industrial Zones. 
When two adjoining properties are in dissimilar residential, commercial or industrial zone districts as indicated in Table 6.1, the property within the zone district allowing more intensive uses is required to provide the buffer when acquiring a building permit unless the buffer was pre-existing. When two adjoining vacant parcels are in dissimilar zone districts as indicated in Table 6.1, no buffer is required when the parcel zoned for the less intensive use acquires a building permit. 
1.  Buffer A Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of plantings or a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), or a berm, which meets the screening standards of Section B. If plantings are chosen method of screening, the planting area shall have a minimum base width of 12 feet. 
2.  Buffer B Requirement. The required buffer shall have not less than a twenty (20) foot base width and shall consist of plantings plus a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), or a berm, or any combination thereof, which meets the screening standards of Section B. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Screening Standards. 
Screening is a method of visually shielding or obscuring one use from another by fence, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation. 
Plantings. Plantings shall consist of either trees or shrubs or any combination of both. Planted areas shall be located along the abutting property lines or in areas that will provide the best screening effectiveness. 
If trees or large shrubs are used solely as the screening devise, they shall be any evergreen species from the list provided by the Zoning Administrator which, under normal growing conditions, will attain a minimum height of eight (8) feet and a canopy spread of ten feet within four (4) years. They shall be planted a minimum twenty (20) feet on center as shown in the following illustration. 

If trees are used in combination with shrubs, they may be of any species from the list provided by the Zoning Administrator. Small trees shall be planted thirty (30) foot on center, and large trees forty (40) foot on center as shown in the following illustration. Shrubs shall be any evergreen species from the list provided by the Zoning Administrator planted four (4) feet on center as shown in the following illustration. Shrubs shall initially be of any size, which would normally attain a minimum height of six (6) feet within three (3) years after planting. 

Walls. Walls shall be of masonry construction and a minimum height of eight (8) feet. The wall shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intense land use. 
Fences. Fences shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height and constructed of standard wood fencing materials and methods or chain link with woven inserts that will provide ninety percent (90%) visual blockage as shown in the examples provided by the Zoning Administrator. The fence shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intense land use. 
Berms. Earthen berms shall have a minimum height of eight (8) feet. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section C. - Buffer Design. 
All buffers required by this article shall conform to the following specifications: 
1.  Prior to development, a buffer plan shall be required to show the types and locations of all plantings within a required buffer. If a site plan is required, a buffer plan shall be incorporated as part of the site development plan. 
2.  Landscaping within buffer areas shall be used to screen objectionable views or nuisances, such as parking and service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units and transformers. 
3.  Existing on-site trees may be credited as meeting the requirements of this Article if the Zoning Administrator determines that such plant materials achieve the purposes of this Article. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section D. - Location of Buffers. 
Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel along all lot lines adjoining dissimilar zones including adjacent property lines, which may be separated by an existing or proposed public right-or-way. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of existing, dedicated, or reserved public or private street right-of-way. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section E. - Variances. 
The requirements of this Article may be waived by the appropriate agency under any of the following conditions: 
1.  If it is clearly demonstrated that the existing topography and/or vegetation will achieve the purposes of this Article. 
2.  If it is clearly demonstrated that for topographic reasons, no required screening device could possibly screen the ground level activities of the use from the first floor view of the residential structure abutting the use. 
3.  The adjoining property owners mutually agree in writing that the required buffer is not necessary for a satisfactory use and enjoyment of their property rights. 
4.  It is clearly demonstrated that an existing (or proposed) public right of way separation between adjoining properties will achieve the purposes of this Article. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section F. - Use of Buffers. 
A buffer may be used for some forms of passive recreation such as pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails, or as a storm water retention area provided that: 1) no planted materials shall be eliminated; and 2) the total width of the required buffer area shall be maintained. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section G. - Buffer Installation and Maintenance. 
Buffer areas shall be established and maintained by the property owner under the following provisions: 
1.  A buffer shall be maintained as a planted area, using existing vegetation or, when required, additional plantings. 
2.  A buffer shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, stone, rocks and other landscaping materials. To preserve the intended mitigation purpose of the buffer relative to adjacent properties, regularly scheduled maintenance of the buffer is required, including possible replacement of a dead or diseased plant(s), fertilization, mowing grass, pruning, replenishing ground cover, or general care. 
3.  A buffer shall not be used for parking or a structure other than a fence or drainage improvements required by the City. However, a buffer may be used as utility easement and for drainage improvements as required by the City. 
4.  Except as provided above, the natural topography of the land shall be preserved and all natural vegetation shall not be disturbed beyond that which is necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin vegetation where it is too dense for normal growth, or to remove diseased, misshapen or dangerous and decayed timbers. The latter sentence shall not be construed to provide an exemption from the general care and maintenance of the buffer as required in Section G (2) above. However, a slope easement may be cleared and graded where required to prevent soil erosion upon approval by the Zoning Administrator; such easement may cover no more than twenty percent (20%) of the required buffer area, and shall be immediately replanted upon the completion of easement improvements. 
5.  Where the conditions described in the preceding paragraph cannot be met by reason of topography, or the prior approval of or lack of timber and foliage, the owner of said buffer area shall erect a screen of evergreen plantings, so designed and developed to provide visual screening between the properties as described in Section A and Section B herein. 
6.  All buffers shall be designated on plats and recorded as permanent easements. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section H. - Failure to Comply with these Provisions. 
See Article XV of this Ordinance for Enforcement and Penalty provisions. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section I. - Surety for Buffer Installation. 
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a development, the developer or owner shall provide a surety for all required buffer materials such that the developer or owner shall guarantee the work for a period of at least one (1) year after the issuance date of the certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any use until the required buffer is either fully installed and approved or guaranteed for installation per the following paragraphs. 
When the date for issuing the certificate of occupancy does not coincide with the planting season that is necessary to install the required buffer, the Zoning Administrator shall accept a letter of credit or other acceptable surety in the name of the city of Chatsworth for the buffer installation. Such surety shall be in the amount and form satisfactory to the Zoning Administrator and shall certify the following: 
1.  That the creditor does guarantee funds in an amount to cover the cost of installing the required buffer as estimated by the developer and approved by the Zoning Administrator. The guaranteed amount accepted by the Zoning Administrator shall equal the actual buffer costs (plants plus installation), plus fifteen (15) percent in the event of default. 
2.  That in the case of failure on the part of the developer to complete the specified improvements within six (6) months of the issue date of the credit, the creditor shall pay to the city of Chatsworth immediately and without further action such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those improvements up to the limit of credit stated in the letter. 
3.  That the letter of credit or other acceptable surety may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount until released by the Zoning Administrator after the installed buffer has received a final inspection of approval. 
4.  Prior to the end of the first year after the buffer installation, the Zoning Administrator shall make an inspection and notify the owner or developer of any required replacement or restoration. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - LIST OF PERMISSIBLE AND CONDITIONAL USES 
List of Permissible and Conditional Uses. No principal building, structure, or land use shall be permitted except in the zone districts indicated and for the purposes permitted in the following table. Each use is mutually exclusive and does not encompass other uses listed in the table. A principal use denoted by the Letter "X" is allowed in that zone district by right, subject to any special requirement that may be applicable to that use. A principal use denoted by the letter "C" is permitted only if a conditional use permit is granted by the Mayor and Council after review under the Zoning Procedures and Standards Ordinance, City of Chatsworth, Georgia. For uses not listed in the following table, the Zoning Administrator can determine that said use is similar in impact and intensity to another use that is currently allowed in a zone district and shall rule that the said use is therefore allowed. In the event, that no similarity exists then the proposed use is not allowed or if the interpretation of the Zoning Administrator is questioned, then the Board of Zoning Appeals, properly convened, can make a judgment as to whether said use is allowed in Chatsworth and such ruling shall be final regarding that interpretation. In the event that the Board of Zoning Appeals cannot rule about a specific use then amendment of the Zoning Ordinance shall be required to determine where such use is properly allowed. 

 
( Ord. of 10-09 ; Ord. of 6-6-16(2), §§ 2, 3 
ARTICLE VIII. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
The regulations set forth in this section qualify or supplement the district regulations in Article V through Article XV of this Ordinance. 

Section A. - Supplementary Area, Yard, and Height Regulations: 
1.  Mixed Uses: Where more than 25 percent of the total floor area of any building in a commercial district is used for dwelling purposes, even though it also supports non-residential uses, the minimum area, yard and height requirements for residential development applicable in the district in which such building is located shall apply, subject to the side yard modification for mixed uses contained elsewhere in this article. Where 25 percent or less of the total floor area of such building is used for dwelling purposes, the building shall be subject to the area, yard, and height requirements applicable to non-residential buildings in the district. 
2.  Exceptions to Height Regulations: 
a.  The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to: 

 
b.  Public and semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, and schools when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 100 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, provided the required side yard and rear yards are each increased by at least one foot for each one foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located. 
3.  Lot Area: 
a.  Requirements for lot area per family do not apply to dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and other similar living quarters which are accessory to a permitted use and which have no cooking facilities in individual rooms or apartments. 
b.  Requirements for lot area per family do not apply to rental units in a hotel, motel, motor lodge, tourist home, or to rooms in a rooming or boarding house. 
4.  Yards and Open Space - General: 
a.  Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, one-half of the alley width may be considered as a portion of the required yard. 
b.  Where these regulations refer to side streets, the Administrator shall be guided by the pattern of development in the vicinity of the lot in question in determining which of two streets is the side street. 
c.  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, except as authorized by this article, and excepting ordinary projections of sills, window air conditioning units, chimneys, cornices, and ornamental features which may project to a distance not to exceed 24 inches into a required yard. 
d.  Except when prohibited by other provisions of this ordinance, fences, walls, and hedges, driveways, and buffer areas may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard provided that no fence, wall or hedge along the street sides of corner lots violates the corner visibility provisions of this ordinance. 
e.  Except for the following instances, only one principal building, together with its customary accessory buildings, shall occupy each lot: 
(1)  Institutional Buildings 
(2)  Public or Semi-Public Buildings 
(3)  Multiple-Family Dwellings 
(4)  Business or Commercial Buildings 
(5)  Homes for the Aged 
(6)  Planned Developments 
The provisions of this exception shall not be construed to allow the location or erection of any building or portion of a building outside the buildable area of the lot or the intermingling of uses. 
f.  In the event that a lot is to be occupied by a group of two or more related buildings to be used for residential purposes such dwelling structures shall not be situated so as to face the rear of another dwelling structure within the development or on adjoining properties, unless differences in terrain and elevation would provide effective visual separation or unless the units are more than 60 feet apart. 
g.  Dwelling structures which are front face to front face or back face to back face or front face to back face shall not be less than 60 feet apart. Dwelling structures which are side face to side face shall not be less than 20 feet apart. Dwelling structures which are side face to front face or back face shall not be less than 40 feet apart. 
5.  Front Yards: 
a.  Where an official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
b.  On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each street. 
c.  There shall be a yard of at least 20 feet on the side street of a corner lot in any district provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot of record at the time of issuance of this ordinance shall not be reduced to less than 28 feet. 
d.  Open, unenclosed porches, platforms, or paved terraces, not covered by a roof or canopy and which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend or project into the required setback requirements not more than six feet. 
e.  When the setback of existing buildings located within 200 feet of each side of a lot within the same block and zoning district, and fronting on the same street as that lot, is less than the minimum required setback, the setback on that lot may be the average of the existing setbacks. 
6.  Side Yards: 
a.  For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a group of business or commercial buildings separated by common or party walls shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
b.  The minimum width of side yards for schools, libraries, churches, and other public and semi-public buildings in residential districts shall be 25 feet, except where a side yard is adjacent to a business or commercial district, in which case the width of that yard shall be as required for the district in which the building is located. 
7.  Rear Yards: Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways, and balconies opening upon fire towers and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues, may project into the required rear yard for a distance of not more than five feet, but only where the same are so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation. 
8.  Corner Visibility: No sign, fence, wall, hedge, planting, or other obstruction to vision, extending to a height in excess of three feet above the established street grade, shall be erected, planted, or maintained within the area of a corner lot that is included between the lines of the intersecting streets and a straight line connecting them at points 25 feet distant from the intersection of the street lines. 
9.  Fences and Walls: No fence or freestanding wall in a required yard other than a retaining wall shall be more than eight feet in height, or be constructed in a public right-of-way. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Supplementary Use Requirements: 
1.  Accessory Uses and Structures: 
a.  Such structures shall be located on the same lot as the principal building to which it is accessory. 
b.  Such structures shall not be permitted in any required front yard. 
c.  Except as herein provided, no accessory building shall project beyond a required yard line along any street. 
d.  Residential accessory uses such as garages, greenhouses, or workshops, shall not be rented or occupied for commercial purposes. 
e.  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
f.  Where a corner lot adjoins in the rear of a lot in a residential district, no accessory building shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building or closer than five feet to the rear property line. 
g.  No garage or other accessory building shall be located closer than three feet to a side or rear lot line in a residential district. 
h.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway, or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
i.  No accessory building shall be located closer than 20 feet to the principal building or to any other accessory building in a residential district. 
j.  All residential accessory buildings must be located at least 20 feet to the rear of the principal building. 
k.  Areas in which the accessory storage of a boat, boat trailer, or travel trailer is permitted shall not include the required front yard. 
l.  Filling station pumps and pump islands where permitted may occupy the required yards, provided, however, that they are not less than 15 feet from the street lines. 
m.  No residential accessory building shall be used by other than employees of the owner, lessee, or tenant of the premises. 
n.  Accessory uses in an apartment development may include, but shall not be limited to, laundry facilities for the convenience of residents, which must be housed in a primary use structure. 
o.  Accessory swimming pools, open and unenclosed, may occupy a required rear or side yard, provided that they are not located closer than six feet to a rear lot line or ten feet to an interior side lot line. A walk space at least three feet wide shall be provided between pool walls and protective fences or barrier walls. On double fronting lots, an open or enclosed swimming pool, located in the rear of the dwelling, shall meet the front setback requirement for the district where the lot is located. Chain-link fencing, not higher than four (4) feet, or site impermeable privacy fencing, not higher than six (6) feet, shall enclose all in-ground pools or other above-ground pools that require permanent power connections. 
p.  An ornamental fence or wall may project into or enclose the front, side, or rear yard provided such fences and walls do not exceed a height of six (6) feet and, if the curb or pavement edge happens to be the right-of-way line, then such fencing/wall shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to such right-of-way line. In order to maintain residential values and minimize negative neighborhood effects, chain link fencing of any type shall not be allowed to enclose any residential front yard. 
2.  Customary Home Occupation: 
a.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation other than a nonilluminated identification sign having an area of not more than two square feet which shall be attached wholly to the dwelling structure within such activity is conducted. 
b.  Such use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and only persons living in the dwelling unit shall be employed in such occupation. 
c.  No more than 25 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for the operation. 
d.  There shall be no group instruction, assembly or activity. 
e.  No commodity shall be stocked or sold on the premises. 
f.  No materials, equipment, or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises except that one business vehicle (the carrying capacity of which shall not exceed one and a half tons) used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage, or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the business or home occupation. 
3.  Electric Transformer Station, Gas Regulator Station, and Telephone Exchange: 
a.  Such uses shall be essential for service to the area in which located. 
b.  Any building or structure, except an enclosing fence, shall be setback not less than 20 feet from any property line and shall meet all applicable yard requirements in excess thereof. 
c.  Such uses shall be enclosed by a fence not less than eight feet in height. 
d.  The required front yard and other open space on the premises outside the fenced area shall be grassed, landscaped, and maintained in an appropriate manner. 
e.  The storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be prohibited. 
f.  Site and development plans shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator to insure compatibility of facilities in the neighborhood in which they are to be located. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section C. - Dwelling Standards 
All structures used as dwellings shall conform to the "City of Chatsworth Housing Code." 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section D. - Landscaping Requirements: 
The following requirements apply to all developers and/or owners of real property involved with the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building or structure, as well as the grading in anticipation of such development in the C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2 Zone Districts. 
1.  Tree Planting. 
a.  Street Frontage Planting Requirements. A tree planting strip, exclusive of access driveways, with an average width of ten (10) feet is required along all property lines abutting the public right-of-way. If large maturing trees are used, the planting strip shall include two (2) trees with a minimum of two (2) inches of caliper and eight (8) feet in height in the first forty (40) feet and one (1) tree per forty (40) feet thereafter or fraction thereof. If small maturing trees are used, the same conditions apply; but the increment drops to thirty (30) feet. 
When a building permit is requested for renovation of a previously developed site and where the required frontage planting strip does not exist, trees are still required. However, in lieu of an ten foot wide planting strip, a pavement cutout of a minimum of eighty (80) square feet and with a minimum dimension of five (5) feet may be substituted. This substitution, if so agreed upon by all parties, must be constructed within the designated front setback area for the particular property as set forth in the Chatsworth City Zoning Ordinance. 
When a railroad or utility right-of-way separates the property from a county right-of-way, the planting strip requirement and the tree planting requirements must still be met. 
b.  Internal Lot Planting Requirements. Whenever the impervious cover of a lot exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet, an area equal to five (5) percent of the total impervious surface must be provided for landscaping and tree planting. Tree planting is required at the rate of one (1) tree per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious cover. 
Trees must be planted within the paved area so that no parking space is more than ninety (90) feet from a tree. Minimum unpaved landscape area per tree shall be one hundred sixty (160) square feet with a minimum dimension of eight (8) feet. 
When a building permit is requested for the renovation of a site previously developed, internal tree planting is still required; and the minimum planting area shall be one hundred sixty (160) square feet per tree. Five (5) percent of the total impervious cover must be open for landscape purposes. 
c.  Tree specifications. The trees to be planted must be from an approved list supplied by the City. Minimum tree caliper measured six (6) inches aboveground on all trees shall be two (2) inches, and the minimum height shall be eight (8) feet. No trees identified as "large maturing" shall be planted within (20) feet of an electrical transmissions or distribution line. This does not include low voltage insulated or covered lines of two hundred forty (240) volts or less of telephone or cable vision lines. 
2.  Utility Responsibility. Public and private utilities which install overhead and underground utilities including CATV installations, and water and sewer by or at the direction of all utility departments shall be required to accomplish all work on property subject to this article in accordance with the company's written pruning and trenching specifications or as mutually agreeable to the property owner and the utility. Written specifications shall have been first approved by the City. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section E. - Telecommunications Antenna and Towers: 
The location of freestanding communication towers may be permitted under the provision of this section. The intent of this section is to: provide for the appropriate location and development of communication towers and antennae to serve the residents and businesses of the City of Chatsworth; minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and antennae through careful design, siting, landscape and innovative camouflaging techniques; and to encourage and promote the location of new communication towers in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
1.  Height Requirements. No antenna or tower shall exceed 250 feet in height. Antenna and towers located in the General Commercial (C-2), Commercial Parkway (C-3), or Central Business District (CBD) shall not exceed the following height limitations. 
a.  For a single user, no more than seventy (70) feet in height; 
b.  For two users, no more than (100) feet in height; and 
c.  For three users, no more than one hundred and fifty (150) feet in height. 
2.  Roof Top Mounted Antennas. Rooftop mounted communications towers and antennae may be located on any nonresidential buildings and alternative tower structures in the City of Chatsworth so long as: 
a.  Such tower or antenna is set back from any existing or planned off-site residence and separated from any residentially zoned property at least a distance equal to two times the full height of the tower and antenna, but in no event less than one hundred (100) feet; 
b.  The existing free-standing nonresidential structure other than a tower on which such tower or antenna will be placed is fifty (50) feet in height or greater and the tower and antenna will add no more than twenty (20) feet total to the height of said existing structure; 
c.  No signs or illumination are permitted on an antenna or tower unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction in which case the enforcement officer may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views; and 
d.  The number and location of antennae, communication towers or other receiving or transmitting devices located on a single structure that is not excessive and does not adversely affect adjacent properties and views. 
3.  Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of communication towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. Tower owners shall conduct periodic inspections of communication towers at least once every three years to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a structural engineer licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. 
4.  Regulatory Compliance. All towers and antennae must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate communications towers and antennae. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the communications towers and antennae into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Tower owners shall provide documentation showing that each communication tower is in compliance with all federal requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every 12 months. 
5.  Security. Communication towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
6.  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on an antenna or tower unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction in which case the Zoning Board of Appeals may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
7.  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower. 
8.  Visual Impact. 
a.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
c.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
d.  Towers clustered at the same site shall be of similar height and design. 
e.  Towers shall be at a minimum height necessary to provide parity with existing similar tower supported antenna, and shall be freestanding where the negative visual effect is less than would be created by use of a guyed tower. 
9.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property and shall be as follows: 
a.  A buffer area no less than 6 feet wide shall commence at the property line. 
b.  The buffer zone is to consist of materials of a variety which can be expected to grow to form a continuous hedge at least five feet in height within two years of planting. 
c.  Trees and shrubs in the vicinity of guy wires shall be of a kind that would not exceed 20 feet in height or would not affect the stability of the guys, should they be uprooted, and shall not obscure visibility of the anchor from the transmission building or security facilities and staff/maintenance. 
d.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
e.  In lieu of these standards, the Enforcement Officer may allow use of an alternate detailed plan and specifications for landscape and screening, including plantings, fences, walls and other features designed to screen and buffer towers and accessory uses. The plan shall accomplish the same degree of screening achieved by the provisions above, except as lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes and/or for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section F. - Flood Hazard Area Development Requirements 
See the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance in the Appendices. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section G. - Requirements for Temporary Structures/Uses. 
The City of Chatsworth acknowledges that temporary structures, such as tents, may be periodically used for special events, activities, entertainment, temporary sales of various products, and the like. However, the City of Chatsworth has determined that specific requirements are necessary to secure the health, safety, and welfare of the entire community by regulating temporary structures/uses, as follows: 
1)  A temporary structure/use permit shall be required from the City of Chatsworth for such temporary structure/use; 
2)  The use sheltered by the temporary structure shall be limited to not more than fourteen (14) days, not more than twice annually, non-consecutively, at any location with the City of Chatsworth, except that seasonal events, such as holiday tree sales lots shall be permitted to operate for up to two (2) consecutive fourteen (14) day periods annually; 
3)  A temporary structure shall be promptly removed at the conclusion of the temporary use associated with such temporary structure; 
4)  A temporary structure shall require either permanent restroom facilities upon the same lot/parcel or the placement of portable toilets on-site, in the discretion of the Zoning Administrator; 
5)  A temporary structure shall require the installation of temporary electrical power, rather than the use of batteries or motorized generators; 
6)  No overnight camping shall be allowed in conjunction with a temporary structure/use; 
7)  Setback requirements of the applicable zone district shall apply and shall be measured from the outermost edge of the temporary structure to the property lines; 
8)  Off-street parking requirements shall be required in conjunction with the applicable use: e.g. seating capacity of a church facility, or parking spaces per square feet of gross floor area for the use sheltered by the temporary structure. Temporary structures used in conjunction with permanent structures shall be exempt from additional off-street parking requirements. 
9)  Food service providers shall comply with all requirements of the Murray County Environmental Health Department, as applicable. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE IX. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD) 

Section A. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this provision to encourage flexible and creative concepts in site planning and building arrangements under a unified plan of development rather than under conventional lot-by-lot regulation. The developer benefits from better land utilization, economy in the provision of roads and utilities, and flexibility in design. The community benefits from efficient use of land, preservation of natural amenities and environmentally sensitive areas, and lower development and housing costs. Review and approval of the development plan provides the opportunity to assure that the development will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood in which it is located. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Guidelines for Review of Planned Unit Developments. 
The review shall consider the following general objectives and purposes to result in approval or denial of a proposed Planned Unit Development: 
1.  Whether the development will be compatible with the topography, hydrology, and other natural features of land; and whether any unusual topographic or other natural features will be disturbed. 
2.  Whether the character, design, and layout of proposed land uses are adequate and appropriate to encourage desirable living conditions, and to provide for separation and screening between dissimilar uses within and adjacent to the PUD. 
3.  Whether the development will be able to preserve and protect the natural amenities including watersheds, wetlands, groundwater recharge areas, floodplains, steep slopes and wooded areas. 
4.  Whether the development will adversely affect developed or undeveloped neighboring properties. 
5.  Whether the existing and/or proposed streets, utilities, and other public services are adequate to serve the development, including perpetual maintenance and adequate security. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section C. - Types and Permitted Uses of Planned Unit Developments. 
1.  Planned Unit Development - Residential (PUD-R). PUD-R is a planned residential development without commercial facilities. The minimum acreage requirement is two (2) acres. A development may contain any combination of residential uses plus the following: Accessory uses - subject to the requirements of VIII-B.1 Supplementary Regulations; Dwellings: multi-family, single-family detached, townhouse/condominium; Zero lot line development; Group personal care homes; Neighborhood centers; Bed and Breakfast home; Cemeteries, Religious and Private; Child care home, family; Churches; Government buildings; Schools, public, private or parochial; Sewage treatment facilities, public or private; Utility facilities (gas, electric, telephone, transformer stations); Water treatment facilities; Golf courses and club houses; Parks and recreation facilities. 
2.  Planned Unit Development - Commercial (PUD-C). PUD-C is a planned residential development with commercial uses as listed in IX.C.1 and also including: Bakeries/Pastry shops; Book, card, and stationary stores; Convenience stores without fuel pump service; Drug stores/pharmacies; Florist shop; Retail stores offering common merchandise; shoe repair shops; Banks and auto-tellers; Clinics, public and private; Coin laundries; Laundry pick-up and dry clean services; Office, business and professional; Video sales and rental; Child care center, group; Child care facility. The minimum acreage requirement is fifty (50) acres and the following criteria shall apply: 
a.  Amount and Type of Commercial Uses. The proposed commercial uses shall be designed to primarily serve the planned development and shall be justified by the developer in a required market analysis report that contains the following information: 
1)  The trade area of the proposed commercial facilities including present and prospective population. 
2)  The effective buying power in such trade area. 
3)  The extent that the proposed commercial facilities already exist in the trade area. 
4)  The need for the proposed facilities. 
b.  Floor Area Ratio. There shall not be less than four (4) square feet of commercial lot area for each (1) square foot of permitted commercial floor area (FAR = .25). 
c.  Design Layout. Layout of parking areas, service areas, entrances, exits, yards, courts and landscaping serving commercial facilities permitted in a Planned Unit Development and control of signs, lighting, noise or other potentially adverse influences shall be designed to protect the residential character within the Planned Unit Development and any adjoining residential district. 
d.  Retail Sales and Service. All retail sales and services permitted in a PUD-C shall be conducted entirely within a wholly and permanently enclosed building(s) which shall be of an architectural design compatible with the residential structures within the Planned Unit Development. 
e.  Building Permit Approval. No building permit for any approved commercial facility shall be issued until at least twenty-five percent (25%) of all planned residential dwelling units have received a Certificate of Occupancy. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section D. - General Development Criteria for a Planned Unit Development. 
1.  PUD Locations and Abutting Developments. A PUD may be located within any residential district if it meets all the required standards for Planned Unit Developments and a rezoning request is approved. Commercial uses, attached dwelling units, or multi-family developments within a proposed PUD shall be designed with sensitivity to existing single-family residential dwellings that surround the PUD. Access to such facilities shall be from internal streets serving the planned development. 
2.  Minimum Lot Area and Yard Requirements. Such requirements for each use may be waived upon the approval of a final plan and a final plat. 
3.  One Principal Building per Lot. Lots developed for single-family detached dwellings shall have only one principal building per lot. 
4.  Separation of Buildings. The minimum distance between all buildings shall be twenty (20) feet, except for ZLL developments which shall be fifteen (15) feet. Such distance shall be measured from the outermost projection of any part of the building. 
5.  Minimum Floor Area. The minimum floor area for each residential use is as follows: 
Single-family detached dwelling - 900 square feet. 
Single-family attached dwelling - 850 square feet. 
Multi-family dwelling: 
- 425 sf per one (1) bedroom dwelling. 
- 625 sf per two (2) bedrooms dwelling. 
- 825 sf per three (3) bedrooms dwelling. 
6.  Gross Density. The maximum gross density in a PUD shall not exceed eight (8) dwelling units per acre. 
7.  Ownership. Planned Unit Development sites shall be under single ownership and/or unified control until developed. If upon application, the applicant does not have a full ownership interest in the land, then evidence of full ownership by a single individual, a partnership, tenants in common, a corporation, or by some other legal entity must be provided before the final plan and final plat are approved. 
8.  Streets and Parking Requirements. Principal vehicular access points to a Planned Development shall be designed to permit smooth traffic flow and minimum hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Internal traffic circulation systems must be designed to assure safety, convenience, and adequate access by both the public and emergency vehicles to dwelling units and non-residential facilities. 
a.  Public or Private Streets. The application for a Planned Unit Development shall stipulate whether the streets within the development are to be public or private. If the streets are proposed to be private, the developer shall submit a legal instrument or instruments setting forth a plan for the perpetual maintenance and repair of the proposed private streets. Regardless whether the streets are publicly or privately owned and maintained, they shall be constructed to the minimum standards specified in the Chatsworth Subdivision Regulations. 
b.  Parking. Parking facilities within a Planned Unit Development shall meet the minimum standards per use as specified in Article XI, Section I and J of this Ordinance. 
9.  Buffer Requirements. 
a.  The perimeter of the PUD must at a minimum, comply with the buffer requirements provided in Article VI of this Ordinance. 
b.  All buffer areas shall be designated on the appropriate permit applications(s) and indicated as a permanent buffer areas on the required buffer plan or final subdivision plat, as appropriate. 
c.  When the uses proposed within a PUD are adjacent to existing dissimilar uses outside the PUD, a buffer is required for the PUD boundary. 
d.  When the uses proposed within a PUD are adjacent to vacant land that is zoned for dissimilar uses, the buffer shall be required on the property that allows the more intensive uses to develop; if the property adjacent to the PUD is vacant and unzoned, the PUD is not required to provide a buffer. 
e.  If due to the topography or other conditions, the Planning Commission determines that the buffer requirements of this article are not adequate, the Commission may then recommend such additional buffer for cause. 
10.  Utilities. All Planned Unit Developments shall be served by a public water system and a public sewage disposal system or a community sewage treatment system approved by the appropriate state or local authorities. 
11.  Deed Covenants. The entire Planned Unit Development shall be included within private deed covenants running with the land to assure the continuance of the Planned Unit Development in accordance with approved plans and developments. 
12.  Homeowners Association. If a homeowners association is proposed, a declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the association shall be submitted as evidence that the Association is established before any homes are sold and shall include provisions requiring that: 
a.  Membership must be mandatory for each buyer and any successive buyer. 
b.  The open space restrictions must be permanent, not just for a period of years. 
c.  The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance of recreational and other facilities. 
d.  The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changing needs. 
13.  Coordination with Subdivision Regulations. Review of a Planned Unit Development under this section shall be submitted in a form and sequence that satisfies the preliminary and final plat requirements of the Chatsworth Subdivision Regulations. The approved final plat shall be recorded in the same manner as other subdivision plats along with the necessary covenants and restrictions applicable to the development. Individual properties in a Planned Unit Development may not be sold until the final plat is approved and recorded. 
14.  Open Space Requirements. 
a.  Common open space shall comprise at least ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the Planned Unit Development to be used as recreational or park facilities, or as an environmental amenity for the collective enjoyment of the occupants of the development. Common open space shall not include public or private streets, parking areas, driveways, or utility right-of-ways. 
b.  For density purposes, land area proposed for common open space may be allocated to single-family detached, single-family attached, and multi-family uses areas in proportion to the ratio of each use to the total area of residential use, provided that open space acreage allocated to a use must be reasonably accessible to that use. 
c.  A Planned Unit Development shall be approved subject to the submission of a legal instrument (ie. Homeowners Association) setting forth a plan for the permanent care and maintenance of such open spaces, recreation areas, private streets and other communally owned facilities. Such instrument shall be approved by the City Attorney as to legal form and effect. 
d.  The required open space shall be developed and landscaped by the developer in accordance with an approved plan. 
15.  Signage. Signage within a PUD are limited to only ground, window, or wall signs as defined in Article X of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section E. - Application for Approval of a Planned Unit Development. 
1.  Pre-Application Conference. Prior to filing a formal application for a PUD, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the Zoning Administrator to review the general character of the plan, and to obtain information on projected programs and other matters. 
2.  Plan Application. An applicant shall file an application for rezoning. This application shall be supported by a written statement of intent and a Site Development Plan. 
a.  Site Development Plan. A site development plan shall be required to encourage logical and innovative design and also assure that the proposed development will be compatible with surrounding areas. Such site development plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the application for rezoning and the City Council may approve the rezoning request based on conditions stipulated in an approved site plan that is recommended by the Planning Commission. For a property requiring a subdivision approval, the City of Chatsworth Subdivision Regulation Regulations shall apply in addition to the site plan requirements. The Site Development Plan shall be prepared according to the requirements in Article IX, Section D of this Ordinance. 
b.  Statement of Intent. A narrative shall be submitted with the preliminary plan to describe the following: 
1)  A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the Planned Development (ie., rationale for the proposal). 
2)  An explanation regarding the status of ownership of the proposed tract(s). 
3)  The proposed market selling price of each type of dwelling unit; or if rental, the proposed rent structures. 
4)  A description of the proposed recreation facility improvements in the development. 
5)  A statement to determine whether the streets are to be dedicated to the city or reserved as private streets. 
6)  The developer should address the current traffic volume on the roads that access his proposed development and analyze the impact of his proposed development on these streets; estimate the number of turning movements in all directions per day; address the need for traffic control devices; address the need for lane separation devices or the development of acceleration/deceleration lanes into and out of the development; and include the proposed schedule for the completion of all traffic-related mechanisms. 
7)  A general statement of the proposed development schedule, (if known). 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section F. - Procedures for Review and Action. 
1.  Zoning Procedures, Public Notices and Public Hearing. An application on a Planned Unit Development is a request for a zoning decision and will be subject to the adopted Chatsworth Zoning Procedures and Standards. 
2.  Submission of Final Plans and Plats. The final site development plans, consistent with any requested modifications, and final plats, consistent with the adopted subdivision regulations, shall be submitted by the developer for action by the Planning Commission, the final platting authority. 
3.  Major Revision of the Planned Development Plan. Major or substantial changes in an approved Planned Unit Development plan that affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes shall require the developer to submit a written request for revision of the development plan and shall require a new public hearing to review such changes. Actions on the revisions shall be consistent with the Chatsworth Zoning Procedures Ordinance. 
4.  Failure to Report Revisions. Should any revisions in the approved plan not be reported by the developer to the Zoning Administrator, in writing, the approval of the plan shall stand revoked unless and until the required approval is obtained. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section G. - Permits and Certifications. 
1.  Grading Permits. A grading permit shall be required for any proposed Planned Development before any improvement or grading of land commences. 
2.  Building Permits. After approval of the PUD plan and recording of the final plat(s), the Building Inspector shall issue building permits for the buildings and structures in the Planned Unit Development if they are in substantial conformity with the approved development plan, and other applicable regulations. 
3.  Control of Area Following Completion. After completion of a Planned Unit Development, the use of land and construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or structures within the area covered by the plan shall be regulated by the approved development plan and the provisions of this resolution. 
4.  Lapse of Approval. Under the following two situations, a PUD reverts to its original zoning district. 
a.  Lack of Construction. Approval of an area as a Planned Unit Development shall lapse one (1) year from the date of the zoning decision by the Mayor and Council unless actual construction has been initiated or a request for an extension of one (1) year is granted by the Mayor and Council. Not more than one (1) extension shall be granted. 
b.  Default of the Developer. If the developer should default regarding the implementation of an approved PUD, the approval of an area as a Planned Unit Development shall lapse one (1) year from the date of the default, unless other developer('s) initiate efforts to continue the approved PUD plan within the one (1) year period. New developer(s) must submit their revised schedule for construction to the Mayor and Council for acknowledgment and approval. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE XI. - TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS 
Each use permitted by these regulations shall meet the following requirements: 

Section A. - Street Access: 
Except as otherwise permitted in these regulations, each building shall be located on a lot or parcel which abuts a public street or has access to a public street by means of a recorded access easement. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Street Right-of-Way: 
Future street right-of-ways in any land development may be required in concert with the approval of plats submitted for approval under the terms of the Chatsworth Subdivision Regulations. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section C. - Street Improvements: 
Street improvements required to accommodate traffic generated by a use and improvement of new street right-of-ways as established by the Chatsworth Subdivision Regulations shall be made in accordance with City policy. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section D. - Extension of Existing Streets: 
Existing streets shall be connected and extended appropriately within the limits of a development. However, streets or portions of streets adjacent to a proposed nonresidential use, which are developed and are being used exclusively for residential access shall not be connected, extended, or in any way provide access to a nonresidential use. In addition, private drives which provide access to a nonresidential use shall not be permitted in any residential district. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section E. - Street Access Curb Cuts in Nonresidential Districts: 
Curb cuts for service drives, entrances, exits, and other similar facilities on public streets in nonresidential districts shall not be located within 20 feet of any intersection or within 40 feet of another curb cut. A curb cut shall be no greater than 40 feet in width and no closer than 20 feet to any property line, unless approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section F. - Traffic Control Devices: 
If the traffic forecasted to be generated by a use within a nonresidential district will necessitate, in order to handle turning movements into and out of the use on a major thoroughfare, traffic control devices for that use to insure public safety, the developer shall install such devices as are necessary to handle the traffic generated by the development. Such determination shall be made by the Zoning Administrator and approved by the Mayor and Council. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section G. - State Department of Transportation Approval: 
All entrances or exits to any street or drive, public or private, from or to any State highway shall be approved by the State Department of Transportation prior to the construction of such street or drive, or the issuance of any development permit for any improvement to be served by such street or drive, but permit approval shall not be held longer than 30 days. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section H. - Private Streets: 
Private streets within any district shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this ordinance. Private streets within any district shall be assigned names and locations and names shall be shown on plans required for the issuance of building and development permits as provided in Article XIV. All private street names shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator to avoid conflicting names. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section I. - Off-Street Automobile Parking: 
Off-street automobile parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section. 
1.  Plans Required: A parking plan for all but single family residential uses shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator with the building plans. He shall review the proposed parking plan to insure its conformance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
2.  Design Standards: Except provisions for single family residences, all parking facilities, including entrances, exits, and maneuvering areas, shall comply with the following provisions: 
a.  shall have access to a public street; 
b.  shall be graded and paved, including access drive(s), and be curbed when needed for effective drainage control as determined by the Zoning Administrator; 
c.  shall have all spaces marked with paint lines, curb stones, or other similar designations; 
d.  each space shall have not less than 162 square feet, and shall not be less than 9 feet wide and 18 feet deep, exclusive of passageways. There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a public street; 
e.  shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets; 
f.  shall be separated from sidewalks and streets in public right-of-way by wheel bumpers and an adequate reserve strip; 
g.  the parking area including space and driveway arrangement shall conform to the geometric design standards established by the City; 
h.  adequate lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night. Such lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting properties. 
3.  Location: All parking facilities shall be located in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  the required space shall be provided on the same lot with the use it serves, except as provided herein; 
b.  where provision of the required parking spaces involves one or more parcels or tracts of land that are not a part of the lot on which the principal use is located, the developer shall submit with his application for a permit, an instrument which subjects said parcels or tracts to parking uses for the principal use it serves. The developer shall pay the necessary fee and the Zoning Administrator shall have said instrument registered in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
c.  where an increase in the number of spaces by a change or enlargement of use of where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located and maintained at a distance not to exceed 300 feet from an institutional building or other nonresidential building served. 
4.  Joint Use of Parking Facilities: The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night and on Sundays. 
5.  Use of Area: No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing, or long term storage of any vehicles or equipment unless permitted by the district in which the area is located. 
6.  Parking of Business Vehicles: The parking of business vehicles in an "R" district, other than ordinary passenger automobiles, shall be within a garage or carport or within a side or rear yard except for official governmental vehicles. 
7.  Required Spaces: The number of parking spaces or area required for a particular use shall be as follows: 

 
8.  Interpretation of Required Spaces: In connection with Section I-7 above, the following shall apply: 
a.  The parking requirements in the chart do not limit other parking requirements contained in these regulations. 
b.  The parking requirements in the chart do not limit special requirements which may be imposed with special use exceptions approved under Article XVI. 
c.  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the next highest whole number. 
d.  The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed in the chart shall be the same as for a listed use of similar characteristics of parking demand generation. 
9.  Residential Parking. All parking areas serving single-family detached or attached dwellings shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  The maximum number of parking spaces allowed on any residential lot in addition to those provided by a garage or carport shall be determined by the number of bedrooms in the dwelling located on that lot. 
One to two bedroom dwellings shall be permitted two parking spaces. 
Three bedroom dwellings shall be permitted three parking spaces. 
Four or more bedroom dwellings shall be permitted four parking spaces. 
b.  Parking shall not be allowed directly in front of any single-family dwelling, nor shall the area of parking exceed fifty percent of the area of the front yard as measured from the front of the principal facade, except in those cases where (an) improved parking space(s) was (were) in existence prior to the adoption of this Amendment, or where a garage or carport facing the street on which the dwelling fronts is built into the dwelling as an integral part of the structure. 
c.  All off-street residential spaces and driveways shall be improved in compliance with Section I.2 of the Article, and in the case of a gravel surface, shall be curbed on all sides with a durable material in a such a way as to prevent dispersal or erosion of the surface. 
d.  Parking spaces and driveways may be located in one side yard only, and in back yards, except where a garage or carport facing the street on which the dwelling fronts is built into the dwelling as an integral part of the structure. 
e.  If garages or carports are converted to living area, then the off-street parking requirements must be met elsewhere on the lot. 
f.  No inoperable vehicle shall be permitted in any residential district for more than 14 days unless it is in an enclosed garage. All repairs shall be made in an enclosed garage. Bona fide automobile restorations shall be excluded from this provision so long as the same shall be completed within one year and limited to two vehicles which shall be maintained under a full car cover. 
g.  No commercial vehicle as licensed by the State with gross vehicle weight exceeding 11,000 lbs shall be allowed to park in the R-1, R-1A, or R-2 zoning districts. 
h.  Recreational vehicles are prohibited from parking in the front yard of R-1, R-1A, and R-2 zoning districts. 
i.  Commercial Vehicles licensed by the State shall not be allowed to park overnight in the street in a residential district. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section J. - Off-Street Loading Requirements: 
Off-street loading shall be established in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section. 
1.  Design Standards: Where required, one or more off-street loading spaces shall be provided on the same or adjoining premises with the facility it serves, either inside or outside a building and shall: 
a.  have a minimum dimension of 13.5 feet by 60 feet by 14.5 feet overhead clearance; 
b.  be drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, and surfaced with erosion-resistant material; 
c.  be located so as not to hinder the free movement of vehicles or pedestrians over a street, sidewalk, or alley. 
2.  Use of Area: Loading space(s) shall be maintained in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee and not used for the sale, repair, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies. 
3.  Mixed Uses in a Building: Where a building is used for more than one use or for different uses, and where the floor area used for each use for which loading space is required is below the minimum for required loading spaces but the aggregate floor area used is greater than such minimum, then off-street loading spaces shall be provided as if the entire building were used for that use in the building for which the most spaces are required. In such cases, the Zoning Administrator may make reasonable requirements for the location of required loading spaces. 
4.  Required Spaces: The number of spaces required for a particular use shall be as follows: 

 
5.  Interpretation of Required Spaces: In connection with Section J-4 above, the following shall apply: 
a.  The loading space requirements apply to all districts but do not limit the special requirements which may be imposed in these regulations. 
b.  The loading space requirements in this Article do not limit special requirements which may be imposed in connection with special use exceptions which may be permitted under Article XV. 
c.  Under the provisions of Article XVI the Board of Appeals may waive or reduce the loading space requirements whenever the character of the use is such as to make unnecessary the full provisions of loading facilities, where provision is made for community loading facilities, or where provision of loading space requirements is impractical under certain conditions for uses which contain less than 10,000 square feet of floor area. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE XII. - MANUFACTURED HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE REGULATIONS 

Section A. - Purpose: 
The purpose of this Article is to provide policies and technical standards for the approved use of manufactured homes and recreational vehicles in the City. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Administration: 
1.  General Provisions: 
a.  All manufactured homes and recreational vehicles shall provide for a healthful environment, with living and service facilities arranged and equipped to assure such a condition; 
b.  Utility services such as public water, gas, electricity, sewer, etc., shall not be provided to any manufactured home or Recreational Vehicle until the permit requirements of these regulations are met; 
c.  No manufactured home or recreational vehicle shall be used for overnight occupancy in any place, public or private, except in accordance with these regulations. 
2.  Manufactured Home Building Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to begin the excavation for or construction of a manufactured home, Recreational vehicle, or combination park, or to begin the excavation for or construction of a manufactured home stand on an individual lot, or to place a manufactured home on an individual lot or on a manufactured home lot in a park until a building permit authorizing such action has been properly issued by the Zoning Administrator. 
a.  Manufactured homes within the City of Chatsworth, whether established or erected as a single family detached home or as a unit within a manufactured home park, shall not be older than five (5) years, as measured from the date of the application for a building permit. Such age requirement shall also be applicable to the replacement or relocation of pre-existing manufactured homes in Chatsworth. 
3.  Temporary Location Provisions: 
a.  Manufactured homes and occupied Recreational vehicles may be temporarily placed on an individual vacant or occupied lot where the applicant shows it is essential to provide for the preparation of a construction project, to provide security or night watchmen quarters or to allow temporary parking or storage of an unoccupied manufactured home on other than a sales lot or inventory area. 
b.  In such cases, temporary placement of manufactured homes and Recreational vehicles may be allowed for a period up to six months, renewable in increments of six months, provided temporary special exception approval is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, a building permit and temporary location permit are properly issued by the Administrator, and where cooking, sleeping, and waste disposal facilities are to be used, the unit placement is developed consistent with the other applicable provisions of these regulations. 
4.  Application Procedures: Applications for manufactured home building permits involving the placement of a manufactured home and/or Recreational vehicle on an individual lot or manufactured home lot in a park shall be made on standard forms established by the Zoning Administrator. Applications for the excavation for or construction of a manufactured home, Recreational vehicle, or combination park shall be in writing, accompanied by three copies of the required plans, and contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of applicant; 
b.  Location and description of the proposed site; 
c.  Plot plan, at a scale of 1 inch equals not more than 100 feet, indicating the size and location of proposed spaces or areas for the placement of the manufactured homes and/or Recreational Vehicles; 
d.  Utilities plan, at a scale of 1 inch equals not more than 100 feet, showing the size and location of all existing or proposed gas, water, sewer, electrical, or other utility features; 
e.  Site feature plan, at a scale of 1 inch equals not more than 100 feet showing locations of drive(s), walk(s), parking area(s), storage facility(ies), other accessory uses or buildings, surface water drainage pattern drainage structures, areas of disturbed soils, and existing and proposed planting and screening; 
f.  Floor plans and specifications of any park service buildings or other structures; 
g.  Scaled layout of the park's typical manufactured home and/or Recreational vehicle sites or integrated grouping of sites; 
h.  Such additional information as may be required by the Administrator to determine if the proposed use will comply with provisions of these regulations. 
5.  Permit Fees: Fees for any permits required shall be paid by the developer, manufactured home lot tenant or property owner, as appropriate, according to fee schedules established by the City. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section C. - Existing Uses: 
1.  Existing Individual Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles: 
a.  After the effective date of these regulations, any existing manufactured home or mobile office on an individual lot may be continued and maintained although its location and use may not conform to these regulations. 
b.  No existing manufactured home, mobile office, or recreational vehicle on an individual lot for either temporary or permanent occupancy shall be relocated to another site and no manufactured home, mobile office, or recreational vehicle shall be placed on a site vacated by an existing manufactured home, mobile office, or recreational vehicle unless such relocation or placement complies with these regulations. 
c.  In all other respects, existing manufactured homes, mobile offices, and recreational vehicles not in compliance with these regulations shall be subject to the nonconforming use provisions of Article XIII. 
2.  Existing Parks: 
a.  Manufactured home, recreational vehicle, and combination parks existing after the effective date of these regulations may be continued and maintained except that each shall not be enlarged, expanded or altered unless such enlargement, expansion, or alteration is in full compliance with these regulations. 
b.  In all other respects, existing manufactured home, recreational vehicle, and combination parks not in compliance with these regulations shall be subject to the nonconforming use provisions of Article XIII. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section D. - Manufactured Home Park Requirements: 
1.  Minimum Park Size: All manufactured home parks shall contain a minimum area of 5 acres; and so located, dimensioned, and related as to facilitate efficient park design and management. 
2.  Minimum Number of Spaces: All manufactured home parks shall contain at least 20 percent of all manufactured home spaces fully completed and ready for occupancy before a manufactured home building permit for any manufactured home lot will be granted. 
3.  Access to Site: Direct vehicular access to the manufactured home park shall be provided by means of an abutting, paved public street. 
4.  Site Conditions and Improvements: 
a.  The park site shall be such that condition of the soil, ground water level drainage, and topography do not create hazards to the property or to the health and safety of the occupants. 
b.  The park, including manufactured home stands, patios, convenience structures, streets, and other features, shall be developed in harmony with the topography, shape of the site, and existing site features, and to protect the park and adjoining properties from objectionable views, and to provide for the practical and efficient operation and maintenance of water, sewerage, and refuse collection facilities. 
5.  Internal Streets: All manufactured home parks shall contain a street system designed to provide convenient circulation within the park. The following requirements shall apply to the development of a park's street system: 
a.  All park streets shall be provided with a smooth paved surface which shall be durable and well-drained under normal use and weather conditions. The surface shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times. 
b.  All streets shall be well-drained and have a minimum pavement width of twenty-two (22) feet. 
c.  Pavement surface material shall be as required by the City's street and road standards. Written approval of the street system and surface material by the Mayor and Council shall be required before the first manufactured home building permit will be issued. 
d.  Street grades should not exceed ten percent (10%) slope. 
e.  On-street parking shall not be permitted on any park street. 
6.  Water Supply System: Each park shall provide an accessible, adequate, potable water supply. The following requirements shall apply to the park's water system: 
a.  The water system shall be such that it meets standards and requirements of the City and/or the State of Georgia. The design and size of the water system shall be based on the maximum number of manufactured home spaces to be contained in the park. 
b.  The location, design, and construction of a park's water supply and distribution system requires the approval of the appropriate water supply authority. Written approval of the water system by said authority shall be required before the first manufactured home building permit will be issued. 
7.  Sewage Disposal System: A safe and sanitary method of sewage collection and disposal shall be provided in all manufactured home parks. The location, design, and construction of a park's sewerage system requires the approval of the local health authority, the State of Georgia environmental protection agency, and/or the appropriate local sewerage system by the appropriate authority(ies) shall be required before the first manufactured home building permit will be issued. The design and size of the sewerage system shall be based on the maximum number of manufactured home spaces to be contained in the park. 
8.  Refuse Collection System: Each manufactured home park shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal meeting the requirements of the City and the State of Georgia. The following requirements shall apply to a park refuse collection system: 
a.  Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with at least two watertight, covered refuse containers each having a capacity of thirty gallons. 
b.  Refuse shall be collected at least weekly. Where such collection frequency is not feasible, screened, centrally located bulk storage containers shall be provided within the park. 
c.  Where available, refuse collection service should be provided by a qualified public or private agency. In such instances the park operator is not directly responsible for the method of disposal. In parks where the owner or operator provides the collection service, refuse shall be conveyed to the nearest approved sanitary landfill. 
9.  Recreation Area: In each manufactured home park accommodating or designed to accommodate 25 or more manufactured homes, there shall be one or more recreational areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents and conform to the following minimum requirements: 
a.  The size of such recreational areas shall be based upon a minimum of 10 percent (10%) of the total gross land area of the manufactured home park. 
b.  Swimming pools, recreational buildings, and child play areas may be included as part of the required recreational area. 
c.  Such recreational areas shall be located where they are free of traffic hazards. 
10.  Service and Convenience Buildings: Service buildings such as shelters, restrooms, management offices, and storage facilities permitted in each manufactured home park are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Such buildings and their parking areas shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the gross land area of the park. 
b.  All service and convenience buildings shall be subordinate to the residential use and character of the park, and shall be located, designed, and intended to serve only the trade or service needs of the park's residents. 
c.  The Zoning Board of Appeals may review and approve or disapprove the use and type of such service and convenience buildings that may be permitted within a park. 
d.  All service and convenience buildings shall be required to conform to any applicable building codes of the City. 
e.  All service and convenience buildings shall conform to any lot size, parking, setback, as provided in the regulations or as may be established as conditions of approval. 
11.  Manufactured Home Spaces and Improvements: Each manufactured home space within a manufactured home park shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Each manufactured home space shall contain at least forty-five hundred (4,500) square feet of area with a minimum frontage on an interior park street of forty-five (45) feet. 
b.  Each manufactured home space shall be adequately marked by permanent lot markers. 
c.  Each space shall contain a permanent manufactured home stand constructed of at least four (4) inches of concrete on a suitable subgrade material to support the manufactured home. A solid pad measuring at least ten feet wide by sixty feet long (10' X 60') or tandem strips at least two feet wide by sixty feet long (2' X 60') positioned parallel and eight feet (8') on-center are considered acceptable forms of manufactured home stands. 
d.  Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a permanent concrete patio, four inches (4") thick, measuring at least eight feet by twelve feet (8' X 12') and located convenient to the entrance of the manufactured home. 
e.  An accessway not less than twelve feet (12') wide shall be provided from the fronting street to each manufactured home stand. Paving of this accessway is not required. 
f.  Each manufactured home space shall be provided with at least two (2) off-street parking spaces. Parking spaces may be either located on each manufactured home space or in integrated groupings (bays, clusters, etc.) provided that no parking space shall be further than fifty feet (50') from the manufactured home space it is to serve. 
g.  Each manufactured home space shall be provided with its own connection to the park's sewer, water, electrical, and gas systems. 
h.  Each manufactured home shall be appropriately anchored to its manufactured home stand to acceptably meet minimum established standards for high wind tie down. 
i.  Each manufactured home space shall be given a lot number and accordingly marked to be visible from the street providing access thereto. 
12.  Manufactured Home Placements: The following minimum requirements shall apply to the placement of a manufactured home on a lot (space) within a manufactured home park: 
a.  No manufactured home shall be located closer than twenty-five feet (25') from the centerline of any interior park street. 
b.  No manufactured home shall be located closer than twenty feet (20') to another manufactured home. 
c.  No manufactured home shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') from the right-of-way line of any abutting public street. 
d.  No manufactured home shall be located closer than twenty-five feet (25') from any manufactured home park tract boundary. 
13.  Supervision and Maintenance: The person to whom a building permit is issued for a manufactured home park shall be responsible for providing adequate supervisors of the park to maintain it in full compliance with these regulations, and keep the park's facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
14.  Tenant Register: The manager of a manufactured home park shall keep an up-to-date register of the park's residents by lot or street address, and maintain such register of departed occupants for a period of three (3) years following their departure. Such register shall be made available to any authorized person inspecting the park, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Names of all occupants of the manufactured home quartered on each designated space and ages of minors; 
b.  Make, model, and year of the manufactured home occupied and serial number, state, and license number, or other designation or description; 
c.  Date of registration and departure of the manufactured home and its occupants. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section E. - Mobile Offices and Commercial Establishments: 
1.  Compliance with District Zoning: Mobile offices shall fully comply with zone district requirements within which one is located for lot size, setbacks, and other restrictions applicable to permanent commercial or industrial structures as well as the provisions of these regulations. In all respects, mobile offices, except as provided for in Section C-1, shall be considered permanent structures and as such subject to any applicable building codes. 
2.  Minimum Site Improvements: Mobile offices, other than those authorized for temporary use, shall comply with the following minimum improvements to the mobile office and lot: 
a.  Each mobile office shall be supported by and firmly anchored to a permanent concrete block or brick foundation, fully closed and vented. 
b.  Each mobile office shall be served by an acceptable water supply and method of sewage disposal subject to the written approval of the local authority having jurisdiction over such matters. 
c.  Each mobile office shall have an individual connection to public electrical power. 
d.  Each mobile office lot shall contain parking spaces as required by these regulations for similar or like use. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section F. - Recreational Vehicle Park Requirements: 
1.  Minimum Park Size: All Recreational vehicle parks shall contain a minimum of one (1) acre of land, unless otherwise specified in the zone district where allowed; and be so located, dimensioned, and related as to facilitate efficient park design, use and management. Recreational vehicle parks may be located jointly on a lot with another commercial use. 
2.  Minimum Number of Spaces: All recreational vehicle parks shall contain at least ten (10) recreational vehicle spaces fully completed and ready for occupancy before any use of the facility is permitted. 
3.  Access to Site: Direct vehicular access to a recreational vehicle park site shall be provided from an abutting, paved public street. However, the entrance drive may be shared with another use to which the recreational vehicle park is accessory or secondary. 
4.  Site Conditions and Improvements: 
a.  The recreational vehicle park site shall be such that the condition of the soil, ground water level, drainage, and topography do not create hazards to the property or to the health and safety of the occupants. 
b.  The park and its features shall be designed and developed in harmony with the topography, shape of the site, and existing site features, and to protect the park and adjoining properties from objectionable views, and to provide for the practical and efficient operation and maintenance of the park and its facilities. 
c.  Any Recreational vehicle park developed jointly with another commercial use or uses shall be so designed, located, and developed to assure the adequate separation of the park functions from those of the other commercial enterprises. 
5.  Internal Streets: All Recreational vehicle parks shall contain a street system, properly adapted to the site's topography, designed to provide convenient vehicular circulation within the park and access to each Recreational vehicle space. The following requirements shall apply to the development of a park's street system: 
a.  All park streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard, and dense surface which shall be durable and well-drained under normal use and weather conditions. Street surfaces and drainage facilities shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times. 
b.  Park streets shall have a surface width of fifteen feet (15') for one-way streets and twenty-two feet (22') for two-way streets. Where on-street parking is to be permitted, on either one-way or two-way streets, the surfaced width shall be increased by eight feet (8') to allow for parking on one side of the street only, and by sixteen feet (16') for parking on both sides. 
c.  Street surface material shall be at a minimum compacted gravel unless otherwise required by the City's street and road standards. Written approval of the proposed street system and surface material by the Mayor and Council shall be required before a building permit will be issued. 
d.  Street grades should not exceed ten percent (10%) and curb radii should not be less than twenty feet (20'). 
6.  Water Supply System: Each park shall provide an accessible, adequate, and potable water supply. The following requirements shall apply to the park's water system: 
a.  The water system shall be such that it meets standards and requirements of City and/or State of Georgia. The design and size of the water supply system shall be based on the maximum occupancy to be accommodated by the park. 
b.  The proposed location, design, and construction of a park's water supply and distribution system requires the written approval of the appropriate water supply authority before a building permit will be issued. 
7.  Sewage Disposal System: Recreational vehicle parks shall be served by public sewer as arranged with the applicable authority of the city of Chatsworth. 
8.  Refuse Collection System: Each recreational vehicle park shall contain adequate facilities for the collection and disposal of refuse and other such solid waste. The following requirements shall apply to a park's refuse system: 
a.  All refuse shall be stored in watertight, rodent proof containers, which shall be located not more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from any trailer space. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. 
b.  Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped to minimize spillage and container deterioration. 
c.  All refuse containing garbage shall be collected as necessary by at least twice weekly. The owner or operator of the recreational vehicle park shall provide for this service. 
d.  The owner or operator of the recreational vehicle park shall provide for proper disposal of the refuse in an approved sanitary landfill. 
9.  Recreational Area: Each recreational vehicle park shall contain a recreational area appropriately developed for both active and passive recreation. The following requirements shall apply to a park's recreational area: 
a.  At least eight percent (8%) of the gross land area of a park or eight thousand (8,000) square feet, whichever is larger, shall be reserved, developed, and maintained for recreational purposes. 
b.  No areas used for motor vehicle parking, setback, service buildings, recreational vehicle space, or other such function shall be counted as part of the required recreational area, except that recreational buildings may be included as part of this required acreage. 
c.  Recreational areas shall be so located as to be easily accessible for all park tenants, but shall not be located in areas where traffic hazards may exist. 
10.  Restroom and Bathing Facilities: 
a.  Each recreational vehicle park shall provide on-site toilet and bathing facilities for the exclusive use of park tenants. 
b.  Such toilet and bathing facilities shall consist of at least one lavatory, one water closet, and one shower stall for each sex (distinctly marked) per each ten recreational vehicle spaces available for occupancy in the park. 
c.  Toilet and bathing facilities shall be properly connected to the park's approved water and sewerage systems and conveniently located within the areas intended to be served. 
11.  Other Service Buildings: Service buildings such as management offices, storage facilities, coin-operated laundries, and indoor recreational buildings may be permitted in trailer parks subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Such buildings and their parking areas shall not occupy more than five percent (5%) of the gross land area of the park. 
b.  All service buildings shall be subordinate to the character and function of the park, and shall be located, designed, and intended to serve the exclusive service needs of the park's residents. 
c.  The Zoning Board of Appeals may review and approve or disapprove the use and type of such service buildings that may be permitted within a recreational vehicle park. 
d.  All service buildings shall conform to any lot size, parking, setback, and buffer requirements as may be provided in these regulations or as may be established as conditions of approval. 
e.  All service buildings shall conform to any applicable building codes. 
12.  Recreational Vehicle Spaces and Improvements: Each trailer space within the recreational vehicle park shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the recreational vehicle to be placed. The following minimum requirements shall apply to the development of each recreational vehicle space: 
a.  Each trailer space shall measure at least twenty feet wide by fifty feet long (20' X 50'). 
b.  Each recreational vehicle space shall be provided with a parking stand or space for the recreational vehicle and shall be composed of not less than six inches (6") of compacted gravel or other acceptable surface material. 
c.  Each space shall have an accessway constructed of compacted gravel or other acceptable material connecting an interior park street with the trailer stand. Said accessway shall be at least ten feet wide and twenty feet long (10' X 20'). Vehicular parking may be permitted in this accessway. 
d.  Each recreational vehicle space shall be provided with a weather proof electrical connection supplying 110 volts. 
e.  Each recreational vehicle shall be provided with an individual connection to the park's water system; or be convenient to a service hydrant. 
f.  Each recreational vehicle space shall be provided with ample room to assure that a typical trailer shall not be located closer than twenty feet (20') to the center line of any interior park street; and closer than thirty-five feet (35') to any park service building, park property line, or a public street right-of-way; and closer than twenty feet (20') to any other recreational vehicle. 
g.  Each recreational vehicle space shall be given a lot number and accordingly marked to be visible from the street providing access thereto. 
13.  Supervision and Maintenance: The person to whom a building permit for a recreational vehicle park is issued shall be responsible for providing adequate supervision of the park to maintain it in full compliance with these regulations, and to keep the park's facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
14.  Tenant Register: The manager of a recreational vehicle park shall keep an up-to-date register of the park's occupants and maintain such register of departed occupants for a period of one (1) year following their departure. The park's register shall be made available to any authorized person inspecting the park, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name of the occupants quartered on each designated trailer coach space; 
b.  Description, make, model, and year of all recreational vehicles and towing vehicles and state and license number of each; and 
c.  Dates of arrival and departure of occupants of each trailer coach space. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE XIII. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Section A. - Continuation of Use: 
A nonconforming use may be continued, but no nonconforming use which has been discontinued for a continuous period of twelve months shall be reestablished. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Extension of Use or Building: 
No nonconforming building or use shall be extended, nor shall its total value be enhanced, unless such extensions or alterations conform with the use and development provisions of the district in which it is located. However, such extension limitation shall not apply to maintenance of the appearance or structural condition of the nonconforming use or building. Furthermore, a nonconforming use may be extended throughout those interior parts of a building which were designed for such use prior to the advent of the nonconforming use status, even though such extension may enhance its total value. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section C. - Building Use and Enlargement: 
The uses permitted by this Ordinance may be established as a new use within any existing structure which does not conform with the development requirements of the district, provided the off-street parking requirements of that use are complied with, and provided further that if any structure or any part thereof is remodeled or rebuilt to an extent exceeding one-third of its then replacement value, exclusive of foundations, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, or if any additions or new structures are erected, the entire such building or structure must be in conformance with the development requirements of the district. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section D. - Restoration: 
Any nonconforming building or any building containing a nonconforming use, which has been damaged by fire or other causes may be reconstructed and used as before if it be done within one year of such damage. If such repair or reconstruction has not begun within one year of such damage, then any subsequent repair or reconstruction shall be in conformity with all provisions of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section E. - Existence of a Nonconforming Use: 
In case of doubt, and on a specific question raised, whether a nonconforming use existing shall be a question of fact and shall be decided by the Zoning Board of Appeals after public notice and hearing and in accordance with the rules of the Board. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section F. - Continued Construction of a Nonconforming Use: 
Any nonconforming use, nonconforming only as being in a district where such use is not permitted, if such nonconforming use was existing and established before the Zoning Ordinance became effective, shall be permitted to continue construction until such time as contemplated construction is completed, provided such construction complies with all other district regulations pertaining to yard area, etc. This shall apply only to the immediate property which was recorded in the developers name before the effective date of this Ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Mayor and Council to determine the eligibility of the owner to continue construction. This shall not include signs, billboards, or junkyards. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Section A. - Administration: 
Except as otherwise provided in these regulations the Zoning Administrator shall administer, interpret, and enforce this Ordinance. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Building, Development Permits and Site Plan Requirements: 
1.  Building Permit. A building permit, approved by the Zoning Administrator, shall be required for the erection, construction or alteration of any building, structure, sign or canopy within the City of Chatsworth. All applications for a building permit shall include a legal survey and sufficient information for the Zoning Administrator to evaluate compliance with all provisions of this Ordinance and all other City regulations. 
2.  Development Permit. A development permit, approved by the Zoning Administrator, shall be required for all non residential development on single lots, planned commercial developments, Single Family Attached Subdivisions, Planned Community Developments, Apartment Developments, and Industrial Park Developments as defined in Article II, conventional residential subdivisions, and Manufactured Home Parks, before any improvements or grading of land commences. Such development permits shall not be in lieu of building permits required for any structures within such developments. All applications for a development permit shall include a legal survey prepared by a registered surveyor and a Site Plan meeting the requirements of Paragraph 3, below. 
3.  Site Plan Requirements. All applications for development permits shall include a current survey and a Site Plan, signed by the owner in duplicate. Site plans shall be prepared by a Georgia registered surveyor, engineer or architect and include all information outlined below: 
a)  Name, location, owner and designer/engineer (if applicable) of the proposed development. 
b)  Present zoning and special exceptions (if any) for the subject site. 
c)  Location of the site in relation to surrounding properties, including the means of ingress and egress to such properties and any screening or buffers on such properties. 
d)  Date, north arrow and graphic scale (not less than one inch equals fifty (50) feet. 
e)  Location of all property lines, existing and proposed pavement driveway approaches, sidewalks, curbs and gutters. 
f)  Location and dimension of all existing and proposed utility poles and guylines, fire hydrants, meters, water and sewer lines. 
g)  The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon. 
h)  The size of the building(s) to be erected. 
i)  The location of the building(s) on the lot. 
j)  The location of existing structures on the lot, if any. 
k)  The number of dwelling units each building is designed to accommodate. 
l)  Location of all trash receptacles and related screening. 
m)  Location of all proposed signs. 
n)  The setback lines of buildings and structures on adjoining lots. 
o)  The layout of all off-street parking and loading spaces, subject to the standards of Article XI. 
p)  If applicable, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Plan and a Flood Plan in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the Chatsworth Subdivisions Regulations. 
q)  Such information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator or required by any other city ordinance. 
Upon final review of a site plan and development permit approval, the development shall be built substantially in accordance with the site plan and its specifications. If after such approval, should the owner/applicant desire to alter the plan, such changes shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. If the zoning administrator deems that there is a substantial change or deviations from that which is shown on the approved site plan, the owner/applicant of his successors shall be required to resubmit a fully revised site plan before approval is granted. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section C. - Issuance: 
All development or building permits shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator, who shall in no case grant any development or building permit for the use, construction or alteration of any land or building if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed, or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance or any other codes and laws of the City, County, or the State, except as provided herein. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section D. - Duration of Permit Validity: 
A development or building permit shall be valid for two years from its issuance providing the work described in any development or building permit has not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section E. - Appeals From Decisions of the Zoning Administrator: 
It is the intention of this Article that all questions arising in connection with the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance shall be presented to the Board of Appeals only on appeals from the decision of such official. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section F. - Maximum Number of Permits. 
The Zoning Administrator shall neither provide nor approve more than ten (10) permit applications to any one (1) applicant within a ninety (90) day period absent proof that the requested activity shall commence within the ninety (90) day period. For purposes of this section, one (1) applicant shall constitute any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, limited liability company, or other business organization, and shall include any immediate family member such person and/or any other principal within any such business organization with which such person is affiliated. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE XV. - REMEDIES AND PENALTIES 

Section A. - Remedies: 
In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator, City Attorney, or other appropriate authority of the City or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be especially damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedy, institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure, or land. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Penalties: 
Any firm, person or corporation who shall do anything prohibited by these regulations as the same exist or as they may hereafter be amended or who shall fail to do anything required by these regulations as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended is hereby declared to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by law. Each and every day that such violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE XVI. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Section A. - Creation and Membership: 
The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established. The word "Board" when used in this Ordinance shall be construed to mean the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Board shall consist of three members, appointed by the Mayor and Council for overlapping terms of three years. One member shall be a member of the Planning Commission, but the other two members of the Board shall hold no other public office or position. Any vacancy in the membership of the Board shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Organization. 
The Board shall elect one of its members as Chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. Meetings of the Board shall be held regularly each month and at such other times as the Board may decide. The meetings may be canceled by the Chairman if there are no matters to be acted upon by the Board. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the Office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be public record. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section C. - Powers and Duties. 
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Variances: The Board shall hear and decide applications for variances from the development requirements of this Ordinance, but only where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property, which at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, was a lot or plat of record; or where, by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of a piece of property, the strict application of the said development requirements of this Ordinance would result in practical difficulties to, or undue hardship upon the owner of such property. In granting a variance, the Board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this Ordinance will be served. However, the Board shall not be authorized to grant a density variance or a use variance to permit a use in a district in which the use is prohibited. 
No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that all of the following conditions exist: 
a.  That the special circumstances or conditions applying to the building or land in question are peculiar to such premises and do not apply generally to other land or buildings in the vicinity. 
b.  That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a property right and not merely to serve as convenience to the applicant. 
c.  That the condition from which relief of a variance is sought did not result from action by the applicant. 
d.  That the authorizing of the variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, increase the danger of fire, imperil the public safety, unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding areas or in any other respect impair the health, safety, comfort, morals, or general welfare of the inhabitants of the City. 
2.  Appeals. The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an effort in any order, requirement, development, or building permit, decision, determination, or refusal made by the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officials in the administration or enforcement of any provision of this Ordinance. Such appeals shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  An appeal to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved or by any governmental officer, department, board or agency affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator with respect to this Ordinance. Such appeal shall be made within ten (10) days following notification of the decision appealed from, by filing with the Zoning Administrator a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
b.  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
c.  The appellant and any public agency or private individual shall be entitled to present evidence on matters before the Board. 
d.  The Board may, inconformity with this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed for, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator. The Board may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to carry out the decisions of the Board. 
3.  Special Exceptions and Interpretations: 
a.  To hear and decide the following exceptions to the terms of this Ordinance provided that such exceptions shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards: 
1.  The extension of a district for a distance of not more than 50 feet where the boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract held in single ownership at the time of the passage of this Ordinance. 
2.  Zone district boundary interpretations as provided in Article IV, Section C. 
3.  Questions relating to allowed permitted uses or interpretation of use restrictions. 
4.  Questions relating to the existence of a non-conforming use. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section D. - Public Hearings. 
The Board shall hold a public hearing before making its decision on all requests for special exceptions, variances, and appeals on which it acts, and shall act within a reasonable time after receiving an application. 
1.  Applications. Application for a hearing and decision on requests for variances, appeals, and special exceptions shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on forms he shall provide at least 30 days prior to the meeting at which they are to be heard. Each application may require to enable to Board to make its decision. Each application for a variance shall include a plat drawn to scale showing the following information: 
a.  All property lines, with dimensions. 
b.  Location of buildings and other structures, creeks, and easements referenced to the property line of the tract. 
c.  North arrow, land district and land lot marker. 
d.  Location of setback lines or other dimensional requirements from which the variance is sought. 
2.  Notice of Hearing. At least 15 days notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent to the applicant and the owners of all properties abutting or across the street from the property with which the hearing is concerned. In addition, the Zoning Administrator shall post, in a conspicuous place on the property a sign or signs which shall contain information as to the date, time, and purpose of hearing before the Board, at least 15 days before the hearing. However, acts of vandalism or natural occurrences which limit the effectiveness of such public notice as posting the property shall not void the proceedings of actions taken under this Article. 
3.  Hearing Procedure. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations for the conduct of the public hearings as are consistent with State law and are appropriate to its responsibilities, which shall be published and available to the public, including rules on the presentation of evidence. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section E. - Assistance by Zoning Administrator. 
The Zoning Administrator shall provide such technical and clerical assistance as the Board may require, and shall maintain permanent and complete records of the activities of the Board. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section F. - Fees. 
To defray a portion of the costs occasioned thereby, no appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator and no application for an exception, variance or other matter, shall be entered on the docket of, heard by, or ruled by the Board until there has been paid to the Chatsworth City Clerk an application fee in an amount established by the Mayor and Council. No fee shall be required for an interpretation of this Ordinance when there is discrepancy between the street layout on the ground and the street layout as shown on the zone district map. Neither the City nor any officer, agent or employee of the City acting in his official capacity, nor any agency of the County shall be required to pay a fee under this Article. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section G. - By-Laws. 
The Board shall adopt such rules for its own internal administration and procedures, including but not limited to, conflict of interest rules, to insure that no member is entitled to rule on or adjudicate a matter in which he has an interest directly or indirectly. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section H. - Appeals From Action of the Board. 
Any party aggrieved by a final judgment or decision of the Board may within thirty (30) days thereafter appeal by Writ of Certiorari directly to the Murray County Superior Court. There shall be no intermediate appeal to the Chatsworth Mayor and Council or any other administrative body. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE XVII. - AMENDMENTS 

Section A. - Amendments. 
The Mayor and Council of Chatsworth may from time to time amend the text of this Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map that is part of the Ordinance, according to the procedures separately adopted as "Zoning Procedures and Standards Ordinance of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia," which is included herein in Appendix A-C. Appendix A-C fully describes the applicable final zoning decisions, the notice requirements to the public, the procedures for conducting public hearings, the standards use to review any proposed zoning decision, and the procedures to obtain a final zoning decision. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Application Process. 
Any amendment to the text of this Ordinance or the Zoning Map shall be filed upon an application form. Such form shall include a listing of any and all requirements to be included as part of the application for consideration of any matter requiring a final zoning decision. Failure to comply with the requirements of the application shall constitute an incomplete application which will not be processed for conclusion of the requested final zoning decision. An application fee, which is established by the Mayor and Council and may be adjusted from time to time, may apply. Failure of the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector or their appointee(s) to collect a fee from the Mayor and Council of Chatsworth or the Chatsworth Planning Commission (or equivalent), when they are initiating a proposed zoning amendment, shall not void the validity of the application. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Section A. - Validity. 
Should any article, clause or provision of the Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part hereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, each article, clause and provision hereof being declared severable. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section B. - Effective Date. 
This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its adoption by the Mayor and Council. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Section C. - Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances and Validity of Prior Approvals and Actions. 
This is the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia, and all other conflicting ordinances or resolutions are hereby repealed; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of operation or conditions of site development accompanying those zoning approvals or use permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions; however, modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished as provided by this Ordinance. 
All variances and exceptions heretofore granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall remain in full force and effect, and all terms, conditions, and obligations imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall remain in effect and be binding. Prior ordinances shall remain in effect insofar as required for the initiation of any proceedings against such violations and for the prosecution of any violations heretofore commenced. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
APPENDIX A-A. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE 
ARTICLE 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

SECTION A. - AUTHORIZATION 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the City of Chatsworth, GEORGIA, does ordain as follows: 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 1, § A ) 
SECTION B. - FINDINGS OF FACT 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Chatsworth, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 1, § B ) 
SECTION C. - STATEMENT OF PURPOSE 
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
(4)  prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 1, § C ) 
SECTION D. - OBJECTIVES 
The objectives of this ordinance are: 
(1)  to protect human life and health; 
(2)  to minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  to minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  to minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  to minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
(7)  to insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 1, § D ) 
ARTICLE 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

SECTION A. - LANDS TO WHICH THIS ORDINANCE APPLIES 
This ordinance shall apply to all Areas of Special Flood Hazard within the jurisdiction of Chatsworth, Georgia. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 2, § A ) 
SECTION B. - BASIS FOR AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD 
The Areas of Special Flood Hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated Sept 29, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this ordinance. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated Sept 29, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for ( * Murray County * ) are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of Special Flood Hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The Repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Chatsworth City Hall, 400 North Third Ave. Chatsworth, Ga. 30705. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 2, § B ) 
SECTION C. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT 
A Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance PRIOR to the commencement of any Development activities. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 2, § C ) 
SECTION D. - COMPLIANCE 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 2, § D ) 
SECTION E. - ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS 
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 2, § E ) 
SECTION F. - INTERPRETATION 
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 2, § F ) 
SECTION G. - WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY 
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of City of Chatsworth or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 2, § G ) 
SECTION H. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Chatsworth from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 2, § H ) 
ARTICLE 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

SECTION A. - DESIGNATION OF ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATOR 
The Flood Plain Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 3, § A ) 
SECTION B. - PERMIT PROCEDURES 
Application for a Development Permit shall be made to the Flood Plain Administrator on forms furnished by the community PRIOR to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application Stage - 
(a)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
(c)  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of Article 4, Section B (2); 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction Stage - 
For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the Administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The Floodplain Administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 3, § B ) 
SECTION C. - DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR 
Duties of the Flood plain Administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When Base Flood Elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Article 2 Section B, then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other sources in order to administer the provisions of Article 4. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with Article 3, Section B (2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with Article 3, Section B (2). 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with Article 3(B)(1)(c) and Article 4(B)(2) or (D)(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the Letter of Map Revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this Ordinance. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the Floodplain Administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 3, § C ) 
ARTICLE 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

SECTION A. - GENERAL STANDARDS 
In ALL Areas of Special Flood Hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated Buildings - All New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include ANY fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(a)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
(b)  So as not to violate the "Lowest Floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
(c)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 4, § A ) 
SECTION B. - SPECIFIC STANDARDS 
In ALL Areas of Special Flood Hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements - Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Article 4, Section A (4), "Elevated Buildings". 
(a)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-Residential Construction - New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in Article 3, Section C. (6). 
(3)  Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles - Where base flood elevation data are available: 
(a)  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(b)  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(c)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. Article 4(A)(6) above) 
(d)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(i)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
(ii)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
(iii)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of Article 4, Section B (3)(a)(c), above. 
(4)  Floodway - Located within Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Article 2, Section B, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
(b)  ONLY if Article 4 (B)(4)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article 4. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 4, § B ) 
SECTION C. - BUILDING STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS AND/OR FLOODWAY (A-ZONES) 
Located within the Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Article 2, Section B, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), OR where base flood data have been provided but a Floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Article 2(B), then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article 4. ONLY if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2&3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a Limited Detail Study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Article 4, Section A (4) "Elevated Buildings". 
(a)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The Floodplain Administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 4, § C ) 
SECTION D. - STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD (ZONES AE) WITH ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS WITHOUT DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS 
Located within the Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Article 2, Section B, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
1.  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
2.  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with Article 4, Section B. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 4, § D ) 
SECTION E. - STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO ZONES) 
Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Article 2, Section B, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Article 4, Section A (4), "Elevated Buildings". 
The Floodplain Administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in Articles 3(B)(1)(c) and (3)(B)(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 4, § E ) 
SECTION F. - STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 4, § F ) 
SECTION G. - STANDARDS FOR CRITICAL FACILITIES 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 4, § G ) 
ARTICLE 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 
(A)  The Construction Code Board of Appeals as established by the City of Chatsworth shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this ordinance. 
(B)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 
(C)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Construction Code Board of Appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Murray County, as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(D)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Historic Structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(E)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this Article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(F)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if ANY increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(G)  In reviewing such requests, the Construction Code Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this ordinance. 
(H)  Conditions for Variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued ONLY when there is: 
(i)  a finding of good and sufficient cause, 
(ii)  a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; 
(iii)  a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this Ordinance are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an Historic Structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(I)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the Construction Code Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 5 ) 
ARTICLE 6. - DEFINITIONS 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
"Accessory Structure" means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
"Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "New Construction". 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
"Area of special flood hazard" is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in Article 2, Section B. 
"Base flood," means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
"Base Flood Elevation (BFE)" The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
"Basement" means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
"Building," means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
"Critical Facility" means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(a)  structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(b)  hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(c)  emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(d)  generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
"Elevated building" means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
* "Existing construction" means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 2, 1987 [The effective date of the initial FIRM for that community]. 
* "Existing Manufactured Home Park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 04, 1987. [The effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
"Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  the overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
"Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood Insurance Study" the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
"Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
"Flood proofing," means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
"Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
"Historic Structure" means any structure that is; 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
"Manufactured home" means a building, transportable in one or more sections built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Mean Sea Level" means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
"National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
* "New construction" means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after July 2, 1987 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 04, 1987 [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
* "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after May 04, 1987. [The effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
"North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)" has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle, which is: 
a.  built on a single chassis; 
b.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
d.  designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
"Start of construction" means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
"Subdivision" the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a 5-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
"Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
"Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 6 ) 
ARTICLE 7. - SEVERABILITY 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this Ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. of 9-13-10(1), art. 7 ) 
APPENDIX A-B. - RECORD OF AMENDMENTS TO TEXT 

 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
APPENDIX A-C. - ZONING PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS 
RESOLUTION REPEALING IN ITS ENTIRETY THE ZONING PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF CHATSWORTH, GEORGIA, DATED MAY 7, 2001 , AND ADOPTING HEREWITH AN ORDINANCE TO BE KNOWN AS, 
ZONING PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS ORDINANCE CITY OF CHATSWORTH, GEORGIA 
WHEREAS, The City of Chatsworth, Georgia last adopted The Zoning Procedures and Standards Ordinance of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia , dated May 7, 2001, and 
WHEREAS, The Mayor and Council of the City of Chatsworth deems that, for the protection of the health, welfare, safety, and morals of the citizens of the City of Chatsworth, it shall be necessary to set forth certain standards and procedures for use by it when it shall exercise its zoning authority so as to insure that due process is afforded to the general public as required by the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Georgia; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, that The Zoning Procedures and Standards Ordinance of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia, dated May 7, 2001 shall herewith be repealed in its entirety and replaced herewith by the adoption of a new ordinance, to be known as Zoning Procedures and Standards Ordinance, City of Chatsworth, Georgia, as follows: 
ZONING PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS ORDINANCE 
CITY OF CHATSWORTH, GEORGIA 
An Ordinance of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia establishing minimum procedural regulations, notice of public hearings, conduct of public hearings, standards, and factors, governing the zoning power of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia, as of the effective date hereof; and for other purposes. 

1.0 - Preamble and Enactment Clause. 
For the purpose of insuring that due process is afforded to the general public when the City of Chatsworth, Georgia regulates the use of property through the exercise of zoning power, and pursuant to the authority and mandates of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV and Chapter Sixty-Six of Title Thirty-Six of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (OCGA §36-66-1 et seq.), the City of Chatsworth, Georgia does hereby adopt, order, and enact into law this Ordinance. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
2.0 - Definitions. 
When used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the definitions and meaning hereafter set forth, alphabetically: 
Conditional Use (synonymous with Special Use). A use approved within a zone district, generally considered compatible with the other uses allowed in the district, only after due consideration of objective criteria as applicable to the proposed conditional use. 
Planning Commission. The Chatsworth Planning Commission or any other agency hereafter designated by the governing authority of the City of Chatsworth which is authorized to investigate any proposal for a zoning decision properly coming before it, to conduct any public hearings necessary for the exercise of any zoning power, and to provide an advisory recommendation to the governing authority concerning the proposed zoning decision. 
Territorial Boundaries. The incorporated areas of the City of Chatsworth, State of Georgia. 
Zoning. The power of the City of Chatsworth to provide within its territorial boundaries for the zoning and districting of property for various uses and the prohibition of other or different uses within such zones or districts and for the regulation of development and the improvement of real estate within such zones or districts in accordance with the uses of property for which said zones or districts were established. 
Zoning Decision. The final legislative action by the City of Chatsworth which results in: 
a)  the adoption of a zoning ordinance; 
b)  the adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which changes the text of the zoning ordinance; 
c)  the adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which rezones property from one zoning classification to another; 
d)  the adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which zones property that is annexed to the territorial boundaries of the City of Chatsworth, State of Georgia; or 
e)  the approval of a conditional use (special use) of property. 
Zoning Ordinance. An Ordinance for the City of Chatsworth establishing procedures and zones or districts within its territorial boundaries, which regulate the uses and development standards of property within such zones or districts. The term also includes the Zoning Map (as hereinafter amended) adopted in conjunction with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Chatsworth, which shows the zones and districts and zoning classification of property herein. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
3.0 - Amendment. 
This Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance of Chatsworth, Georgia may be amended from time to time subject to the following conditions: 
3.1  No Amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been initiated by either the Mayor and Council of the City of Chatsworth, the Planning Commission, the property owner(s) or an individual who has the owner(s)' power of attorney authorizing such person to act, or a request signed by sixty (60) percent of the property owners who hold not less than sixty (60) percent of the affected land; or valid annexation procedures as defined by OCGA §36-36-1 et seq. 
3.2  All proposed amendments or conditional use reviews shall be initiated by an application filed with the Zoning Administrator of Chatsworth upon forms provided by the City of Chatsworth. A standard fee to be set from time to time by the governing authority shall be paid with the application. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
4.0 - Public Notice. 
Notice of the public hearing upon a proposed amendment to this Ordinance or for a proposed zoning decision shall be given as hereinafter set forth: 
4.1  At least fifteen (15), but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date set for the public hearing, a written notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Chatsworth setting forth the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
4.2  In addition to the requirements of subsection 4.1, if the proposed amendment calls for a zoning decision for the 1) rezoning of property; 2) annexation to the territorial boundaries of the City of Chatsworth; or 3) approval of a conditional (special) use permit, and the proposed amendment is initiated by a person other than the Mayor and Council of the City of Chatsworth: 
4.2-1  The published notice shall include the location of the property and state the present zoning classification of the property (if applicable) and the proposed zoning classification of the property (if applicable); and the proposed use requiring a special use (conditional use) review (if applicable); and 
4.2-2  A sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property that is the subject of the zoning decision setting forth the time, place and purpose of the public hearing, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property (if applicable), and (if applicable) the proposed use requiring a special use (conditional use) review. Acts of vandalism or natural occurrences limiting the effectiveness of notice by a sign posted on the property shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. 
4.2-3  The City of Chatsworth shall notify by regular mail all abutting property owners, including those that would abut if not separated by the width of a public street or railroad right-of-way, as to the date, time, and purpose of the proposed zoning decision, at least seven (7) working days prior to the date of the public hearing. Notification shall be sent to those property owners shown to be the owners by the Murray County Tax Records upon the date of the filing of the application for zoning decision. Failure of an abutting owner to receive timely notice shall not void the proceedings. 
4.3  If the zoning decision is for property to be annexed into the City of Chatsworth, then: 
4.3-1  The City of Chatsworth shall complete the procedures required by this chapter for such zoning, except for the final vote of the municipal governing authority, prior to adoption of the annexation ordinance or resolution or the effective date of any local Act but no sooner than the date the notice of the proposed annexation is provided to the governing authority of the county as required pursuant to OCGA §36-36-6; 
4.3-2  In addition to the requirements of Section 4.3-1, the City of Chatsworth shall provide notice of the hearing as required under the provisions of Section 4.0, herein; and 
4.3-3  The hearing required by Section 4.0 of this Ordinance shall be conducted prior to the annexation of the subject property into the City of Chatsworth; 
4.3-4  The zoning classification approved by the City of Chatsworth following the hearing required herein, shall become effective on the later of a) the date the zoning is approved by the City of Chatsworth; or b) the date that the annexation becomes effective pursuant to OCGA §36-36-2. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
5.0 - Public Hearing. 
A public hearing upon the adoption of or for any proposed amendment to this Ordinance or to the Zoning Ordinance of Chatsworth shall be held before the Planning Commission on behalf of the Mayor and Council of Chatsworth. A public hearing shall be conducted at the time and place specified by the Planning Commission and as set forth in the public notice described in Section 4.0 of this Article. The purpose of such hearing shall be to present to the public the proposed zoning amendment, and to receive comments thereon from the public. The Planning Commission shall consider the proceedings and comments of such hearing in making any zoning recommendation on the proposed zoning amendment. The Planning Commission shall prescribe the rules of order for its deliberations on matters with which it is charged under this Ordinance, and said rules of order shall be consistent with the general requirements and purposes set forth in this Ordinance and other laws of the State of Georgia concerning conduct of proceedings of public commissions, bodies, and governmental units. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
6.0 - Conduct of Hearings. 
The following policies and procedures shall govern the conduct of public hearings under this Ordinance: 
6.1  The Chairman of the Planning Commission or his/her delegate on the Commission shall open any hearing with an explanation of the purpose of the hearing and a description of the general rules for the conduct of the hearing. The Chairman or his/her delegate may describe the authority and role of the Planning Commission in any zoning decision. An individual requesting to be heard on a matter germane to the purpose of the hearing must be recognized by the Chairman or his/her delegate before addressing the Planning Commission. The Chairman or his/her delegate shall chair the hearing and shall determine germaneness of any proposed comment or presentation to the Planning Commission in the hearing and is authorized to rule any individual or a portion of any presentation out of order if not germane to the published purpose of the hearing. Any person requesting to address the Planning Commission upon being recognized by the Chairman or his/her delegate shall state his name and residence address before proceeding with any comment, remarks, or presentation. Any person addressing the Planning Commission shall respond to questions of the Chairman or any member of the Commission. The Chairman or his/her delegate may pre-determine the length of any hearing allotting equal time to proponents and opponents of any proposed zoning amendment to the extent that there are both proponents and opponents who desire to be heard. The Chairman or his/her delegate shall only be required to offer equal time to both proponents and opponents of any proposed zoning amendment and the fact that equal time is not in fact utilized by either position shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. The Chairman, however, shall allow a minimum time period to be no less than ten (10) minutes per side for the presentation of data, evidence, and opinion. 
6.2  The Chairman or his/her delegate shall determine whether any application for zoning amendment is properly filed and the type of zoning decision for which the proposed amendment calls. The Chairman or his/her delegate shall confirm the giving of proper public notice of the hearing on the proposed zoning amendment in accordance with this Ordinance. 
6.3  The Chairman or his/her delegate shall allow the person initiating the proposed zoning amendment or his/her/its designee to present a description of the proposed zoning amendment and the reason(s) for initiating the proposed zoning amendment. A failure of the applicant or his/her representative holding power-of-attorney to be present for the hearing shall result in automatic termination of any proceedings on the amendment and an adverse recommendation on the proposed amendment shall be forwarded to the Mayor and Council of the City of Chatsworth, unless the applicant can show just cause by reason of health emergency, in which case the application may be re-filed by the applicant for consideration at a later date. 
6.4  The Chairman or his/her delegate shall enter into the record after the presentation of the applicant or his/her/its representative any written comment, petition, or similar written statement received by the Planning Commission prior to the hearing and the same shall be considered by the Mayor and Council with comments and proceedings of the hearing in making any zoning decision concerning the proposed zoning amendment. 
6.5  The Chairman or his/her delegate shall give persons opposed to the proposed amendment the opportunity to address the Planning Commission. 
6.6  The Chairman or his/her delegate may alternate the presentations of persons speaking in favor of and opposed to the proposed zoning amendment beginning with the presentation of the applicant or his/her/its representative, or the Chairman or his/her delegate may divide such presentations into blocks of time beginning with proponents of the proposed zoning amendment, and thereafter moving to the presentations of opponents of the proposed zoning amendment. Further, the Chairman or his/her delegate may direct that proponents and opponents designate one or more spokesperson(s) for representations of favorable and opposing views of the proposed zoning amendment. The Chairman or his/her delegate may poll the public assemblage at the hearing concerning their concurrence in the remarks of any speaker. 
6.7  Any remark amounting to attack on the character or personal integrity of another individual, or comment not factually supportable, or comment in the form of an emotional outburst, shall be non-germane to the purpose of any hearing and may be ruled out of order. 
6.8  Upon conclusion of the presentation of persons opposing the proposed zoning amendment, the Chairman or his/her delegate shall afford the person initiating the petition an allotted time to address the Planning Commission in rebuttal of any issue(s) raised by persons addressing the Planning Commission in opposition to the proposed zoning amendment. The Chairman or his/her delegate may rule out of order the raising of any new issue(s) in rebuttal unless he deems the raising of such new issues useful to the purposes of the hearing, in which case those persons present and opposing the proposed zoning amendment shall be allocated an equal amount of time through a spokesperson or otherwise to address such new issue(s). 
6.9  When proponents and opponents of the proposed zoning amendment have been heard in accordance with the foregoing procedures, the Chairman or his/her delegate shall declare the public hearing closed. No further public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment shall be required prior to the final zoning decision. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
7.0 - Zoning Standards. 
Exercise of the zoning power of the City of Chatsworth shall constitute an effort to balance the interest of the community in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right of property owners to the unrestricted use of their property. The following standards are determined to be relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right to unrestricted use of the property. 
7.1  Standards: 
7.1-1  Whether the proposed amendment would allow a use that is generally suitable for the site compared to other possible uses and the uses and zoning of adjacent and nearby properties; 
7.1-2  Whether the proposed amendment would adversely affect the economic value or the uses of adjacent and nearby properties; 
7.1-3  Whether the property to be affected by the proposed amendment can be used as currently zoned; 
7.1-4  Whether the proposed amendment, if adopted, would result in a use which would or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, schools, sewers, water resources, police and fire protection, or other utilities; 
7.1-5  Whether the subject property under the proposed amendment is in conformity with the policies and intent of the adopted Murray County, Chatsworth, and Eton Joint Comprehensive Plan, 2005-2025 or equivalent, as amended. 
7.1-6  Whether there are other conditions or transitional patterns affecting the use and development of the subject property, if applicable, which give grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment. 
7.2  The City of Chatsworth shall consider any proposed zoning amendment properly initiated in light of the standards set forth in Section 7.1. In evaluating the standards set forth in Section 7.1 it shall be the policy of the City of Chatsworth to exercise its zoning power in conformity with the policy and intent of the Joint Comprehensive Plan for Murray County and the City of Chatsworth insofar as that plan is current in its application to the specific property that is the subject of the proposed amendment. It is further the policy of the City of Chatsworth to exercise the zoning power for purposes of assuring the compatibility of the use of adjacent and nearby properties and the preservation of the economic value of adjacent and nearby properties while enabling a reasonable use of all property. 
7.3  Conditional Use (Special Use). The granting of a conditional use does not constitute a permanent change in zoning or use. The conditional use may be forfeited if it does not meet the review criteria. To ameliorate the impact of a conditional use upon surrounding property, no conditional use may be granted without special provisions for conditions, criteria, standards, and/or requirements as to the particular use. A permit for a conditional use (special use) shall be approved or denied, provided that due consideration is given to the following objective criteria as applicable to the specific use proposed at the specific site requested: 
7.3-1  Whether the proposed use impacts negatively or positively the anticipated volume of traffic flow or pedestrian safety in the vicinity; 
7.3-2  Whether the hours and manner of operation of the conditional use (special use) have no adverse effects on other properties/uses in the vicinity; 
7.3-3  Whether refuse areas, parking, or loading/service areas on the property will be located or screened to protect other properties in the vicinity from noise, light, glare, or odors; 
7.3-4  Whether the height, size, or location on the building or other structures on the property are compatible with the height, size, or location of buildings or other structures on neighboring properties; 
7.3-5  Whether the size of the lot is sufficient for the proposed use, accounting for growth opportunity that will not infringe upon the requirements of the zoning ordinance nor infringe upon the relationship to surrounding land; 
7.3-6  And satisfying the foregoing criteria, whether the benefits of and need for the proposed use are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damages to the neighboring properties. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
8.0 - Official Action. 
Consideration of any proposed zoning decision properly initiated and subsequent to the public hearing shall be as follows: 
8.1  The planning staff of the City of Chatsworth shall make a report of its investigation of the proposed zoning decision to the Planning Commission commenting on the advisability of adopting any proposed zoning amendment. The report of the planning staff shall be in writing addressed to the Planning Commission. Further, the planning staff's report shall provide an evaluation of each of the standards set forth in Section 7.1 (or Section 7.3, as applicable) and describe how the planning staff's advice is considered to be consistent with the exercise of zoning power set forth in Section 7.2. A summary of the proceedings of the public hearing shall accompany the Planning Commission's written recommendation to the Mayor and Council. 
8.2  Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning Commission may approve, disapprove, or table the proposed zoning decision. The Planning Commission may recommend and/or the Mayor and Council may amend an application prior to acting thereon: 1) to reduce the size of the area affected by the amendment; 2) to change the requested zone district to a less intensive or lower density district than the requested zone; 3) to specify conditions that are deemed relevant to the public interest regarding site plans, ingress/egress, buffers, and infrastructure related to drainage, utilities, traffic, and other matters. The foregoing powers are not in limitation of any other zoning powers accorded the City of Chatsworth under the laws of the State of Georgia. If the Planning Commission fails to recommend action on the zoning decision in writing within forty-five (45) days of the close of the public hearing and the applicant does not agree in writing to an extension of the time limit, the applicant may take the proposed zoning decision to the Mayor and Council without a Planning Commission recommendation. 
If consideration of the proposed zoning amendment is tabled, it shall be reconsidered by the Planning Commission not later than its next regular monthly meeting. In any event, the Commission shall have forty-five (45) days from the date of the close of the public hearing before the Planning Commission to review and submit its written recommendation to the Mayor and Council of Chatsworth. Once an application for a zoning decision has been filed and the Planning Commission holds the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation on the proposed zoning decision and the Mayor and Council shall take a final action, regardless of whether or not the applicant withdraws his/her/its application for the proposed amendment. 
8.3  The authority of the Planning Commission and planning staff in any zoning decision shall be advisory only. Any zoning decision shall be made by the Mayor and Council of the City of Chatsworth, who shall either approve or disapprove the proposed zoning amendment. Any approval of a proposed zoning decision may be subject to any and all lawful conditions determined by the governing authority that are attached to the ordinance approving the proposed zoning decision. 
8.4  If the Mayor and Council of the City of Chatsworth shall take official action defeating a proposed zoning amendment which seeks to rezone property or approve a conditional (special) use, the same property may not be considered again for rezoning or conditional (special) use until the expiration of twelve (12) months from the date of the official action of the Mayor and Council. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
9.0 - Distribution. 
Copies of this Zoning Procedures and Standards Ordinance, as amended, shall be printed and copies thereof made available for distribution to the general public in the offices of the City Clerk or Zoning Administrator of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia. Distribution to the general public shall be upon request of a member of the general public who shall be entitled to one copy. The Clerk of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia, is authorized to print copies of this Ordinance and any amendments thereto from time to time for purposes of meeting distribution requirements of The Zoning Procedures Law (Title 36, Chapter 66 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated). 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
10.0 - Legal Status. 
10.1  Separability. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
10.2  Repeal of Conflicting Resolutions and Ordinances. All resolutions and Ordinances and parts of resolutions and Ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed. 
10.3  Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be enforced from and after its adoption, the public welfare of the City of Chatsworth requiring it. 
( Ord. of 10-09 ) 
Appendix B - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 3, 2008, amended App. B in its entirety, in effect deleting App. B and enacting a new App. B to read as set out herein. Former App. B pertained to similar subject matter and derived from a pamphlet dater 1984. Words and figures in brackets have been inserted by the editor. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of punctuation, capitalization, headings, catchlines, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. 

ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 1.1. - Short title. 
All regulations contained in this ordinance shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 1.2. - Authority and purpose. 
(a)  Authority. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the City of Chatsworth, Murray County under Article IX, Section II of the Georgia Constitution, as amended, the Georgia Coordinated Planning Act of 1989, as amended, home rule powers, and state administrative rules for the adoption and implementation of Comprehensive Plans. 
(b)  Purpose. This ordinance is enacted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development and to further the orderly development of land; 
(2)  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land developments; 
(3)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian in land developments; 
(4)  To assure the provision of needed public open space and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; 
(5)  To prevent the pollution of air, land, streams, and ponds, as well as encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city, and preserve the topography and beauty of the community and the value of land; 
(6)  To assist the general public, who generally lacks the specialized knowledge needed to evaluate subdivision improvements and design; and, 
(7)  To promote the goals, objectives, policies, and the future land use map of the adopted comprehensive plan, entitled, Murray County, Chatsworth, Eton Joint Comprehensive Plan: 2005-2025, as amended. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 1.3. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The provisions in this ordinance shall be applicable in the incorporated areas of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia. 
(b)  When necessary to further its purposes, this ordinance may be amended by the mayor and council of Chatsworth. Amendment of this ordinance shall follow the same procedure as followed by the city in amending or adopting other city ordinances. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 1.4. - Use of plat. 
After the adoption of this ordinance, the transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to or exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the building inspector and recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Murray County is prohibited; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. Valid pre-existing lots, described by deed or plat, or both, and being lots of record, and created prior to the adoption of this ordinance, shall not be affected by this ordinance unless said lot or lots are modified or further subdivided. [See the Chatsworth Zoning Ordinance Article III, General Provisions, Section L, Lots of Record for additional guidance.] 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 1.5. - Platting authority. 
By authority of the mayor and council of the City of Chatsworth, the Chatsworth Planning Commission does hereby exercise the power and authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, disapprove preliminary plats for major subdivisions of land, and to grant variances from the requirements of this ordinance. The building inspector shall exercise the power and authority to review and approve final plats for both major and minor subdivisions as set forth in this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 1.6. - Fees. 
Permit, application, and/or fees shall be adopted by resolution in a public meeting of the city council, from time to time by the mayor and council of Chatsworth. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 1.7. - Enforcement and penalties. 
The building inspector shall be the general administrative and enforcement officer of this ordinance. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b), any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 60 days, or both. 
Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any land or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this ordinance shall be placed, or shall exist, and any person who may have assisted the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. The municipal court of the City of Chatsworth shall have jurisdiction on any offense charged under this paragraph unless removed to the Murray County Superior Court for a jury trial pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-61. 
In any case in which any lot or parcel is, or is proposed to be, used in violation of this adopted ordinance or any amendment thereto, the mayor and council or any owner of adjacent real estate may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement or any appropriate action or actions, or proceeding to prevent, to enjoin or abate such unlawful use. 
Any subdivision of property in direct and/or deliberate violation of this ordinance could also result in penalties as follows: 
(a)  A denial or withholding of water or sewer service in cooperation with the Chatsworth Water Works Commission, to any part or portion of the property in violation; and 
(b)  A denial or a withholding of building permits from the City of Chatsworth to any part or portion of the property in violation. 
(c)  Issuance of stop work orders. The building inspector or his/her agent is authorized to issue stop work orders in any instance where a violation of this ordinance is found. The procedure for issuance stop work orders shall be the same as the notification procedure for violations as follows: 
1)  Violations. In cases where a violation of this ordinance has been determined by the Chatsworth Building Inspector, he/she shall notify the owner of the property on which such violation is found in person or by certified mail sent to the address of the property owner as it appears in tax information. The notice of violation shall clearly state the nature of the violation, including specific provision(s) of this article which have not been complied with, and the date upon which said violation(s) will be remedied. Said date will be determined by the building inspector based on the nature and extent of the violation, but in no case shall exceed 30 days from the date the certified mail was received. In cases where the notice of violation is hand-delivered, the date upon which said violation(s) is remedied shall not exceed 30 days from the date of delivery. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 1.8. - Interpretation, conflict and severability. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements. More stringent provisions may be required if it is demonstrated that different standards are necessary to promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this ordinance or of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(c)  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or void, the validity of the remaining portions of these regulations shall not be affected thereby. The intent of the mayor and council in adopting this ordinance is that no portion hereof or provision of the regulations contained herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the unconstitutionality or invalidity of any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase of provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2.1. - Purpose. 
For the purpose of this ordinance and in order to carry out the provisions and intentions as set forth herein, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "person" includes a firm, partnership, or corporation as well as an individual; the term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied". Words, terms and phrases not specifically defined herein, shall have their common meaning (in the context in which they are used) in accordance with the most recent edition of Webster's New World Dictionary. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 2.2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby defined as follows and shall be interpreted as such throughout this ordinance. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them as provided hereinabove: 
Access. The right to cross between public and private property, thereby permitting pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property. 
Block. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or lake. (See Figure 2-1.) 

Bond. A legal instrument with a clause which establishes a sum of money fixed as a penalty, binding the parties to pay the same; conditioned, however, that the payment of penalty may be avoided by the performance of certain acts. 
Building. Any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building inspector. Appointee of the mayor and council of Chatsworth responsible for executing the administrative tasks identified in this ordinance, and for the functions herein enumerated. 
Common elements. Any portion of a development, which is held in common by owners of the development. 
Comprehensive plan. Any plan adopted by the mayor and city council of the City of Chatsworth, or portion of such plan or plans. This definition shall be construed liberally to include the major thoroughfare plan, master parks and recreation plan, or any other study, document, or written recommendation pertaining to subjects normally within the subject matter of a comprehensive plan (if formally adopted by the local governing body) as provided by the Georgia Coordinated Planning Act of 1989. 
Conservation areas, primary. Property qualifying as a conservation use property is located outside of building envelopes and lots established for building purposes and includes: steep mountain slopes containing at least 5,000 square feet of contiguous area with 25 percent slope or greater; 2) land within the 100-year floodplain; 3) wetlands; 4) water bodies larger than 5,000 square feet; 5) riparian zones at least 75 feet wide along both sides of all perennial and intermittent streams; and 6) populations of endangered or threatened species or habitat for such species. 
Conservation areas, secondary. Prime farmland, natural meadows, mature woodlands, farm fields, localized aquifer recharge areas, and land containing scenic views and sites, critical wildlife habitat, and sites of historic, cultural, or archaeological significance, located outside of building envelopes and lots established for building purposes. 
Conservation easement. A legally enforceable agreement between a property owner and the holder of the easement, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, and recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of Murray County. A conservation easement restricts the existing and future use of the defined tract or lot to conservation use, agriculture, passive recreation, or other use approved by the mayor and council of Chatsworth and prohibits further subdivision or development. Such agreement also provides for the maintenance of open spaces and any improvements on the tract or lot. Such agreement cannot be altered except with the expressed written permission of the easement holder and any other co-signers. A conservation easement may also establish other provisions and contain standards that safeguard the tracts or lot's special resources from negative changes. 
Conservation design subdivision. A subdivision where open space is the central organizing element of the subdivision design, with all primary and all or some of the secondary conservation areas within the boundaries of the subdivision identified and permanently protected. 
Crosswalk. A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily for pedestrian use, and designed to provide access to adjacent roads and lots. 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Design standards. The design specifications for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating, among other things, the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such items as right-of-way, blocks, easements, and lots. 
Easements. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by an individual, company or agency for a specified purpose. (See Figure 2-2.) 

Erosion and sedimentation control plan. A plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. Such a plan is completed pursuant to the City of Chatsworth Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
Escrow. A legal agreement between the developer and the City of Chatsworth or the appropriate agency or utility in lieu of actual performance and intended to assure performance. 
Filling. The placement of any soil or other solid material either organic or inorganic on a natural ground surface or an excavation. 
Finished grade. The final grade or elevation of the ground surface forming the proposed design. 
Flood. An overflow of lands not normally covered by water that results in significant adverse effects in the vicinity. 
Governing authority. The Mayor and Council of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia. 
Grading. Altering surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions, and/or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, and stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Health inspector. The legally designated county health sanitarian of the Murray County Health Department, or his authorized representative. 
Homeowner's association. An organization formed for the maintenance and operation of the common areas of a development, where membership in the association is automatic with the purchase of a dwelling unit or lot within the development, with the ability to legally assess each owner of a dwelling unit or lot and which has authority to place a lien against all dwelling units and lots within the development. 
Individual sewage disposal system. A septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device, other than a public treatment system, approved by the Murray County Public Health Department. 
Issuing authority. The governing authority of the City of Chatsworth which has been certified by the director or the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended. 
Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. [Notice: Call before you dig. Georgia Underground Protection Center (GA 1-Call)]. 

Lot. A developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
Lot area. The total surface area of land included within lot lines. 
Lot, corner. A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured within the lot boundaries. On corner lots, lot depth is measured from the street frontage with the shortest dimension. 
Lot, double frontage. A lot other than a corner lot abutting two streets. 
Lot, flag. A tract or lot meeting minimum street frontage requirements, but shaped in such a manner that the portion of the lot closest to the street (the "pole") can only be used for access purposes and not as a functional yard or buildable area. The buildable portion (the "flag") of the lot is located some distance from the street R/W, behind other conventional lots that already front the street. 
Lot frontage. That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street. 
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot lines. The boundary dividing a given lot from the street, an alley, or adjacent lots. 
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the Murray County Superior Court Clerk's Office, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the Murray County Superior Court Clerk's Office prior to the date of passage of this ordinance. 
Lot, through. A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
Lot width. The distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at the established front building line. 
Lot width, curvilinear frontage. For a lot having the majority of its frontage on a circular turnaround or curved street, the lot width shall be the distance between the side lines of the lot, measured as if tangent at the midpoint of the arc of the front property line and parallel to the chord of the arc, where the minimum required distance is obtained. The lot width line is synonymous with the front building line in this example. 
Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling takes place. 
Owner(s) of record. The owner(s) of property as specified on the deed of the lot of record. 
Percentage of grade. On street center line, means the distance vertically (up and down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal distance. 
Planning commission. The Chatsworth Municipal Planning Commission. 
Plat. 
1.  Preliminary. A detailed drawing or map of a proposed subdivision submitted to the planning commission for review meeting requirements herein enumerated and showing the proposed layout in sufficient detail, although not completely computed, to indicate unquestionably its workability. 
2.  Final. The final map or drawing and accompanying materials described in this ordinance on which the subdivider's plan of the subdivision is presented to the building inspector for approval and which, if approved, is recorded in the Office of the Murray County Clerk of Superior Court. 
Pre-submittal conference. An initial and informal stage of subdivision review at which the developer may make known preliminary plan proposals and the building inspector may respond and/or advise the developer concerning the subdivision standards. 
Protective covenants. Contracts made between private parties or conditions recorded with an approved plat and running with the land, specifying the manner in which land may be used, developed, or improved with the view to protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
Reserve strip. A strip or parcel of land along, or around, or between properties, the purpose of which is to restrict access. 
Re-subdivision. A change in a map of any approved or recorded subdivision plat altering the lots incorporated within the confines of the original plat. 
Right-of-way. A strip of land designated, reserved, dedicated, occupied, or purchased for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access, road, railroad, sanitary or storm water, water main, shade trees, or utility line installation, or other special use. 
Roadway. The actual road surface including necessary road shoulders and drainage facilities including ditches and curbing and guttering, which is utilized to transport motor vehicles. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device, such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carry water to a release point on the other side. 
Sanitary sewer. A municipal or community sewerage collection, treatment, and disposal system. 
Sediment. Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity; the product of erosion. 
Setback line. The line that is the required minimum distance from the street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed. 
Slope. Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation and/or mulch or other ground cover and/or in combination with installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Stop work orders. A notice from the building inspector or mayor and council of Chatsworth or their representative that requires all work on a development to cease except corrective measures to the violation stated in the notice. 
Street. A right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, drive, expressway, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or alley. (The following definitions are consistent with the Georgia Department of Transportation Functional Classification System, but in the event of a conflict, the definitions of this ordinance shall control.) 
1.  Arterials. Roads designed to carry rapid, continuous traffic to major magnets within the city; will usually pass through or near the heart of a municipality, connecting residential, commercial, industrial and public activity areas. 
2.  By-pass. A highway designed for fast, continuous movement of all types of traffic between highways and widely separated parts of the urban area. By-passes generally have limited or controlled access and are usually grade-separated at railroads and major crossings. 
3.  Collector streets. A street bringing traffic to arterials, or interconnecting arterials. A street that provides for relatively easy movement at moderate speeds from homes and businesses to arterials. 
4.  Local streets. A street providing direct access to abutting properties. 
5.  Alley or service drive. A minor access way used for service access, or property access under specified circumstances, to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
6.  Frontage street. A street parallel and adjacent to major thoroughfares or arterial streets which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through traffic. 
7.  Cul-de-sac. A local street or road with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminus for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
8.  Half-street. A street or road adjacent to a subdivision tract boundary where only one-half the required right-of-way and road improvements are provided within the proposed subdivision and the responsibility for the other one-half is undecided or is left to the adjacent property owner. 
Street (private). A right-of-way serving two or more properties that is not dedicated to public use. Any such right-of-way shall be recorded on a plat or deed with a statement that the right-of-way will not be maintained by a government entity. [Note: These rules do not advocate or allow a subdivision where the lots created therein have principal frontage upon an access easement.] 
Street (public). A right-of-way arising by purchase, dedication, or public use which is maintained by a government entity or agency thereof; accessible to, supported and shared by all members of the public. 
Street line or right-of-way line. A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
Subdivider. Any person, as defined by this ordinance, who undertakes the subdivision of land, and any person having such a proprietary interest in land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this ordinance, or the authorized agent of such person. 
Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for sale, legacy, or building development, and includes re-subdivision and leaseholds of property, but not buildings and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. With the exception of conservation design subdivisions as addressed in article 6 of this ordinance, the resulting lot dimensions must conform to the minimum lot dimensions specified in the Chatsworth Zoning Ordinance and/or the regulations of the Murray County Board of Health for Individual On-Site Sewage Management Systems, if applicable. For the purpose of this ordinance the definition of a subdivision is broken down into three subcategories as follows: 
1.  Exempt subdivisions of land. Divisions of land that have the following characteristics are exempt from review and action by the planning commission or the building inspector under the subdivision regulations as set forth in this ordinance. Such exemption shall not require the city to issue permits for construction if the resulting lots or parcels fail to meet any applicable regulations of the city concerning lot size, lot width, access, and other dimensional requirements. (Note: If the subject lot is within 200 feet of public sewer, then the connection to public sewer is mandatory. If the subject subdivision is within 500 feet of public sewer, then the connection to public sewer is mandatory.) 
a.  The sale of entire lots consistent with a previously approved and recorded plat or deeds; 
b.  The sale of the total area of an existing lot(s) or parcel(s) or a portion(s) of any lots to one or more adjoining landowners(s) for recombination into one or more adjacent lots or parcel so that the total number of lots is not increased and all resulting lots meet or exceed the requirements of this ordinance; 
c.  The acquisition of right-of-way by any county, city, governmental unit, or the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT). 
2.  Minor subdivisions of land. All subdivisions of land, which front on an existing public or private street, as defined by this ordinance (see definition for "street" in this article above); do not require any new or improved street; do not require a request for variance from any of the provisions of this ordinance; do not require the extension of public utilities on public rights-of-way [does not mean individual stub-outs]; and, are not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
Lots, eligible for approval as a minor subdivision, are often created from larger tracts of land. In such cases, a deed description or the use of break lines (not to scale) to show the relationship of the larger tract to the smaller lots is acceptable. In such cases, the smaller lots must still meet the submittal requirements for a minor subdivision in section 4.5. The following specific examples are included as minor subdivisions: 
a.  The division of land between or among heirs or beneficiaries in accordance with the Georgia Probate Code and approved by the Murray County Probate Judge. (Divisions by probate processes are encouraged to comply with prevailing subdivision regulations because in the future such lots may not be owned or occupied by heirs.); 
b.  The division of a portion of a lot or parcel by the owner thereof solely for the purpose of placing said divided portion as collateral for a security instrument. 
c.  The division of land between immediate family members provided that such divisions meet all requirements of this ordinance in the creation of lots or building sites as outlined in section 4-5. 
3.  Major subdivisions of land. All subdivisions not classified as exempt or minor subdivisions. (Note: New street construction or extensions of public water, sewer service, or other utility service are required in a major subdivision.) 
Townhouse. One single-family dwelling unit connected in a row of at least two such units in which each unit has its own lot with a front and rear yard, and no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls. 
Variance. A minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of this ordinance granted by the planning commission where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property such as irregular lot size, topography, or other characteristics of the land, and not as the result of any action on the part of the property owner, a literal enforcement of this ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. Such modification may not authorize, however, the creation of a lot(s) that contain less square footage than the minimum standard established by this ordinance or the Chatsworth Zoning Ordinance. 
Water course. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Water system. 
1.  Public water system. A system for the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption, if such system has at least fifteen service connections, or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily, at least 60 days out of the year in accordance with the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-5, "Rules for Safe Drinking Water" as amended. 
a.  Governmental public water system. A public water system, which is owned and operated by a governmental entity, or a legislatively-created authority. Such connections must also be consistent with the terms of the local service delivery agreement, as amended. 
b.  Non-governmental public water system. A public water system, which is owned and operated by any non-governmental entity. 
2.  Community water system. A system serving more than one single-family dwelling but fewer than the required connections and/or persons to be considered a public water system. 
3.  Individual water supply system. A system of piping, pumps, tanks, or other facilities, which utilities groundwater to supply a single-family dwelling. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
ARTICLE 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 3.1. - Administration. 
This ordinance shall be administered by the Chatsworth Planning Commission and the building inspector designated by the mayor and council of Chatsworth. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 3.2. - Fees. 
The city is authorized to collect fees for the administration of the subdivision process based upon a fee amount that is assessed per lot in any proposed subdivision. In the case of a major subdivision, the fee shall be based upon those lots first presented upon a preliminary plat. For a minor subdivision, the fee shall be based upon those lots shown on the final plat. Such fee amount per lot may periodically be adjusted at the discretion of the mayor and council and shall be displayed in appendix B-A of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 3.3. - Variance/conditions. 
When there is a request from a subdivider, it must be in written form, and where the planning commission finds that extraordinary or unnecessary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, and that the subdivider meets the conditions of a variance as defined, and as provided by the term "variance" as defined in article 2 above, the planning commission may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured. Provided, however, that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of other plans and policies of the governing authority and such authority shall not include approval of a density variance (ie. cannot reduce the size of lots as established by the zoning ordinance of Chatsworth, unless a conservation design subdivision is subject to approval.) 
In granting variances and modifications, the planning commission shall require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives or standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 3.4. - Waiver. 
When there is a request from a subdivider, in written form, and where the planning commission finds that, due to the special circumstances of a particular plat, the provision of certain required improvements is not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare or is inappropriate to the proposed subdivision, the planning commission may waive such requirements subject to appropriate conditions. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 3.5. - Recording of plats. 
No plat of a subdivision of land within the city shall be entitled to be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Murray County, and it shall be unlawful to record such plat of land subdivision, unless and until the plat has received approval as a major or minor subdivision or is an exempt subdivision of land as defined in this ordinance. The land developer owning the property represented on an approved minor or major subdivision plat shall be responsible for the timely recording of such plats in the Office of the Murray County Clerk of Superior Court. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 3.6. - Road access required. 
Effective as of the adoption date of this ordinance, no building permit shall be issued for and no structure or accessory structure shall be erected upon any lot or parcel within the city unless the road giving access thereto has been either accepted or secured for acceptance into the Murray County road system as a public road or unless the road is fully constructed and designated as a private road meeting the requirements of subsection 5.3.6. Any new development must meet all regulations set forth herein. [Note: These rules do not advocate or allow a subdivision where the lots created therein have principal frontage upon an access easement.] 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 3.7. - Issuance of building permits. 
No building permit shall be issued for any proposed structure or building upon any lot or parcel within any proposed subdivision, when such lot or parcel has not been recorded in the Office of the Murray County Superior Court Clerk by a description of metes and bounds in an instrument of transfer (deed). Such lots must meet in every respect, the regulations set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
ARTICLE 4. - SUBDIVISION SUBMITTAL, REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE 

Sec. 4.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedure for review and action on submittals for subdivisions of land. The procedure is intended to provide for the orderly and expeditious processing of such submittals. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 4.2. - Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. 
In addition to the requirements established in this ordinance, all subdivision plats shall comply with all applicable laws, resolutions, rules, or regulations, including, but not limited to: 
1.  All applicable provisions of Georgia law, regulations, or policy (example: Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act); 
2.  The goals, objectives, and policies within, and future land use map of the adopted comprehensive plan, but subdivisions consistent with the zoning of the property shall be controlled by zoning; 
3.  The rules of the Murray County Public Health Department as applicable; 
4.  The rules, as applicable, of the Federal Highway Administration or Georgia Department of Transportation, if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state or federally designated highway; 
5.  The standards and regulations, as applicable, adopted by all other boards, commissions, and agencies having jurisdiction; and, 
6.  Any provisions that may apply as a result of any proposed development being located in an area designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as a potential flood hazard prone area. 
Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with the above rules or with the provisions set forth in this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 4.3. - Pre-submittal conference. 
The pre-submittal conference will serve as an informal plan review involving the developer and building inspector. The building inspector and his designees, hereinafter referred to as "staff", at that time shall determine if the submittal constitutes either an exempt, major, or minor subdivision. The purpose is to permit the subdivider to discuss his concept and proposed design. Further, staff can point out any factors that may have an impact on the proposed development and advise the subdivider of various possibilities before substantial amounts of time and money have been invested in a very detailed proposal that may contain elements contrary to this ordinance. During the pre-submittal conference regulations may be distributed, the schedule of planning commission meetings noted, and department approvals and agency contacts identified. The pre-submittal conference is highly recommended for new developers. While such conference is optional, those developers that are familiar with the process of plat approval in Chatsworth are still encouraged to participate. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 4.4. - Determination of subdivision type. 
Upon receipt of any subdivision plats, planning staff shall determine whether the proposed subdivision is an exempt, minor, or major subdivision of land as the term "subdivision" is defined in article 2. No subdivision shall be considered exempt, unless so designated by the city, through the building inspector, the planning commission, or other proper agent of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 4.5. - Submittal, review, and approval procedure for a minor subdivision. 
Subdividers requesting review and action on a minor subdivision plat shall follow the procedure described below. 
1.  Submittal requirements. 
a.  A final plat that has been prepared in accordance with subsection 4.6.2(d) shall be submitted to the building inspector for action, together with the prescribed fee and evidence that no taxes or assessments are outstanding against the property. 
b.  Where the subdivision involves a townhouse development, a plat including additional site plan specifications shall be required [subsection 4.6.2(e)]. A plat including these additional specifications may be presented in addition to or in lieu of a plat not containing these additional features. 
2.  Review procedures. 
a.  The building inspector will review the plat for compliance with minimum plat specifications [subsection 4.6.2(d)], design standards (article 5) and conformance with all other applicable rules and regulations (section 4.2). 
3.  Approval procedures. 
a.  Upon presenting the proposed final plat and site plan, if applicable, to the building inspector, all applicable "certificates of approval" shall already be endorsed except for the "certificate for approval of recording." 
The building inspector shall approve or deny the final plat and/or site plan within 15 working days of its submittal. However, the developer may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of this period. 
b.  Where a minor subdivision proposes access to a state highway, the Georgia Department of Transportation shall determine the feasibility of such access (Georgia Code of Public Transportation, Section 32-6-151). The building inspector shall include the requirements of the department of transportation in any action taken upon a proposed minor plat. 
c.  If plat and/or site plan approval is denied by building inspector, the subdivider may request that the planning commission review the plat and/or site plan, pursuant to the submittal and approval procedure contained in subsection 4.6.2, in which case the action of the planning commission shall be final. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 4.6. - Submittal, review and approval procedure for a major subdivision. 
Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed major subdivision shall follow the procedure described below in order to secure approval. Subdividers wishing review and action on a major subdivision shall follow the procedure described below. 
1.  Preliminary plat. Subsequent to an optional pre-submittal conference with the building inspector and before any grading, site development, or construction begins, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat pursuant to the following sequence of submittal, review and approval procedures. 
a.  Submittal requirements. The subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat that has been prepared in accordance with subsection 4.6.1(d), together with prescribed fee, to the building inspector, who will coordinate with the planning commission and other interested parties the activities of the review and approval process. 
When the subdivision involves a townhouse development or is considered a conservation design subdivision, a plat, including additional site plan specifications, shall be required [subsection 4.6.2(e)]. Preliminary plats including all site plan specifications may be presented, or the plats and site plans may be submitted separately. 
A minimum of five copies of the preliminary plat (seven copies where subdivision proposes access to a state highway) and supporting documentation shall be submitted to the building inspector. The submission shall occur a minimum of 15 working days prior to the meeting date of the planning commission at which the subdivider desires the planning commission to take official action. At the discretion of the building inspector, this time limit may be waived. 
If a subdivision proposes access to a state highway, then the department of transportation shall receive two copies of the proposed plat to determine the feasibility of such access (Georgia Code of Public Transportation, Section 32-6-151). The planning commission shall include the requirements of the department of transportation in any action taken upon a proposed plat. 
In the event that the subdivider plans to secure approval of his subdivision layout by the federal housing administration or other federal or state agency, it is suggested that such approval be secured prior to the submission of a preliminary plat to the planning commission. 
b.  Review procedures. Review of the preliminary plat is the most important step in any development review in order to identify problems or obstacles that will inhibit the proposed development. The building inspector will review the plat for compliance with minimum plat specifications [subsection 4.6.1(d)], design standards (article 5) and conformance with all other applicable rules and regulations (section 4.2). The building inspector will coordinate and forward copies of the plat such that all affected parties, including but not limited to those responsible for streets, drainage, provisions for fire, water, sewer, and other infrastructure may conduct individual reviews of the plat. 
c.  Approval procedures. The building inspector will direct the preliminary plat to the planning commission for review and action. Within 90 days after the date of review by the planning commission, the planning commission shall approve, or approve with condition, or disapprove the preliminary plat. 
Failure of the planning commission to act within 90 days shall be deemed approval of the plat and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the planning commission on demand; provided, however, that the applicant for the planning commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent in writing to the extension of the period. The grounds for disapproval of any plat shall be stated in writing upon the records of the planning commission and a copy of the grounds provided to the subdivider. After official action by the planning commission, a letter to the subdivider shall be issued by the building inspector notifying the subdivider of the official action. Any conditions attached to the official action shall be stated and if the preliminary plat is denied the reasons for denial shall also be stated. 
Planning commission approval of a preliminary plat shall be considered valid for a period of two years from the date of plat approval. 
d.  Preliminary plat specifications. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a Georgia Registered Land Surveyor; if a landscape architect or civil engineer contributed to the plat, then so indicate. The plat shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet to an inch. The plat shall be drawn in permanent ink on reproducible material not exceeding 20 by 24 inches and shall include: 
(1)  Proposed name of subdivision; with R/Ws and names of new streets and existing streets; 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of person to be notified of action; 
(3)  Name, address, and license number of the register land surveyor responsible for the preparation of the plat; 
(4)  Graphic scale, north arrow and date of plat preparation; 
(5)  Total acreage in single parcel ownership by the subdivider; the total number of acres being subdivided; the total number of lots created; and the total linear length of streets; 
(6)  A general location map showing the proposed development in relation to other adjacent properties and existing streets in the Chatsworth area; 
(7)  The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property to the nearest hundredth of a foot and the deed record names of adjacent owners or subdivisions shall be identified; 
(8)  The location and dimensions of existing rights-of-ways, streams (showing stream buffers, as amended), drainage structures, or utilities, buildings, lakes, and lands subject to flooding; if applicable, the 100-year flood plain should be shown and referenced appropriately; 
(9)  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet based upon mean sea level (M.S.L.); the contour requirement may be waived or the interval adjusted up or down based on the need as determined by the building inspector; 
(10)  The layout and scaled dimensions of all lots and streets; the location, purpose, and dimensions of all existing and future drainage ways and easements; the size of the drainage area in acres must be provided and the size and location of all existing and proposed drainage tiles shall be shown; 
(11)  The location and dimension of all property proposed to be set aside for recreation use or other public use, with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation; 
(12)  Centerline profile of all proposed streets showing natural and finished grades and proposed street names; and a cross-section of the proposed street design; 
(13)  Front setback lines; 
(14)  Statements on the plat to indicate the applicable service to the proposed development: 
water = public water or individual well 
sewage disposal = public sewer or individual septic tanks 
If a public water system is proposed using a well supply, then the proposed location of the well shall be shown. All existing wells shall be shown; rock outcrops, marshes, springs, and other outstanding topographic features shall be designated. 
If individual septic tanks are proposed then soil types shall be shown upon the plat in compliance with the requirements of the Murray County Health Department. 
(15)  Draft of proposed restrictive covenants, if any, to be imposed and designation of areas subject to special restrictions; 
(16)  Environmentally sensitive areas: location of major river corridors, water supply watersheds, groundwater recharge areas, wetlands, the boundary and elevation of the 100-year flood plain as determined by the past history of flooding or best available data; 
(17)  A soil erosion and sediment control plan as required by the City of Chatsworth Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Ordinance; [Such plan approval should parallel the subdivision plat approval process in order to avoid inconvenient delays in on-site work. Also, compliance with National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements administered by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division shall apply.] 
2.  Final plat. Subsequent to approval of the preliminary plat, the developer shall submit a final plat pursuant to the following sequence of submittal, review, and approval procedures. 
a.  Submitted requirements. Before a final plat is submitted to the building inspector for review and action, one of three criteria must have been met. These criteria are: (1) No public utilities extensions or public or private streets are necessary on the part of the developer; (2) The proposed public improvements which were approved in the preliminary plat have been completed in accordance with approved standards, and certificates of satisfactory completion have been obtained from the appropriate authority(ies); or (3) the developer/subdivider may submit an appropriate bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or funds in escrow in an amount not less than 110 percent of the estimated expenses of construction to proper standards and shall complete construction within one year of the issuance of the first building permit for a lot along such road. Under such circumstances the security shall be posted with the applicable department or agency that will bear the responsibility of completing the public improvement(s) should the developer default. 
Further, the developer/subdivider shall indemnify the city, including, but not limited to all elected officials, employees, agents, attorneys, and anyone acting on behalf of the city from any and all liability associated with any failure of the developer/subdivider in connection with his/her status as a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit holder, or any failure of the developer/subdivider to construct any public improvements to the standards required by the city. 
The developer shall submit the final plat to the building inspector, prepared in accordance with subsection 4.6.2(d). When the subdivision involves a townhouse development or is considered a conservation design subdivision, a plat, including additional site plan specifications, shall be required [See subsection 4.6.2(e)]. 
A minimum of five copies of the final plat and site plan, if applicable, and all supporting documentation shall be submitted to the building inspector within two years from the date the preliminary plat was approved; if not, such preliminary plat approval shall lapse. 
If the developer places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by this ordinance, such restrictions or reference thereto shall be identified on the plat by the following statement: Restrictive covenants apply to the subdivision of lots shown hereon. Also, both the plat and covenants shall be recorded referencing each other. Conservation design subdivisions (article 6, subsections 6.4.5 through 6.4.7) specifically require mechanisms for securing the ownership, maintenance, and perpetuity of open space established through the subdivision review process. 
b.  Review procedures. The building inspector will review the plat for compliance with minimum plat specifications (subsection 4.6.2(d)), design standards (article 5) and conformance with all other applicable rules and regulations (section 4.2). 
c.  Approval procedures. From the date of plat submission, including all required supporting data and certifications, the building inspector shall approve or disapprove the final plat and/or site plan within 30 days. 
Failure of the building inspector to act within 30 days after the date of submission shall be deemed approval of the plat and/or site plan and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the building inspector on demand; provided, however, that the applicant for the building inspector's approval may waive this requirement and consent to the extension of the period. The grounds for disapproval of any plat and/or site plan shall be stated in writing and a copy of the grounds provided to the subdivider. 
Approval of the final plat and/or site plan, if applicable, by the building inspector shall not be deemed an acceptance by the city or the public of any street or other ground shown upon the plat or site plan. The subdivider must prepare deeds of conveyance for each right-of-way or other public space and separate action is required before the governing authority. 
d.  Final plat specifications. The final plat shall be prepared by Georgia Registered Land Surveyor. If a landscape architect or civil engineer, licensed to practice in Georgia, contributes to the plat then appropriate seals, preferably at 100 feet to an inch, but in no case smaller than 200 feet to an inch shall be shown. The plat shall be drawn in permanent ink on reproducible material on sheet or sheets not exceeding 17 by 22 inches, and shall include: 
(1)  Name of subdivision and street names; 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of person to be notified of action; 
(3)  Name, address, seal and license number of the registered land surveyor; the signature of the surveyor shall be across the seal in black ink for the plat to be valid; also, seals of landscape architects or civil engineers, if appropriate; 
(4)  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point, notation as to the reference of bearings to magnetic, true north, or grid north and indication whether bearings shown are calculated from angles turned or taken from compass readings; 
(5)  Location of tract (land district and land lot) giving total acreage being subdivided; total number of lots created; and total length of new streets within the development; 
(6)  Location sketch map showing the relationship of the plat to other existing streets and properties in Murray County; 
(7)  Index map where more than one sheet is required to present plat; [Note: multiple sheets shall each be named to conform with the title sheet and designated for example: 1 of 3, 2 of 3, and 3 of 3]; 
(8)  Identify the point of beginning (P.O.B.) tied to the nearest existing street intersection or nearest land lot line or district line; 
(9)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth foot and angles to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure to be one foot in 8,500 feet or better. The error of closure shall be stated on the plat; 
(10)  City, county or land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse the subdivision; 
(11)  Street center lines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature; 
(12)  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners; 
(13)  Front setback lines; 
(14)  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order or numbered in relationship to each phase of development; 
(15)  Location, dimensions and purpose of all drainage structures and of any easements; including slope easements, and public service utility right of-way boundaries, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and limitations; and of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners; 
(16)  Final plan of sanitary sewers (if applicable) with grade, pipe size and man-hole locations; 
(17)  Final plan of water supply system (if applicable) with pipe sizes and location of valves, pipe and fire hydrants; 
(18)  Plan showing approximate location of electrical, telephone, television cable, and gas (if applicable) service's. An as built drawing of these services shall be submitted to the building inspector upon completion of the installation; 
(19)  Accurate location of monuments and markers; 
(20)  The boundary and elevation of the 100-year flood plain as determined by the past history of flooding or best available data; 
(21)  Certificates and statements as specified in subsection 4.6-2(f); 
(22)  If a declaration of covenants and restrictions apply to the subdivision, then such covenants and restrictions shall be presented before the final plat is approved; the plat shall contain a statement: Restrictive covenants apply to the subdivision of lots shown hereon. 
e.  Site plan specification requirements. In addition to the required specifications for a major subdivision plat, the site plan shall include: 
(1)  Location of parking spaces showing, size and type, aisle width, curb cuts, drives, driveways, and all ingress and egress areas and dimensions; 
(2)  Location of open space areas or recreational facilities; 
(3)  Location of buffers and/or vegetation where required; and 
(4)  Building locations. 
f.  Final plat certificates of approval. Each final plat submitted shall carry "certificates of approval" appropriate to the particular development and signed by the appropriate departmental authorities. At least seven certificates shall be required. Examples of these certificates follow. Certificates on the final plat must reflect the content of these model certificates, but the language of the certificates may be changed at the discretion of the building inspector to reflect special circumstances. 
(1)  A certificate of ownership shall be affixed to the final plat. Two examples follow. The first example should be used in the case of the dedication of infrastructure and public grounds to the city. The second example should be used in the establishment of a property owner's association for the purpose of the maintenance of infrastructure and public grounds. 


(2)  A registered Georgia land surveyor shall certify accuracy of the final plat. The following example should be used. 

(3)  A certificate of approval for fire protection shall be affixed to the final plat. The following example should be used. 

(4)  The final plat shall bear certification of approval of a public water system and public sanitary system or public water and individual sewage disposal systems. If the subdivision is served by a public water system and public sanitary system that is installed in an acceptable manner, the first example certificate should be affixed to the final plat. If the subdivision is served by a public water system that is installed in an acceptable manner, then the second example certificate should be affixed to the final plat. If the subdivision is served by a individual sewage disposal system, then the third example certificate should be affixed to the final plat. 

(5)  The final plat shall bear certification of approval for the proper construction and installation of public or private streets and the necessary drainage mechanisms for storm water conveyance. 

(6)  In the interest of public safety, the final plat shall bear a certification of approving the names of subdivisions and new streets. 

(7)  A certificate of approval for recording shall be affixed to the final plat. Two examples follow. If the subdivision is a minor subdivision, the following example certificate of approval for recording (minor subdivision) should be affixed to the final plat; if the subdivision is a major subdivision, the following example certificate of approval for recording (major subdivision) should be affixed to a final plat. 


(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
ARTICLE 5. - DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 5.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of good subdivision and site design is to create a functional and attractive development, to minimize adverse impacts, and to ensure that projects will be designed to result in a well-planned community without adding unnecessarily to development costs. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 5.2. - General principles of design. 
1.  Site analysis. An analysis shall be made of characteristics of the development site, such as site context, geology and soil, topography, climate, ecology, existing vegetation, structures, and road networks, visual features, and past and present use of the site. Development of the site shall be based on the site analysis. To the maximum extent practicable, development shall be located to preserve the natural features of the site, to avoid areas of environmental sensitivity, and to minimize negative impacts and alteration of natural features. 
2.  Suitability of the land. Land which the planning commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements or other features which would be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of inhabitants of the land and surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the planning commission to solve the problems created by the unstable land conditions. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 5.3. - General subdivision design standards. 
1.  Monuments. The subdivider shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required herein and as approved by a registered surveyor. Monuments shall be located and set as follows: 
a.  Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines, at street intersections and at the beginning and ending points of curves. 
b.  All lot corners shall be marked by iron rods, pipe, or pins at least 18 inches long and five-eighths inch in diameter. 
c.  The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pins at least 18 inches long and five-eighths inch in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least 18 inches long. Such pins shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river or stream and lot line, with a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the bank of the river or stream. 
d.  All monuments and pins shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a registered surveyor prior to the time the building inspector recommends approval of the final plat or release of the bond where bond is made in lieu of improvements. 
2.  Name of subdivision. The name of the subdivision must have approval of the planning commission or building inspector. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision within the city or in any other Murray County jurisdiction. 
3.  Residential development design. 
a.  The planning commission or building inspector may require alternative lot area and dimensions provided that lots conform to the minimum requirements of the Chatsworth Zoning Ordinance and provided that such standards shall be appropriate to the type of development permitted. The planning commission may also review and approve alternative lot area, frontage, setbacks, and/or heights as allowed by article 6 conservation design subdivisions, provided that such standards shall be appropriate to the type of development permitted and is used to protect natural resources. Deviation from the typical lot-by-lot requirements of the Chatsworth Zoning Ordinance is applicable only to conservation design subdivisions and the approval of the required subdivision plats and site plans. 
b.  Every lot shall have sufficient access to it for emergency vehicles as well as for those needing access to the property for its intended use. 
c.  The placement of lots in residential developments shall take into consideration topography, privacy, orientation, drainage, and aesthetics to enhance the benefit and enjoyment of residential occupancy into the future. 
4.  Industrial and commercial development design. Commercial and industrial development shall be designed according to the same principles governing the design of residential developments; namely, buildings shall be located according to topography with environmentally sensitive areas avoided to the maximum extent practicable. Factors such as drainage, noise, odor, surrounding land uses and sufficient access shall be considered. 
5.  Circulation system design. The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient and orderly movement of traffic; to meet, but not exceed the needs of the present and future population served; to have a simple and logical pattern; to respect natural features and topography; and to present an attractive streetscape. 
6.  Access by private streets. Private streets may be permitted by the planning commission in subdivision developments where controlled access or privacy is desired by the developer provided such streets meet the following conditions. All private streets shall be constructed to the specifications of the city, however, private streets within Conservation Design Subdivisions are provided additional flexibility as addressed in article 6 and in appendix B-B-II. The developer or developer's successor must provide access for emergency vehicles of the city or any other governmental entity. [Note: These rules do not advocate or allow a subdivision where the lots created therein have principal frontage upon an access easement.] 
a.  The preliminary and final plats of a development proposing private streets shall show a statement indicating: The street system is private and will not be maintained or improved by the city. 
b.  The plat review before the planning commission shall also include evidence of the legal formation of a property owners association to be charged with the minimum responsibility for maintenance of the private street. Such legal documentation shall be recorded and referenced as an attachment to the final plat. 
c.  The deed for each lot or parcel sold from the plat shall also contain the statement: The maintenance and improvement of the private street providing access to the described lot is the responsibility of the property owner(s) association and not the city. 
d.  Waiver of liability: Land developments, like condominiums, that are accessed by private internal streets or sharing commonly-owned parking areas may receive some city services, like solid waste service, only after the authorized officer(s) of the valid and functional homeowner's association executes a waiver of liability form that is available in the Office of the city clerk. The completed form shall acknowledge that the city is held harmless for damages to paved surfaces or landscaping while providing requested services to the private property. 
7.  Access by easements. All lots created in the city shall front upon a public or private street, meeting specific design standards. Access by easement [minimum width of 20 feet] shall only be allowed as a secondary residential access or as a complementary cross-access between commercial or industrial lots already having the required minimum frontage on a public or private street. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 5.4. - Special provisions governing unit ownership (townhouse subdivisions). 
1.  General provisions. Whenever a developer, the sole owner, or the co-owners of a building or buildings expressly declare through the submission of a master deed, lease, or plat their desire to submit their property to a regime wherein there is established a horizontal property regime, each such townhouse or property regime created for the purpose of sale or transfer of real property is subject to the provisions of these standards. 
2.  Submission of plat required. Prior to the sale or transfer of any property incorporated in the property regime, the developer, sole owner, or co-owners of such property shall submit to the planning commission and obtain their approval of the subdivision plat of such property in the manner prescribed in this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 5.5. - Lot design standards. 
All lots hereafter established in connection with the development of a subdivision shall comply with the following design standards. 
a.  Lot lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines. 
b.  Jurisdictional limits and lot lines. Lots shall not be divided by city or county boundary lines. 
c.  Lot frontage. Each lot created shall have direct abutting frontage to an approved public or private street. Each lot must front for at least 50 feet upon an approved street. Construction and/or maintenance of driveways connecting to the public street R/W or to the private road shall be the sole responsibility of the lot or parcel owner. Lots, however, within a Conservation Design Subdivision are exempt from such frontage requirements as provided in the Chatsworth Zoning Ordinance and article 6 of this ordinance. 
d.  Setback lines. Setback lines per lot shall be as required by the Chatsworth Zoning Ordinance, however, lots within a conservation design subdivision are exempt from such requirements in lieu of flexibility provided by the Chatsworth Zoning Ordinance and article 6 of this ordinance. 
e.  Adequate building sites. Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements or building setback lines required by this ordinance and any other applicable ordinance. 
f.  Panhandle or flag lots. "Panhandle" or "flag" lots are generally to be considered an unacceptable design technique, but may occur after a finding and approval has occurred before the Chatsworth Planning Commission that unique physical or environmental characteristics of a parent tract preclude efficient and logical subdivision in accordance with standard design. The required width and area will be allowed where terrain makes standard design or frontage impossible or impractical. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle access shall not be less than 50 feet wide and the panhandle access shall not be more than 200 feet long. Not more than two such panhandle access points shall abut each other. 
g.  Double or reverse frontage lots. Double and reverse frontage, unless required or approved by the planning commission or building inspector, shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography, orientation, and property size. A planted screen reservation of at least five feet, across which there shall be no right of access, may be required along the line of lots abutting such a traffic arterials or other disadvantageous use. 
h.  Reserved. 
i.  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently large to permit the location of buildings so as to conform to the minimum front building setback requirement on both streets. The remaining lot lines shall meet side building setback requirements. Corner lot lines at road intersections shall have minimum radii of 20 feet. 
j.  Lot remnants. Lot remnants shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unbuildable parcels. 
k.  Easements. Easements, with designated widths and purposes shown on the plat, shall be provided in subdivisions for the following purposes: 
(i)   Utility easements. When it is found to be necessary and desirable to locate public utility lines in other than street rights-of-way, easements shall be shown on the plat for such purposes. Such easements shall not be less than 20 feet in width or in concurrence with the width required by the utility provider. Where possible, such easements shall be centered on rear or side lot lines. 
(ii)  Water course and drainage easements. Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, or stream, appropriate provisions shall be made to accommodate stormwater and drainage through and from the proposed subdivision. Such easement shall conform substantially with the lines of said water course and be of sufficient width or construction, or both, as to be adequate for the purpose. 
Where appropriate, the utility provider or applicable Department of the city, at their request, shall be provided with the written legal mechanism necessary to document the location, width, and purpose of such perpetual easement. 
(iii)  Access easements. Allowed only as described by subsections 5.3.7 and 5.5(h). 
l.  Residential lot depth. Residential lot depth shall generally not be more than four times the lot width at the building line. 
m.  Commercial and industrial lots. Commercial and industrial subdivisions of land shall also be subject to the approval of the planning commission or building inspector and shall comply with the requirements of the Chatsworth Zoning Ordinance. 
n.  Minimum lot dimensions and area. Except for lots within a conservation design subdivision (see article 6), the minimum lot area, the minimum lot width at the front building line, and the setback lines shall be as required in the Chatsworth Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Easements for electrical utilities may use the easement policy of the service provider. 

Sec. 5.6. - Street design standards. 
All streets, whether public or private, which shall hereafter be established in connection with the development of a major subdivision shall comply with any construction specifications of the city. 
1.  Access to arterials and collectors. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector route, as defined by this ordinance, the planning commission may require that access to such street be limited by: 
a.  The subdivision of lots so as to back on to the arterial or collector street and front on a parallel local street; 
b.  A series of cul-de-sac, "U" shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the arterial or collector street; or 
c.  A frontage street. 
2.  Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such street shall generally not be permitted. However, in extraordinary circumstances the planning commission may allow creation of a reserve strip to enable a more appropriate pattern of lots or streets. Where such is created, the planning commission must agree to any and all future dispositions of same. A notation to this effect shall be entered on the final plat or approved as an auxiliary instrument attached thereto. 
3.  Arrangement of continuing and dead-end streets. Where a subdivision will contain temporary or permanent dead-end streets they shall be designed as follows: 
a.  Arrangement of continuing streets. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of major streets between adjacent properties when in the opinion of the planning commission such continuation is necessary for convenient movements of traffic, effective fire protection, efficient provision of utilities, and when such continuation is in accordance with the major street or road plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary cul-de-sac, temporary "T", or "Y"-shaped turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets as required in the following turnabout standards, with a notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutting property owners whenever the street is continued. 
b.  Dead-end streets. Where a street does not extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the planning commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than 50 feet. However, the planning commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnabout shall be provided at the end of a dead-end street in accordance with the requirements of the city. 
4.  Intersections. Intersections of new streets in a subdivision shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two streets at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be permitted. The angle of intersection is to be measured at the intersection of the street center lines. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point unless approved by the planning commission. 
b.  Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall coincide, wherever practicable, with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Jogs for opposing streets having centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected streets are separated from each other by an unbroken median at either intersection. Where streets intersect arterial or collector routes, their alignment shall be continuous (no jog). Intersections of arterial or collector streets shall be at least 800 feet apart. 
c.  Minimum curve radius at the intersection of two local streets shall be 25 feet, and minimum curve radius at an intersection involving a collector street shall be 30 feet. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular movement. 
d.  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a two percent grade for a distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
5.  Additional width on existing streets. In subdivisions that adjoin existing streets, the subdivider shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the minimum street width requirements as follows: 
a.  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the street. 
b.  When the subdivision is located on one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way measured from the centerline of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
6.  Street names. Streets or roads that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing named streets shall bear that name. The names of new streets and roads shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission/911 director and shall not duplicate or be similar in sound to existing names of streets in the city or in any other Murray County jurisdiction irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, circle, way, boulevard, drive, place, lane, or court, etc. 
7.  Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways, where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands, shall be treated as follows: 
a.  In residential areas, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normally required depth of the lot may be required adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening; the placement of structures herein is prohibited". 
b.  In commercial or industrial areas, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad or limited access highway shall, wherever practical, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth of commercial or industrial sites. 
c.  Streets parallel to a railroad or limited access highway, when intersecting a street that crosses the railroad at grade, shall, to the extent practical, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
8.  Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the city shall be constructed at the full expense of the subdivider without reimbursement from the city. The sharing of expenses for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the city, may be fixed by special agreement between the city and the subdivider. The cost shall be pro-rated to the subdivider as to the percentage of his development so served. The engineering design of all bridges shall be reviewed and approved by the city. Any preliminary plat identifying the construction of a bridge must bear the seal of a Georgia Certified Civil Engineer. 
9.  Special purpose streets. 
a.  Half streets. Half streets are prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
b.  Split level streets. Streets, which are constructed so as to have two traffic ways, each at a different level within the same right-of-way, shall provide a minimum right-of-way of 25 feet per traffic way and such additional right-of-way as necessary to meet the requirements of subsection 5.6.5 and a minimum paved traffic surface of 15 feet. The slope between the two traffic ways would not be less than two to one. 
c.  One-way streets. If permitted by the planning commission, one-way streets shall meet a minimum right-of-way of 25 feet and a pavement width of 15 feet. 
c.  Alleys. Alleys or service drives may be required at the rear of all lots used for multi-family, commercial, or industrial developments but shall not be provided in one and two family residential developments unless the alley or services drive is to provide secondary access to a lot (lots) whose natural grade is (are) more than 12 feet above the finished street grade, or unless the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for an alley or service drive; pavement width is 15 feet with or without curbs; right-of-way, 20 feet. 
10.  Geometric design standards for streets. The criteria in the following table are applicable. 

 
11.  General street specifications. The criteria in the following table are applicable. All streets must be curbed, guttered, and constructed meeting any construction specifications of the city. 

 
[Notes.] 
1 Reserved. 
2 All streets must be curbed, guttered, and constructed meeting any construction specifications of the City of Chatsworth; curb and gutter requirement are optional if the proposed subdivision is proposed as a Conservation Design Subdivision, approved under Article 6 and the applicable appendices. 
3 In cases where the street is a cul-de-sac intended to serve primarily commercial office uses, the residential street requirements shall apply. 
4 A utility/road maintenance easement ten feet wide on each side of the constructed street width may be substituted for right-of-way on local streets only. In such cases, the right-of-way is equal to the construction width from back-of-curb to back-of-curb, and setback distances are measured from the easement line. Such easements must meet the requirements of the Building Inspector. Required off-street parking is allowed within such easements. 
5 Defines width of payment, curb, and gutter. 
6 Measured distance is between points four feet above the centerline of the street. 
7 Measured distance is the centerline radius of curvature. 
12.  Stormwater infrastructure. All subdivision developments, whether residential, commercial, or industrial, shall comply with the construction specifications of the city relative to stormwater infrastructure. [Land developers/subdividers are further advised that common construction activities disturbing 1.0 acres or greater shall require compliance with National Pollution Elimination Discharge System (NPDES) requirements administered by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division.] 
a.  The subdivider/developer shall also provide for adequate drainage for springs and/or other ground water drainage. 
b.  The drainage system for a subdivision—residential, commercial, or industrial—shall be designed in accordance with sound engineering principles and procedures such that all salable lots or parcels upon the plat are positively drained. 
c.  The drainage system shall be designed to accommodate drainage from adjacent lots or parcels, which naturally drain to or through the lands being subdivided. The drainage system shall be designed such that it does not affect the natural drainage onto adjacent parcels unless an agreement is obtained by the developer/subdivider from the owner of such adjacent parcels. A copy of the any such agreement shall be submitted to the Chatsworth Zoning Administrator. 
d.  Drainage facilities, which are designed to accommodate flowing water, shall be hydraulically designed to function when subjected to the maximum flow rate, which may be expected to occur for a ten-year storm. 
e.  Drainage facilities, which are designed to handle water accumulations, shall be designed to accommodate the maximum water levels, which may be expected to occur for a 25-year storm. Necessary drainage facilities including, but not limited to culverts, rights-of-way, and easements, shall be offered for dedication to the city. 
f.  All drainage systems discharging into any state waters, including but not limited to wetlands, as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, shall pass through an approved best management practices erosion control measures (example: sedimentation and detention ponds) prior to such discharge. 
g.  A master drainage plan shall be submitted to the Chatsworth Zoning Administrator simultaneously with the submittal of construction drawings, and compliance with the above minimum requirements shall be affirmed or rejected. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 5.7. - Street features. 
1.  Signs. The developer shall install street name signs, traffic control signs and any other signs as specified by the city. 
Signs for street names, directions of travel, traffic control, and hazards shall be provided as directed by the building inspector. Street signs on exterior or boundary streets shall be installed by the city with the developer paying a proportionate share determined by the city. Street signs for interior streets of a subdivision or land development shall be installed at the subdivider or developer's expense by the subdivider or developer, subject to the approval of the building inspector. 
2.  Mailboxes. The developer shall coordinate the lot addressing system with the Murray County Building Inspector. 
3.  Sidewalks. All residential subdivisions shall be developed with sidewalks. Sidewalks within commercial subdivisions may be required at the discretion of the planning commission, which shall be influenced by reasonable proximity to existing or proposed residential developments that can benefit from the connectivity. 
a.  Location. Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated non-pavement right-of-way of roads and shall parallel the street pavement as much as possible; however, the city may permit sidewalks to be designed and constructed so that they meander around permanent obstructions or deviate from a linear pattern for design purposes. 
b.  Specifications. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet wide. A strip of grassed or landscaped areas at least two feet wide shall separate all sidewalks from the back of curbs in residential areas. 
4.  Street lights. All residential subdivision street lighting shall be installed meeting specifications adopted by the city relative to height, spacing, and intensity of lights. 
a.  Type. The light source shall be metal halide. Equivalent substitution may be allowed at the discretion of the building inspector. 
b.  Height/spacing. Collector roads shall have light poles at 30-foot maximum to the top of the light fixture/post assembly. Local roads shall have light poles at 18-foot maximum height to the top of the fixture/post assembly. Spacing distances shall be determined in consultation with the power company providing service to the subdivision. 
c.  Intensity. The following table 5-3 sets forth minimum illumination intensity requirements by street type: 

 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 5.8. - Utilities. 
1.  Water supply and sanitary sewer. The water system and sanitary sewer design, materials and construction methods shall be approved the city. Where a public-governmental water supply and/or sanitary sewer system is available within the distance specified by the regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, developments shall connect to such systems. Extensions shall be made at the developer's expense. 
In all cases where the developer may and intends to install an individual water supply system and/or a community sewage disposal system (a system permitted by Georgia DNR, but not including individual sewage disposal systems), the developer shall present adequate justification as to why they shall not provide a connection to the existing public-governmental water and/or sanitary sewer system. The water supply and sewer system strategy shall be determined by the planning commission/Chatsworth Waterworks Commission on a case-by-case basis taking into consideration the following factors: 
a.  Developer costs of installing individual water supply system and/or community sewage disposal system relative to costs of connecting to existing public system; 
b.  Ground water availability, quality, and pollution susceptibility; 
c.  The extent to which additional costs imposed upon the developer for a required connection to existing public system is necessary to promote the health, safety, or general welfare of the general public. 
When a water main is to be located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot before the street base is applied. 
2.  Electrical, telephone, and cable service. All electrical, telephone, and cable service to subdivisions developed after the adoption of these regulations shall be required to be placed underground. All electrical, telephone, and cable service shall be installed meeting any construction specifications of the City of Chatsworth relative to said utilities. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 5.9. - Surety in lieu of completion of improvements. 
1.  Purpose. In lieu of the completion of the required improvements necessary for final plat approval, the city may accept security in an amount and form satisfactory to him, providing for the actual construction and installation of the improvements. A separate security in an amount and form satisfactory to city will be required for the actual construction and installation of infrastructure improvements that they regulate. 
2.  Form of security. The developer shall provide adequate and acceptable security from a bank or other reputable institution, which certifies the following: 
a.  That the creditor does guarantee funds in an amount equal to 110 percent of the cost of completing all required improvements, as estimated by the developer and approved by the city as appropriate. 
b.  That, in the case of failure on the part of the developer to complete the specified improvements within the required time period, the creditor shall immediately pay to the city, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those improvements up to the limit of credit stated in the applicable letter or up to the principal amount of the bond. 
c.  That the security may not be withdrawn, or reduced in amount, until released by the city. 
3.  Time limits. Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the developer and the city, shall agree upon a deadline for the completion of all required improvements. Such deadline per phase shall not exceed one year from the date of final approval. 
4.  Release of security. When the required improvements have been completed by the developer to the satisfaction of the city as applicable, then each entity shall release the security. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 5.10. - Improvement maintenance security. 
1.  Maintenance required. The developer shall be required to maintain all public improvements in a development for a period of one year. The one-year maintenance period shall commence with the date of the city accepting the deed or, if secured by a surety for completion of improvements, as provided for in subsection 5.9.2, then the one-year period shall be measured from the date the security is released. 
2.  Maintenance security - form and amount. The developer shall post with the clerk of the city an acceptable form of security payable to the city in an amount equal to ten percent of the total cost of the public improvements. The purpose of the security is to insure faithful maintenance of said installations and improvements by the developer. 
3.  Call for security. If, upon being notified by the city of failure of required installations or improvements, the subdivider does not correct the deficiency or commence work within ten days of notice, it shall be deemed to be a failure on the posted security, and the city shall have the right to make the necessary repairs, either by public work or by private contract, and the surety, cash deposit and/or escrow account aforesaid shall be liable for the full amount of the cost of said repairs. The ten percent security does not indemnify the developer from those costs exceeding the ten percent security during the one-year maintenance period. 
4.  Release of security. At the end of the one-year period of time, the developer may formally petition the governing authority to release the maintenance security. If the improvements are acceptable to the city, at that time, dedication will be accepted and the maintenance security will be released. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
ARTICLE 6. - CONSERVATION DESIGN SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 6.1. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to provide flexibility in ensuring preservation of open space within a master-planned residential development. A conservation subdivision design preserves open space while maintaining the pro-rated density of residential units for the overall site area. Neutral density is achieved by allowing smaller individually-owned residential lots in neighborhoods that are surrounded by aesthetically and ecologically important areas. The goal of the design process is to identify and set aside conservation open space areas prior to the delineation of transportation and residential pod layouts. Open space areas may include wetlands, river buffer zones, woodlands, playing fields, steep slopes, and meadows, depending on the resources of the land. 
1.  The intent of the conservation design subdivision regulations is to: 
(a)  Preserve significant areas of land for ecological, recreational, and agricultural purposes in perpetuity; 
(b)  Encourage more efficient development of land consistent with public health, safety, and general welfare; 
(c)  Afford greater flexibility of design and placement of buildings and structures; 
(d)  Preserve and protect exceptional terrain, natural beauty, or sites of historic interest from inconsequential placement of homes, roadways, utilities and appurtenances; 
(e)  Preserve all the streams and tributaries in the City of Chatsworth as natural resources; 
(f)  Minimize flooding, erosion, and water pollution, and protect the quality and quantity of drinking water; 
(g)  Preserve wetlands, aquifers, topographical or soil features, wildlife habitat; and other features having conservation values, including views, vistas, and indigenous vegetation and wildlife; and 
(h)  Promote a less sprawling form of development. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 6.2. - Procedure. 
Conservation design subdivisions are allowed as a permitted right in accordance with the requirements set forth in article 6 of the subdivision regulations of the city. Also, conservation design subdivisions are allowed as an option in all residential zoning districts, except R-3 and O-R, subject to modification of the standing residential zoning requirements of that zone district and the approval of site plans/plats complying with the intent of conservation design subdivisions and the platting requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 6.3. - Housing density determination. 
The number of applicable lots or dwelling units created shall be density neutral. Density neutral is defined as maintaining the number of lots or dwelling units so as not to exceed the number that can be created with the conventional minimum area and width as established in the subdivision regulations of the city and the Chatsworth Zoning Ordinance. 
1.  Number of lots. The maximum number of lots in the conservation design subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the applicant: 
(a)  Calculation: The maximum number of lots or dwelling units, as applicable, is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size as determined by the minimum lot size allowed in the residential zone district where such subdivision is proposed. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
(1)  Slopes 25 percent or greater with at least 5,000 square feet of contiguous area. 
(2)  The 100-year floodplain. 
(3)  Bodies of open water with over 5,000 square feet of contiguous area. 
(4)  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
(b)  Yield plan: The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of functional lots possible. The plan or plat does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan or plat, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations for streets (ie. grade) and service to lots. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 6.4. - Open space. 
1.  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that is set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument (see subsections 6.4.6 and 6.4.7). 
2.  Standards to determine open space. 
(a)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
(b)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required for inclusion within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
(1)  The 100-year floodplain; 
(2)  Riparian zones at least 75 feet wide, along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
(3)  Slopes 25 percent or greater with at least 5,000 square feet of contiguous area; 
(4)  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
(5)  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
(6)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(c)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
(1)  Important historic sites; 
(2)  Existing healthy, native forests with a contiguous area of at least one acre; 
(3)  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured five feet high from ground level on the bole of the tree (diameter breast high); 
(4)  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridgelines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
(5)  Prime agricultural lands with at least five acres of contiguous area; and 
(6)  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(d)  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space, but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(e)  At least 25 percent of the open space shall consist of land that is suitable for building. 
(f)  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space shall adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
(g)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
3.  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following. 
(a)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(b)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(c)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(d)  Passive recreation areas, such as open fields; 
(e)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(f)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(g)  Landscaped stormwater management facilities, and community wastewater disposal systems located on soils particularly suited to such uses. Such facilities shall be located outside of primary conservation areas; 
(h)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(i)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
(j)  A community building/swimming pool only if the planned open space totals 50 percent or more of the gross tract area. 
4.  Prohibited uses of open space. 
(a)  Golf courses; 
(b)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(c)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; 
(d)  Impoundments; or 
(e)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
5.  Disposition and preservation of open space. Open space land shall be preserved and maintained solely for the purposes specified in section 6.1. The method for effectuating such preservation and maintenance may be one or more of the following: 
(a)  Establishment of a mandatory Home Owners Association (HOA) to own and maintain the land in common for the open space purposes intended according to the following provisions (See suggestions for the HOA in Appendix B-B-I): 
(1)  Prior to final plat approval, developers desiring to build a conservation design subdivision will create and submit minimum requirements and structure for the HOA before the first lot is sold; 
(2)  The HOA will maintain, pay taxes, and own the open space. [In some communities the local government may agree to maintain the open space; see item (b) below.]; 
(3)  Membership in the HOA is mandatory for all homeowners, and dues are uniform; and 
(4)  The HOA, by law, will stipulate that a third party, such as the local government, may enforce the maintenance of the open space through legally enforceable liens. 
(b)  Dedication of legally described and platted "open space" to the city or the Chatsworth/Murray County Recreation Department. 
(c)  Dedication of legally described and platted "open space" to a land trust established in compliance with the requirements of Georgia law and shall be for conservation purposes. [In lieu of ownership, a binding conservation easement to the applicable land trust can also be declared across the conservation lands.] 
6.  Open space ownership and maintenance. The approval of such subdivision shall require the owner or owners of open space land to execute, acknowledge, and file in the land records of Murray County, including documents and maps which effectively create a conservation easement or other legal conveyance approved by the city or Murray County or their designee. Theses records (see legal considerations in subsection 6.4.7 and suggestions for open space in Appendix B-B-I): 
(a)  Will be binding on all future owners of the open space land; 
(b)  May be enforced by the adjoining property owners, the City of Chatsworth, Murray County, or a land trust by appropriate court action for equitable relief in the form of an injunction; 
(c)  Will assure appropriate maintenance, by the homeowners' association or as otherwise herein provided, of open space land to the satisfaction of the City of Chatsworth; 
(d)  Will provide that if maintenance, preservation, and/or use of the open space land no longer complies with the provisions of the easement, the City of Chatsworth may take all necessary action to effect compliance and assess the costs against the owners in default; and 
(e)  Will provide that such easement may not be modified, altered, or amended. 
7.  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
(a)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
(1)  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
(i)  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
(ii)  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
(2)  If the entity accepting the easement is not the city, then a third right of enforcement favoring the city shall be included in the easement. 
(3)  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity. 
(4)  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the city. 
(b)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions and permitted uses contained in subsections 6.4.3 and 6.4.4, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
8.  Septic systems, wells, and stormwater management systems. Easements will allow designated open space to be used for community sewer system drip lines or wells, and storm water management structures designed to promote on-site infiltration and/or treatment of runoff. 
9.  Significant structures. Structures of historic, architectural, or cultural significance existing prior to development of the subdivision may be retained within the open space. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 6.5. - Road specifications. 
Design standards for road construction in a conservation design subdivision shall be generally consistent with those set forth in the Chatsworth Infrastructure Specifications, however, the flexible standards list in Appendix B-B-11 shall also be available as options if the street system is to remain private. (Even as private streets, the requirements for street base and all storm water drainage mechanisms shall comply with the requirements of Chatsworth, and public safety and emergency access issues remain valid.) 
Private streets, constructed using the flexible standards addressed in Appendix B-B-II, are not eligible for future dedication to the city unless such roads are improved to comply with all specifications of the city. 
1.  Road locations. 
(a)  Roads should be located in a way that minimizes adverse impacts to primary and secondary conservation areas. 
(b)  To the greatest extent practicable, wetland crossings and streets traversing existing slopes over 15 percent shall be strongly discouraged. 
(c)  Permanent turnarounds employing a "T," "Y," or half-circle designs are available alternatives if deemed necessary to minimize effects on terrain. 
(d)  Alleys, otherwise available only as a secondary access to one or two-family residential developments [subsection 5.6.9(d)], are available for primary access in a conservation design subdivision due to terrain or overall design considerations. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 6.6. - Locations of building sites. 
As long as the number of buildings meet the density neutral criterion set in section 6.3 it is intended that developers are given flexibility on building locations based on environmental factors and the types of developments the market will bear. 
1.  Building location considerations. The Chatsworth Planning Commission shall evaluate the appropriateness of proposed building locations on conceptual preliminary site plans and plats to determine whether the proposed locations satisfy considerations listed in Appendix B-B-III. 
2.  Generally, a minimum distance of 100 feet shall separate building sites from primary conservation areas. 
3.  Building sites can be located within 50 feet of secondary conversation areas in order to take advantage of views without negatively impacting primary conservation areas. 
4.  Building "footprint" locations may not be changed more than 50 feet from preliminary plat to final plat without the approval of the Chatsworth Planning Officer. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
APPENDIX B-A. - FEE SCHEDULE 
Major Subdivision (includes preliminary and final plat) ..... $100 + $2.00 per lot 
Minor Subdivision (final plat only) ..... $30 + $1.00 per lot 
(Note: the above fees include the amount necessary to record the plat in the Office of the Superior Court Clerk of Murray County.) 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
APPENDIX B-B-I. - HOME OWNERS ASSOCIATION 
Suggestions for the home owners association (HOA): 
At least one member of the HOA should receive training in wildlife habitat conservation, enhancement, and maintenance. 
Each homeowner should be given site-specific information about indigenous habitat and diversity of species. 
• The HOA should develop a long-term conservation plan for maintenance of common areas. This plan should include examples of environmentally friendly landscaping techniques for homeowners. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
APPENDIX B-B-II. - OPEN SPACE AND STREETS 
Suggestions for open space: 
A minimum of ten percent should be used for active recreation, such as playing fields or community buildings/amenity centers (swim/tennis). [Note: the community buildings/amenity centers require planned open space to equal 50 percent or more of the gross tract area.] 
Open space in one development should be linked to open space in adjoining developments to create the largest, continuous area of open space possible. 
Suggestions for streets: 
• Minimize the number of cul-de-sac streets by providing more than one entrance to the development and interconnect streets as much as possible; the importance of environmental areas and the connections between them are important in conservation design subdivisions, and shall be considered in determining whether street interconnections are possible. 
• For cul-de-sac streets, minimize the amount of impervious surface by limiting the internal turning radius to 20 feet and the width of the paved lane to 16 feet. Use grass and vegetation for the inner circle of turnarounds, rather than paving the entire area. In the neighborhood Bylaws, declare the HOA responsible for the maintenance of the grassy area. 
Vegetated swales are encouraged in a conservation subdivision plan as an alternative to curb and gutter. Omit curbs wherever possible. This allows runoff from roofs and pavements to pass immediately through grass swales or infiltration basins. Use plant material that will absorb rainwater and act as a natural filter for oil and pollution. 
Use permeable pavement for street surfaces, driveways, sidewalks, and pedestrian and bike paths, except where steep slopes, swelling soils, and other site-specific constraints make it unfeasible. Examples of permeable pavement used in neighborhood developments include permeable crushed stone aggregate, open-celled pavers, porous asphalt, and porous concrete. Wooden decks, paving stones, and wood mulch are recommended for pedestrian areas. 
• Provide marked, paved paths for non-vehicular traffic within the development and connecting to neighboring residential and commercial areas. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
APPENDIX B-B-III. - EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR BUILDING SITE LOCATIONS 
In evaluating the layout of lots and open space, the following criteria will be considered by the Chatsworth Planning Commission as indicating design appropriate to the site's natural, historic, and cultural features, and meeting the purposes of this ordinance. Diversity and originality in lot layout shall be encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship between development and conservation areas. Accordingly, the Chatsworth Planning Commission shall evaluate proposals to determine whether the proposed conceptual preliminary plan: 
1.  Protects and preserves all floodplains, wetlands, and steep slopes from clearing, grading, filling, or construction (except as may be approved by the city for essential infrastructure or active or passive recreation amenities). 
2.  Preserves and maintain mature woodlands, existing fields, pastures, meadows, and orchards, and creates sufficient buffer areas to minimize conflicts between residential and agricultural uses. For example, locating house lots and driveways within wooded areas is generally recommended, with two exceptions. The first involves significant wildlife habitat or mature woodlands, which raise an equal or greater preservation concern, as described in subsections 5 and 8 below. The second involves predominantly agricultural areas, where remnant trees groups provide the only natural areas for wildlife habitat. 
3.  If development must be located on open fields or pastures because of greater constraints in all other parts of the site, dwellings should be sited on the least prime agricultural soils, or in locations at the far edge of a field, as seen from existing public roads. Other considerations include whether the development is visually buffered from existing public roads, such as by a planting screen consisting of a variety of indigenous native trees, shrubs and wildflowers (specifications for which should be based upon a close examination of the distribution and frequency of those species found in a typical nearby roadside verge or hedgerow). 
4.  Maintains or creates an upland buffer of natural native species vegetation of at least 100 feet in depth adjacent to wetlands and surface waters, including creeks, streams, springs, lakes and ponds. 
5.  Designs around existing hedgerows and tree lines between fields or meadows, minimizing impacts on large woodlands (greater than five acres), especially those containing many mature trees or a significant wildlife habitat, or those not degraded by invasive vines. Also, woodlands of any size on highly erodible soils, with slopes greater than ten percent, should be avoided, where possible. However, woodlands in poor condition with limited management potential can provide suitable locations for residential development. When any woodland is developed, great care shall be taken to design all disturbed areas (for buildings, roads, yards, septic disposal fields, etc.) in locations where there are no large trees or obvious wildlife areas, to the fullest extent that is practicable. 
6.  Leaves scenic views and vistas unblocked or uninterrupted, particularly as seen from public roadways. (For example, in open agrarian landscapes, a deep "no-build, no-plant" buffer is recommended along the public roadway where those views or vistas are prominent or locally significant. In wooded areas where the sense of enclosure is a feature that should be maintained, a deep "no-build, no-cut" buffer should be respected, to preserve existing vegetation. 
7.  Avoids sitting new construction on prominent hilltops or ridges, by taking advantage of lower topographic features. 
8.  Protects wildlife habitat areas of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and/or by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Georgia Protected Species Updated List. 
9.  Designs around and preserves sites of historic, archaeological or cultural value, and their environs, insofar as needed to safeguard the character of the feature, including stone walls, spring houses, barn foundations, cellar holes, earthworks, burial grounds, etc. 
10.  Protects rural roadside character and improves public safety and vehicular carrying capacity by avoiding development fronting onto existing public roads. Establishes buffer zones along the scenic corridor of rural roads with historic buildings, stonewalls, hedgerows, etc. 
11.  Landscapes common areas (such as community greens), cul-de-sac islands, and both sides of new streets with native specie shade trees and flowering shrubs with high wildlife conservation value. Planted trees along roadways shall be spaced at intervals so that the neighborhood will have a stately and traditional appearance when they grow and mature. Such trees shall generally be located between the sidewalk or footpath and the edge of the street, within a planting strip not less than five feet in width. 
12.  Provides active recreational areas in suitable locations offering convenient access by residents, and adequately screened from nearby house lots. 
13.  Includes a pedestrian circulation system designed to assure that pedestrians can walk safely and easily on the site, between properties and activities or special features within the neighborhood open space system. All roadside footpaths should connect with off-road trails, which in turn should link with potential open space on adjoining undeveloped parcels (or with existing open space on adjoining developed parcels, where applicable). 
14.  Provides open space that is reasonably contiguous, and whose configuration is in accordance with the guidelines contained in the Design and Management Handbook for Preservation Areas, produced by the Natural Lands Trust. For example, fragmentation of open space should be minimized so that these resource areas are not divided into numerous small parcels located in various parts of the development. To the greatest extent practicable, this land shall be designed as a single block with logical, straightforward boundaries. Long thin strips of conservation land shall be avoided, unless the conservation feature is linear or unless such configuration is necessary to connect with other streams or trails. The open space shall generally abut existing or potential open space land on adjacent parcels, and shall be designed as part of larger contiguous and integrated greenway systems, as per the policies in the Murray County, Chatsworth, and Eton Joint Comprehensive Plan, 2005-2025, or equivalent. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
APPENDIX B-C. - DEVELOPER'S QUICK CHECKLIST 
[This checklist only applies the development of major subdivisions.] 

I. - Pre-submittal conference (optional). 
A.  Opportunity to meet with the building inspector or other department heads to discuss initial questions about the proposed subdivision and to explain the process for approval. 
B.  Intent to subdivide land means that before any grading, site development, or construction begins on-site, a preliminary plat must be approved. 
C.  A soil erosion and sediment control plan should parallel the subdivision plat approval process in order to avoid inconvenient delays in on-site work. 
D.  The national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit should also parallel the plat approval process. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
II. - Preliminary plat submission. 
A.  Five copies of the preliminary plat (seven copies where subdivision proposes access to a state highway) and supporting documentation shall be submitted to the building inspector. 
B.  Submission shall occur 15 working days prior to the meeting date of the planning commission at which the subdivider desires the planning commission to take official action. 
C.  Building inspector forwards copies of the plat to city departments for individual review by those responsible for streets, drainage, provisions for fire, water, sewer, and other infrastructure. 
D.  Ninety days after the date of review by the planning commission, the planning commission shall approve, or approve with condition, or disapprove the preliminary plat. 
E.  Planning commission approval of a preliminary plat shall be considered valid for a period of two years from the date of plat approval. 
F.  Preliminary plat specifications. Shall be prepared by a Georgia Registered Land Surveyor. The plat shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet to an inch. The plat shall be drawn in permanent ink on reproducible material not exceeding 20 by 24 inches and shall include: 
(1)  Proposed name of subdivision; with R/Ws and names of new streets and existing streets; 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of person to be notified of action; 
(3)  Name, address, and license number of the register land surveyor responsible for the preparation of the plat; 
(4)  Graphic scale, north arrow and date of plat preparation; 
(5)  Total acreage in single parcel ownership by the subdivider; the total number of acres being subdivided; the total number of lots created; and the total linear length of streets. 
(6)  A general location map showing the proposed development in relation to other adjacent properties and existing streets in the Chatsworth area; 
(7)  The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property to the nearest hundredth of a foot and the deed record names of adjacent owners or subdivisions; 
(8)  The location and dimensions of existing rights-of-ways, streams (showing stream buffers, as amended), drainage structures, or utilities, buildings, lakes, and lands subject to flooding; if applicable, the 100-year floodplain should be shown; 
(9)  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet based upon mean sea level (M.S.L.); the contour requirement may be waived or the interval adjusted up or down as determined by the building inspector; 
(10)  The layout and scaled dimensions of all lots and streets; the location, purpose, and dimensions of all existing and future drainage ways and easements; the size of the drainage area in acres must be provided; the size and location of all existing and proposed drainage tiles shall be shown; 
(11)  The location and dimension of all property proposed to be set aside for recreation use or other public use, with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation; 
(12)  Centerline profile of all proposed streets showing natural and finished grades and proposed street names; and a cross-section of the proposed street design; 
(13)  Front setback lines; 
(14)  Statements on the plat to indicate the applicable service to the proposed development: 
water = public water or individual well 
sewage disposal = public sewer or individual septic tanks 
(15)  Draft of proposed restrictive covenants, if any, to be imposed and designation of areas subject to special restrictions; 
(16)  Environmentally sensitive areas: location of major river corridors, water supply watersheds, groundwater recharge areas, wetlands, the boundary and elevation of the 100-year floodplain as determined by the past history of flooding or best available data. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
III. - Final plat submission. 
A.  The final plat shall be prepared by a Georgia Registered Land Surveyor preferably at 100 feet to an inch, but in no case smaller than 200 feet to an inch. The plat shall be drawn in permanent ink on reproducible material on sheet or sheets not exceeding 17 by 22 inches. 
B.  From the date of final plat submission, including all required supporting data and certifications, the building inspector shall approve or disapprove the final plat and/or site plan within 30 days. 
C.  The final plat shall substantially represent the as-built development approved via the preliminary plat process. Such improvements shall have been completed in accordance with approved standards, and certificates of satisfactory completion have been obtained from the appropriate authority(ies); or the developer/subdivider may submit an appropriate bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or funds in escrow in an amount not less than 110 percent) of the estimated expenses of construction to proper standards and shall complete construction within one year of the issuance of the first building permit for a lot along such road. 
D.  A minimum of five copies of the final plat shall be submitted and shall show the following: 
(1)  Name of subdivision and street names; 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of person to be notified of action; 
(3)  Name, address, seal and license number of the registered land surveyor; the signature of the surveyor shall be across the seal in black ink for the plat to be valid; also, seals of landscape architects or civil engineers, if appropriate; 
(4)  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point, notation as to the reference of bearings to magnetic, true north, or grid north and indication whether bearings shown are calculated from angles turned or taken from compass readings; 
(5)  Location of tract (land district and land lot) giving total acreage being subdivided; total number of lots created; and total length of new streets within the development; 
(6)  Location sketch map showing the relationship of the plat to other existing streets and properties in Murray County; 
(7)  Index map where more than one sheet is required to present plat; [Note: multiple sheets shall each be named to conform with the title sheet and designated for example: one of three, two of three, and three of three]; 
(8)  Identify the point of beginning (P.O. B.) tied to the nearest existing street intersection or nearest land lot line or district line; 
(9)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth-foot and angles to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure to be one foot in 8,500 feet or better. The error of closure shall be stated on the plat; 
(10)  City, county or land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse the subdivision; 
(11)  Street center lines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature; 
(12)  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners; 
(13)  Front setback lines; 
(14)  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order or numbered in relationship to each phase of development; 
(15)  Location, dimensions and purpose of all drainage structures and of any easements; including slope easements, and public service utility right-of-way boundaries, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and limitations; and of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners; 
(16)  Final plan of sanitary sewers (if applicable) with grade, pipe size and manhole locations; 
(17)  Final plan of water supply system (if applicable) with pipe sizes and location of valves, pipe and fire hydrants; 
(18)  Plan showing approximate location of electrical, telephone, television cable, and gas (if applicable) service's. An as built drawing of these services shall be submitted to the building inspector upon completion of the installation. 
(19)  Accurate location of monuments and markers; 
(20)  The boundary and elevation of the 100-year floodplain as determined by the past history of flooding or best available data; 
(21)  All certification statements on the final plat shall be signed and dated by the responsible city official per subsection 4.6.2(f) of the subdivision regulations; 
(22)  If a declaration of covenants and restrictions apply to the subdivision, then such covenants and restrictions shall be presented before the final plat is approved; the plat shall contain a statement: Restrictive covenants apply to the subdivision of lots shown hereon. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Appendix C - SIGN ORDINANCE 
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND SCOPE 
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide standards to safeguard public health, property, and welfare by regulating the location, size, illumination, construction, erection, maintenance, and quality of materials of all exterior signs, and to ensure that signs will not confuse, mislead, or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic and pedestrian safety. 
The City of Chatsworth ("City") acknowledges, too, that preservation of the health, safety, morals, and welfare of the citizenry of the City requires the preservation and protection of the visual attractiveness and aesthetic characteristics of existing streets and neighborhoods throughout the community. Signage controls are included in this ordinance to further the aesthetic values of the community by: 1) protecting neighborhood property values, 2) maintaining the traditional character of historic neighborhoods and districts; 3) avoiding the visual degradation of the City's irreplaceable scenic and environmental resources, and 4) promoting the City's continued economic growth by encouraging high quality commercial development. 
Reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs provides vital support for economic development and helps create a positive community image that will attract desirable business and industry to the Chatsworth area. The uncontrolled use of signs with their variable sizes, heights, and illumination demand attention to help avoid potential dangers to moving traffic and pedestrians. In addition, uncontrolled sign placements can be destructive to adjacent property values so that clutter replaces the intrinsic values of the property and diminishes the effectiveness of the signs as they compete with each other. Absent regulations, competition among competing sign owners for visibility of their signs undermines the sign owner's original purpose of presenting a clear message to the public. 
For these reasons, it has become necessary in the public interest to regulate the sizes, heights, locations, types, and other pertinent physical features of exterior signs in the City while simultaneously acknowledging free speech as a First Amendment constitutional right. Balancing the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs while protecting the right of the public against unrestricted proliferation of signs, is acknowledged as the goal of the City. Such reasonable regulations also further the policy implementation of the City's adopted comprehensive plan, especially regarding impacts on quality land use development in the area. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

2.1 - [Definitions.] 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply: 
Aggregate sign area: The area of all signs on a parcel, wall or window, as the case may be, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs. 
Animated sign: A sign with action, motion, or changing colors that requires electrical energy. This definition includes any signs that electronically change the sign face, whether by substitution of copy or scrolling. 
Awning: A permanently installed cloth, canvas, or rigid roof-like covering which hangs from a building facade or projects over the public sidewalk for the purpose of beautifying a building facade or sheltering pedestrians from sun or rain. (Also, see "Canopy.") 
Banner: A type of sign intended to be hung either with or without frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind. 
Business Premises: A building, suite, office, or other unit used for nonresidential purposes. For businesses licensed by the City, the area occupied by a single business license holder shall be deemed as one (1) business premises. Each professional corporation, partnership or other entity in which the professional participates shall be considered the occupant and all area so occupied shall be the business premises. For the purpose of this Ordinance, business premises shall include nonresidential space occupied by charitable organizations, political organizations, institutions, or other noncommercial entities. 
Canopy: A roof-like structure supported by columns or projecting from a building and open on at least three-sides. A canopy may also be detached from a building as a free-standing structure. 
Display Area (Face) or Sign Area: (a) For a sign, either free-standing or attached, the area shall be considered to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying design and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, (with or without trim), on which they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which are incidental to the display itself; (b) For a sign painted upon or applied to a building, the area shall be considered to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs or symbols together with any background of a different color than the natural color of the building; (c) Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surface, building, canopy, awning, wall or window, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or other geometric shape which encompasses all of the letters or symbols. 
Facade: The face of a building which, because of its architectural details, is clearly intended to be viewed by the public. The front facade is the building wall which customarily contains the primary entry of the building. 
Flag: Any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used to signify a government or other entity or organization. 
Frontage, Building: The width in linear feet of each exterior wall of a business which faces a public or private street right-of way. 
Frontage, Lot: For purposes of this Ordinance, lot frontage shall be construed as the width in linear feet of each lot where it adjoins a street right-of-way line. 
Parcel: A separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records. Also, synonymous with "lot" or "tract." 
Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or similar material suspended from a rope, wire, cable, or string designed to move in the wind. The term can include "streamer." 
Sign: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, events or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement, or illumination (See "Display Area or Sign Area.") 
Sign, Abandoned: Any sign that no longer serves the functional purpose for which it was originally erected due to physical deterioration. 
Sign Base: The footings, and vertical posts supporting the sign display area. 
Sign, Bench: A sign located on any part of the surface of an outdoor courtesy bench or seat, trash cans, water fountains, bus stop shelters, and similar devices. 
Sign, Billboard: Any permanent freestanding sign used as an outdoor display for making anything known where the total sign display area is larger than two hundred (200) square feet. 
Sign, Canopy: A permanent sign affixed to, superimposed upon, hung from or painted on any roof-like structure or awning extended over the sidewalk or a walkway. Often, used in lieu of a wall sign. 
Sign Copy: The linguistic or graphic content, including the trim and borders of a sign. 
Sign, Double-Faced (Back-to-Back): A sign type with two parallel, or nearly parallel display areas, back-to-back, and located not more than twenty-four (24) inches from each other, where the interior angle formed by the display areas is sixty (60) degrees or less. One display area is designed to be seen from one direction and the other display area from another direction. 
Sign, Flashing: A sign of any type requiring electrical energy, where illumination of the sign by artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity for at least ten (10) seconds. Color changes, while the sign is in use, are included as a flashing sign. 
Sign, Freestanding: Any affixed sign supported by one or more upright poles, columns, braces, or a base placed in or on the ground and is wholly independent of any building for support. 
a)  Ground: Any permanent freestanding sign with a height that extends not more than three (3) feet above the ground measured from the point of lowest adjacent grade, and the bottom edge of the display area is either attached directly to the ground or not more than one (1) foot above the ground. 
b)  Pole: A permanent free-standing sign used as an outdoor display having a total sign display area mounted on one or more poles or supports more than three (3) feet above the ground. 
Signs, Lighted: Any sign which is visually enhanced through the use of light emitted directly from or within a display surface (internal), or through the use of indirect light that is cast from a source other than the display area of the sign (external). 
Sign, Non-Conforming: Any sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, and which by reason of such adoption fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this Ordinance. 
Sign, Permanent: Any sign attached securely to a building, or a canopy, or the ground by means of concrete, bolts, metal braces, or wood, and continuing in the same state without essential change to the sign structure. 
Sign, Portable: Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support is constructed without wheels; or an A or T-frame sign; or any sign generally considered moveable or temporarily attached to the ground, including but not limited to: 
Signs designated to be transported by a trailer or wheels; 
Signs with wheels removed; 
Signs with chassis or support constructed without wheels; 
A - or T - frame signs (a self-supporting sign with two faces placed back-to-back on a base (inverted T) or hinged together at the top in such a manner that each face leans toward the other.); 
Menu, sandwich or sidewalk-type signs; 
Searchlight stands; 
Hot-air or gas-filled balloons, or umbrellas; 
Signs mounted on or painted on parked cars that are intended as an advertising device; 
Banners (except those banners larger than thirty-two (32) square feet, and attached temporarily to a building or above a public street right-of-way); and 
Pennants and Streamers. 
Sign, Projecting: A sign which is attached perpendicular to a building and extends twelve (12) inches or more horizontally from the plane of the building wall, but not more than five (5) feet. 
Sign, Project/Development: A sign located at any discernible entrance or gateway into a particular residential subdivision, other high-density residential development, or commercial/industrial park that serves a common or collective purpose for a group of persons or businesses. 
Sign, Roof: Any permanent sign that is attached, or mounted permanently on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which may or may not project above the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable, or hip roof, the deck line of a building with a mansard roof, or project above the building with a flat roof; roof signs would also include any letters, numbers, or message that would be painted, or equivalent, upon the surface of the roof. 
Sign, Side-by-Side: A permanent structure of two horizontally adjacent signs with their faces orientated in the same direction. 
Sign, Stacked: A permanent structure of two vertically adjacent signs with their faces orientated in the same direction. 
Sign, Temporary: A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic, plywood, or other light, impermanent material and designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time. 
Sign, V-Shaped: A structure of two signs in the shape of the letter "V" when viewed from above having their faces oriented in opposite directions at an interior angle not greater than ninety (90) degrees. 
Sign, Wall: A sign painted or attached parallel to a wall which is an integral part of the building, and which shall project not more than twelve (12) inches from the wall of the building. 
Sign, Window: Any permanent or temporary sign with letters, words, or symbols which are displayed on or attached to the exterior or interior window glass that is part of the structural wall of any building and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 - Applicability. 
The location of signs shall conform to applicable State law. In general, all signs shall be located on private property. No sign shall be permitted within any street or road right-of-way. 
3.1-1  It shall be unlawful to erect or place any sign that does not conform to the requirement of this Ordinance or as otherwise provided for non-conforming signs by this Ordinance. 
3.1-2  The requirements of this ordinance shall apply to all signs that are visible from a street, public right-of-way, or property in public ownership, regardless of zoning district. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
3.2 - Measuring Signs. 
3.2-1  Display Area. See definition for display area in Article II of this Ordinance. The display area is measured geometrically in square feet, and is the area within the smallest regular geometric shape that contains the entire sign copy. The maximum allowed sign size of this Ordinance requires the summation of multiple display areas mounted on any sign structure that are readable from a single direction. 
3.2-2  Height of Signs. Except, as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, the height of a sign at its highest point above the level of the ground may be no greater than the maximum building height of the zone district in which the sign is located. The following rules shall apply in determining adjacent ground: If the base of the sign structure is below the grade of the adjacent roadway, the sign height is measured from the elevation of the adjacent roadway that is nearest to the sign structure. The ground shall not be altered for the sole purpose of providing additional sign height. 
3.2-3  Setback. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the setback requirements reference the minimum distance from a street right-of-way line required for the placement of a sign structure. For side or rear line setbacks in all zone districts, a sign structure shall comply with a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from the property line, but in no case shall the sign structure be placed on or the sign display area extend across any property line, required buffer, or over a public right-of-way, except as may be allowed in the CBD zone district. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
3.3 - Lighting Restrictions. 
3.3-1  The light from illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
3.3-2  No illuminated signs shall be constructed or maintained within fifty (50) feet of any dwelling within a residential district. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
3.4 - Special Restrictions. 
3.4-1  It shall be unlawful to post any signs or advertisements on any building, fence, or property belonging to another without the written consent of the owner thereof. Such consent shall be exhibited to the Building Inspector on demand by the person erecting, constructing, or maintaining the sign. 
3.4-2  Rotating signs which include a standard sign rotating device designated to rotate at a rate of less than six (6) revolutions per minute shall be permitted within all non-residential districts. 
3.4-3  Signs may be mounted back to back when they share the same structure and only one side (the larger side if of unequal dimensions) shall be considered in computing the display area dimensions. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
3.5 - Corner Visibility Clearance. 
In any district, no sign or sign structure (above a height of three (3) feet shall be maintained within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. However, a sign structure (example: pole support) not more than ten (10) inches in diameter, if located on a corner lot where services are provided to the motoring public, may be located within the required corner visibility area if all other requirements of this Article are met and the lowest elevation of the sign face is at least ten (10) feet above the ground level. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF SIGNS 
The following provisions apply to all uses in all zone districts except as may be specified elsewhere in this Ordinance. 

4.1 - Prohibited Signs. 
The following signs types are prohibited throughout the city of Chatsworth in all zone districts and all historic districts. 
4.1-1  Portable Signs, except A-frame signs in the CBD that meet the requirements set forth in Section 4.4-1(e). 
4.1-2  Billboards Signs except in specifically identified corridors. 
4.1-3  Roof Signs. 
4.1-4  Flashing Signs. 
4.1-5  Abandoned Signs. 
4.1-6  Lighted, neon or luminous signs giving off light resulting in glare, blinding, or any other such adverse effect on traffic shall not be erected or maintained. 
4.1-7  Signs that contain words, pictures, or statements that are obscene as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
4.1-8  A sign which simulates an official traffic control or warning sign in such a manner as to confuse or mislead the traffic, or hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal. 
4.1-9  Signs which emit or use in any manner any sound capable of being detected by a person with normal hearing that is moving as a pedestrian or within a motor vehicle along any road or highway. 
4.1-10  Signs on public rights-of-way. 
4.1-11  Signs erected, maintained, affixed, painted, drawn on any tree, rock, or other natural feature. It shall also be unlawful to post signs, upon any utility or telephone poles and traffic control devices. 
4.1-12  No sign shall be erected or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, any means of ingress/egress or ventilation, or which prevents free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof; nor shall any sign be attached in any form shape or manner to a fire escape. 
4.1-13  Animated signs that change sign copy more frequently than ten (10) second intervals. 
4.1-14  Signs that violate the building codes or electrical code of the city. 
4.1-15  Bench Signs. 
4.1-16  Projecting Signs. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
4.2 - Permanent Signs. 
The following sign types require the issuance of permits unless otherwise stated by this Ordinance. 
4.2-1  Freestanding Signs. Such signs shall only be located on property in multi-family residential, commercial, or industrially zoned areas, unless otherwise stated. The display area of such signs shall not extend over a public right-of-way line or property line. Those pole signs having all of the display area ten (10) feet or more above ground level when measured from the grade at the right-of-way line may be erected so that the display areas abut the right-of-way line. Signs, with any portion of the display area less than ten (10) feet above ground level, must be erected at least ten (10) feet from the right-of-way line. 
4.2-2  Ground Signs. Allowed in multi-family residential, commercial, and industrial zone districts, a ground sign is a freestanding sign, provided that it does not exceed three (3) feet in height, and is no bigger than thirty-six (36) square feet in area, measured on one side only. Ground signs must be set back at least three feet from the public right-of-way. Freestanding signs in the C-1 zone district are limited to ground signs. 
4.2-3  Wall. Wall signs (including signs attached flat against the wall and painted wall signs) shall be securely fastened by metal supports to the building surface along the sign's greatest dimension. They may project not more than twelve (12) inches from the building, provided that, if they project more than four (4) inches from the building surface, they shall maintain a clear height of eight (8) feet above the ground level. Wall signs may not extend more than four (4) feet above the parapet wall. A wall sign may be permitted on an existing building that does not meet the setback requirement provided that the sign meets all other requirements of this section and is not located within the right-of-way. 
a)  Signs on the facades of the building. Except, as otherwise provided below, the total aggregate area of wall signs on the exterior front surface of a business premise shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the front surface of the business or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less. The total aggregate area of wall signs on a side or rear surface of a business premise shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the exterior side or rear surface of the business respectively or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less. The maximum size of a wall sign for a residential dwelling is two (2) square feet and for a multi-family residential project/development is fifty (50) square feet. 
b)  Larger Buildings. A non-residential building containing an area of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, or more, may have multiple wall signs on any facade of the building, not exceeding ten (10) percent of any façade. 
4.2-4  Window Signs. The aggregate sign area (permanent and/or temporary window signs) for each ground level window shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the window area. Window signs on or above the second floor are prohibited except when a business has no ground floor frontage, then, in such event the provisions of this Section 4.2-4 shall apply. 
4.2-5  Canopy Signs. Such signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in size and shall be not less than eight (8) feet above the ground at the lowest extremity of the sign. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
4.3 - Temporary Signs. 
Signage may periodically be needed for a short duration rather than permanent usage. To avoid the unfettered proliferation of signage that could easily contribute to litter and blight to the detriment of property values and business opportunity in all zone districts, the City finds it necessary to manage such signage with the issuance of permits that are tied to a prescribed set of rules for the various signs that may fall in this particular category. These signs shall not be erected within the public right-of-way and shall be located on private property with the permission of the property owner. Only one (1) permit shall be issued to cover all temporary signs. 
The maximum number of temporary permits to be issued to a single parcel in a multi-family, commercial, or industrial district shall be four (4) per year for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days for each permit issued. Not more than one temporary permit shall be issued per calendar quarter per applicant. Banners are allowable as temporary signs, however, only one (1) banner is allowed per applicant during any use period. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
4.4 - Signs Exempt from Permit Requirements. 
4.4-1  The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of Section 7.1 of this Ordinance: 
(a)  Freestanding sign, having a sign area of less than fifteen (15) square feet, provided it is not located in the public right-of-way, does not block vehicle sight visibility, does not exceed three (3) feet in height if a ground sign, or, if a pole sign, does not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(b)  Temporary window sign. Provided, however, the aggregate sign area (permanent and/or temporary window signs) shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the available window space. 
(c)  Seasonal displays located outside of the public right-of-way that are erected for a maximum period of thirty (30) days not more than twice a year. 
(d)  One A-frame sign per business in the CBD provided that: (i) it does not exceed three (3) feet in height and does not occupy more than three (3) square feet of sidewalk space, (ii) it is placed so that there is at least a five (5) feet of uninterrupted width of sidewalk for pedestrian traffic adjacent to the sign, (iii) it is placed at least a five (5) feet from any immobile street amenity (e.g. benches and bicycle racks). 
4.4-2  Flagpoles in residential zone districts shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height or the height of the primary structure, whichever is less. Flagpoles in commercial or industrial zoned districts shall not exceed sixty (60) feet in height. The dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height such that the hoist side of the flag shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the vertical height. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
4.5 - Use of Signs by Zone Districts. 
4.5-1  Residential Districts. 
a)  Platted residential subdivisions may erect one monument sign at each entrance to the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet above the grade level of the centerline of the adjacent street and shall not have a sign area greater than fifty (50) square feet. 
b)  Other than subdivision entrance signs allowed under Subsection (a) above, parcels located in residential zoning districts shall not contain signs having an aggregate sign area greater than fifteen (15) square feet. No individual sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in sign area in a residential zoning district, nor shall such sign exceed a height greater than six (6) feet above the grade level of the centerline of the adjacent street. 
4.5-2  Commercial/Industrial Districts. 
a)  Parcels may contain more than one freestanding sign, and the limits provided below shall include the area of all freestanding signs on the parcel: 
1)  Unless otherwise stated in this Ordinance, parcels exceeding three acres shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of three hundred (300) square feet for the entire parcel, but no single sign shall have a display area exceeding two hundred (200) square feet. 
2)  Unless otherwise stated in this Ordinance, parcels less than three acres but greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet for the entire parcel. 
3)  Unless otherwise stated in this Ordinance, parcels less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in size shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of one hundred (100) square feet for the entire parcel. 
4)  Platted non-residential subdivisions may erect one monument sign at each entrance to the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet above the grade level of the centerline of the adjacent street and shall not have a sign area greater than fifty (50) square feet. 
b)  Residential uses in the commercial and industrial districts shall comply with the signage requirements of Section 4.5-1. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
4.6 - Billboard Signs. 
4.6-1  Billboard signs are only allowed on commercial (C-2 and C-3) or industrial (M-1 and M-2) zoned parcels within the following corridors: 
a)  U. S. Highway 411 south of the intersection of Georgia 52 Highway; 
b)  U. S. Highway 411 north of the intersection of North Hyden Tyler Road; 
c)  Industrial Boulevard; 
d)  Duvall Road south of the intersection of Industrial Boulevard; 
e)  G. I. Maddox Parkway. 
4.6-2  The display area and trim of a billboard sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and twenty-five (25) feet in length or a display area in excess of three hundred (300) square feet. Billboard signs shall not be placed side-by-side or stacked. 
4.6-3  All billboard signs shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet above adjacent highway/roadway pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. The maximum height of any billboard sign shall be forty (40) feet, measured from the grade of the adjacent highway/roadway. 
4.6-4  Two signs in the same location (back-to-back or "V" formation) shall be the same height above the adjacent roadway surface. 
4.6-5  Sign structures shall be not less than ten (10) feet from any property or right-of-way line and shall be spaced a minimum of five hundred (500) feet apart measured on the same side of the highway/roadway. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
ARTICLE V. - NON-CONFORMING USES 
Except, as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, all signs shall be subject to the provisions below, governing non-conforming uses. Such provisions, however, shall not be construed to prevent a legally operating non-conforming use from using signs otherwise permitted for similar conforming uses. 

5.1 - Continuance of Non-Conforming Uses. 
The lawful use of land area or sign structure existing at the time of enactment of or subsequent amendment to this Ordinance may be continued subject to the following restrictions even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Existing non-conforming sign structures shall not be: 
(a)  Changed to another non-conforming sign; 
(b)  Torn down and rebuilt or moved and rebuilt as a non-conforming sign; 
(c)  Extended or enlarged; or 
(d)  Rebuilt, altered, or repaired after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the improvements, except when changed conditions beyond the control of the owner render the sign nonconforming or warrant the sign's repair. 
For the purpose of administration of this provision ordinary maintenance of a sign is not deemed to be or constitute an extension or enlargement of the sign; and changing the face of the sign is not deemed a change prohibited by this Section. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
5.2 - Deterioration. 
Non-conforming signs which have been allowed to deteriorate so as to constitute either an aesthetic nuisance or a safety hazard are subject to removal pursuant to Article VII of this ordinance. A sign shall be deemed to be deteriorated if the paint on its face is faded, cracked or peeling, if removable letters on the changeable copy board are missing or in disarray, if plastic panels are missing, broken or stained, if the sign face or its supporting frame work is rusty or in need of paint, if the area surrounding the sign base is not maintained and kept free of weeds and debris, or if the sign is in need of structural repair. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
5.3 - Abandonment. 
Nonconforming signs which have been abandoned, shall be removed in their entirety by the record owner of the building or the person who obtained the sign license, whichever owns the sign or portion thereof, within ninety (90) days after the business using the sign closes or ceases to operate on the premises where the sign is located. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
ARTICLE VI. - APPEALS 

6.1 - Procedure. 
An applicant whose permit application has been denied or a permittee who alleges that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building Inspector or any other administrative official in connection with the enforcement of this Ordinance, may appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals as established by Article XVI of the Chatsworth Zoning Ordinance upon filing a written notice of an appeal with the Building Inspector within ten business days of the challenged decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider an appeal at the next meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that the notice of appeal is received a minimum of five (5) full business days before the meeting. If the appeal is not heard at the next meeting it shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals thereafter, but in any event no later than forty-five (45) days from the date the written notice of an appeal was filed with the Building Inspector. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make a final decision no later than thirty (30) days from the date of hearing. Should the appellant wish to appeal the Board's decision, the appellant must do so by writ of certiorari directly to the Whitfield County Superior Court. There shall be no intermediate appeal to the Mayor and Council or any other administrative body. An application for a writ of certiorari must be filed within thirty (30) days of the applicant's receipt of the written decision of the Board. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
6.2 - Powers. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to reverse or amend the decision of the Building Inspector, and/or authorize a variance from the strict application of this Ordinance where such application will result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships to the person owning or having the beneficial use of the property or sign for which the variance is sought. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
6.3 - Application of the Variance Power. 
A variance may be allowed by the Board of Appeals only in cases involving practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships when the evidence in the official record of the appeal supports all of the following affirmative findings: 
(1)  That the alleged hardships or practical difficulties or both, are exceptional and peculiar to the property of the person requesting the variance, and result from conditions which do not exist generally throughout the City. 
(2)  That the alleged hardships and practical difficulties, or both, which will result from a failure to grant the variance, include substantially more than mere inconvenience, inability to attain a higher financial return, or both. 
(3)  That allowing the variance will result in substantial justice being done, a) considering the public benefits intended to be secured by this Ordinance, b) the individual hardships that will be suffered by a failure of the Board to grant a variance, and c) the rights of others whose property would be affected by the allowance of the variance. 
(4)  That the requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to allow the applicant to enjoy the rights commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(5)  That granting of the variance would not violate more than one standard of this Ordinance. 
The above findings of fact shall be made by the Board of Appeals, which is not empowered to grant a variance without an affirmative finding of fact on the categories above. Every finding of fact shall be supported in the record of the proceedings of the Board. 
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to empower the Board of Appeals to change the terms of this Ordinance or to add to the uses permitted in any district. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

7.1 - Sign Permit. 
7.1-1  A sign permit is required before a permanent or temporary/special event sign may be erected or attached to, suspended from or supported on a building or structure; and before an existing sign may be enlarged, relocated or materially improved upon to an extent of sixty (60) percent of its total replacement value. All signs using electrical wiring and connections shall require an electrical permit. 
7.1-2  A sign permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector when the plans, specifications and intended use of the permanent sign or part thereof conform in all respects to the applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the City building code, and the requirements of the electrical code as certified by the Building Inspector and a permit fee has been paid by the applicant. The administrative application and fee shall be accompanied by plans or such other information as the Building Inspector may reasonably require in the exercise of his duties. In no event shall the Building Inspector require the applicant to submit the content of the proposed sign as a condition of issuing a permit. Standardized sign plans may be filed with the Building Inspector in fulfillment of this requirement, although site plans to determine the location of a sign shall be filed with each application. The Building Inspector shall process the application and either grant or deny the application within thirty (30) business days from the date of receipt of a complete application and payment of the proper fee. The failure of Building Inspector to timely act on the application shall be deemed a grant of the application. 
7.1-4  Each permit application shall contain an agreement to indemnify and save the City harmless of all damages, demands or expenses, which may in any manner be caused by the sign(s) or sign structure. 
7.1-5  The City shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that either do not comply with the provisions of this ordinance, are incomplete applications or are applications containing false material statements. Should it be determined that a sign permit was erroneously issued, then such permit is void from the beginning (ab initio). Denial of a permit shall be communicated to the sign applicant in writing by the Building Inspector before the end of the thirty (30) business days established for review of the application and shall state the reasons for denial of the application. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the communication may be made by email or facsimile. Alternatively, the City may serve the sign applicant personally with a copy of the written notice of denial within thirty (30) business days after the City's receipt of the application. The sign applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit to the City's Zoning Board of Appeals by written notice of appeal as provided in Section 6.1 above. 
7.1-6  A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six (6) months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. Where a permit has expired for failure to erect the sign and a sign is later desired in the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule in effect at the time of re-application. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
7.2 - Permit Fee. 
7.2-1  A permit fee shall be paid to the Building Inspector for each permit required by this Ordinance. The fee shall be in accordance to the rate schedule maintained in the Office of the Building Inspector. No permit shall be issued until the exact dimensions and area of the sign have been filed with the Building Inspector. 
7.2-2  Permit fees shall not apply to the ordinary servicing, repainting of existing sign message, cleaning of a sign, nor to changing of advertising on a sign specifically designed for periodic change of message without change in structure. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
7.3 - Construction and Maintenance. 
All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in constant repair and unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, shall be periodically given a protective coating. The area immediately in front of all freestanding signs shall be maintained free of high weeds and debris. In addition to the above provisions, the Building Inspector may cause any sign or structure which (a) is structurally unsafe, or (b) constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment, or (c) is not kept in good repair, or (d) is capable of causing electrical shocks, to be removed following 24-hour notice to the owner, at the expense of the owner thereof, and to destroy or otherwise dispose of the same. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
7.4 - Enforcement. 
If any sign is erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, the Building Inspector shall have the power to give the owner thereof written notice of such violation, said notice to include a brief statement of the particulars in which such violation is to be remedied. If a sign has been registered with the Building Inspector, notice to the registered owner or the person or firm receiving the permit shall be sufficient. If a sign has not been registered and the owner is not known, affixing a copy of the notice to the sign, graphic structure, or building for a period of ten (10) days shall be sufficient. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the interest of safety, any official or employee of the City shall have the authority to remove and dispose of any sign placed within the public right-of-way without notice to the owner. 
If such a violation is not remedied within thirty (30) days after such notice, the owner shall remove the sign immediately or be subject to a one hundred dollar ($100) a day fine for each day the sign remains. If the sign is not removed by the owner, the Building Inspector shall have the right to remove such sign at the expense of the owner thereof and to destroy or otherwise dispose of the same. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
7.5 - New Zoning Districts. 
If a new zoning district is created after the initial enactment of this Ordinance or subsequent amendment, no signs shall be permitted therein until this Ordinance shall be amended to include such zone district. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADOPTION AND AMENDMENTS 

8.1 - Adoption and Amendment. 
This ordinance may be adopted, or amended hereafter, only after the Mayor and Council shall have authorized the Chatsworth Planning Commission or equivalent (hereafter known as the Planning Commission) to conduct a public hearing, then review, and make a recommendation regarding the adoption or subsequent amendment of the Ordinance. The process for legal notice, public hearing, recommendation, and final action shall be in compliance with the requirements of the Chatsworth Zoning Procedures and Standards Ordinance. After conclusion of the required public hearing (Section 8.2), the Planning Commission shall have forty-five (45) days within which to submit its written report to the Mayor and Council. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within the forty-five (45) day period it shall be deemed to have approved the adoption or subsequent amendment. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
8.2 - Public Hearing. 
Before enacting an amendment to this Ordinance, the Planning Commission of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia, shall hold a public hearing thereon, and shall provide at least fifteen (15) days notice of the date, time, place, and purpose, which shall be published in the legal organ of the City of Chatsworth, Georgia. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
8.3 - Presentment to Mayor and Council. 
After either receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission or the expiration of the forty-five (45) day period within which the Planning Commission must act, the Mayor and Council may proceed to final action on the adoption or subsequent amendment. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
ARTICLE IX. - LEGAL PROVISIONS 

9.1 - Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect, except that any ordinances repealed by this provision shall not limit or impair the city's authority to enforce such ordinances to the extent that violations thereof occurred prior to repeal. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
9.2 - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Council of Chatsworth that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
9.3 - Effective Date. 
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption, the public welfare of the City of Chatsworth requiring it. 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
APPENDIX C-A. - RECORD OF AMENDMENTS 

 
( Ord. of 9-14-09 ) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1926 CODE 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1926 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1926 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1926 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1926 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede, but which were never included in the 1926 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter, Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state laws. 

 