LOCUST GROVE, GEORGIA - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances  of the City of Locust Grove, Georgia 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 7,  Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

PREFACE 
The Locust Grove, Georgia Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1994, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 7, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Jerry Elkins, mayor, and Frances G. Ward, city clerk. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 7, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the code up to date through Ordinance No. 16-12-063, passed December 19, 2016. 
Municipal Code Corporation  1700 Capital Circle SW  Tallahassee, FL 32310  800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the City of Locust Grove as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are "Reserved" for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 7, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross-referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 7, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 7, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 7, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX  Fee 5.04.030  Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 7, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation  P.O. Box 2235  Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation  1700 Capital Circle SW  Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
THE CHARTER 
ARTICLE I - Creation, Incorporation, Powers 

Sec. 1.10 - Incorporation. 
The City of Locust Grove, Georgia, in the county of Henry, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the City of Locust Grove, Georgia. Under that name, said city shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the corporation; shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will; and may exercise in conformity with this charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
Sec. 1.11 - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the City of Locust Grove shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The current boundaries of the City of Locust Grove, at all times, shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Locust Grove, Georgia." Alterations in these boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entries upon or additions to such map or description. Such entries or additions shall be made by and under the direction of the mayor. Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12 - Specific powers. 
The corporate powers of the government of the City of Locust Grove, to be exercised by the governing authority, may include the following: 
(1)  To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(2)  To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions, and to license and regulate such privileges, occupations, trades and professions, and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; 
(3)  To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city, to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(5)  To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(6)  To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(7)  To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, or under other applicable public acts as are or may be enacted; 
(8)  To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties; and to provide for withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; 
(9)  To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services, not to exceed periods of 50 years; to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with such regulations by the Public Service Commission; 
(10)  To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; 
(11)  To grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities and public services; 
(12)  To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, or other applicable public acts, as are or may be enacted; 
(13)  To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(14)  To establish minimum standards for and to regulate the erection, construction and repair of buildings and all other structures, to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes, to regulate all housing, building, and building trades, to license all building trades, and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city; 
(15)  To regulate or prohibit junk dealers; pawn shops; the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the use and sale of firearms; and to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; 
(16)  To regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, and itinerate trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; 
(17)  To license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortune telling or palmistry; 
(18)  To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the right-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; 
(19)  To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(20)  To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(21)  To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; 
(22)  To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(23)  To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(24)  To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(25)  To levy, a fee, charge or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a sewer service charge fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; 
(26)  To charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees, and to charge the same from time to time; such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; 
(27)  To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(28)  To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(29)  To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; 
(30)  To provide that persons given jail sentences in the recorder's court shall work out such sentence in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares in the city; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(31)  To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of loitering, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, the playing of lotteries and disturbing the peace in the corporate limits of the city and to prohibit or regulate by ordinance such other conduct and activities within said city which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this state, is deemed by the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the city or to the welfare of the citizens thereof; 
(32)  To regulate and license, or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same, if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition, by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; 
(33)  To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(34)  To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; 
(35)  To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city; 
(36)  To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefor; 
(38)  To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(39)  To make, ordain and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order and good government of the city; 
(40)  To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(41)  To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen or in any other manner provided by the general laws of the State of Georgia; 
(42)  To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(43)  To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.13 - General powers. 
In addition to all other powers herein granted, the city shall be vested with any and all powers which municipal corporations are, or may hereafter be, authorized or required to exercise under the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein, and any and all powers which the city was heretofore authorized to exercise upon the effective date of this charter. 
Sec. 1.14 - Construction. 
The powers of the city shall be construed liberally and in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the city as stated in this charter. It is the intention hereof to grant the city full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the city and all of its affairs. 
Sec. 1.15 - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision such powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the governing authority and as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.16 - Ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the governing authority. 
ARTICLE II - Governing Body 
[Division 1] City Council 

Sec. 2.10 - Creation; composition; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of the City of Locust Grove, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six (6) councilmen. The mayor and councilmen shall be elected in the manner provided by Article V of this charter. 
Sec. 2.11 - Terms of office. 
The three members of the council who were elected to such offices in 1997, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in such offices, shall continue to serve out their respective terms in such offices, which shall expire December 31, 2001. The mayor and three members of the council who were elected to such offices in 1999, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in such offices, shall continue to serve out their respective terms in such offices, which shall expire December 31, 2003. Future successors to the offices of mayor or members of the council whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the regular municipal general election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and shall serve terms of office of four years each. The mayor and members of the council shall serve for the terms specified in this section and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
Sec. 2.12 - Qualification of office. 
No person shall be eligible to any office under this act who is not eligible as a voter at the election aforesaid. 
Sec. 2.13 - Mayor pro tempore. 
At the first meeting of the city council in each year the council shall choose from its own number a mayor pro tempore, who, in the absence, sickness or disqualification of the mayor, shall be clothed with all rights, privileges and duties of the mayor. If the mayor elected by the people, and the mayor pro tempore shall be unable from any cause to attend to their duties, the council shall immediately elect another mayor pro tempore, who shall thereby be clothed with all the powers, rights and duties of the mayor of the city, upon taking the usual oath. 
Sec. 2.14 - Vacancy; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Forfeiture of office. The mayor or any councilman shall forfeit his office if he: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(2)  Is convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude. 
(c)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilman shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in Article V. 
Note: Pursuant to OCGA § 21-3-63, all municipal terms of office are now four years. 
Sec. 2.15 - Compensation and expenses. 
(a)  The major and councilmen shall receive as compensation for services as governing body members an amount which may be determined from time to time by majority vote of the Council; provided, however, that the initial compensation of the mayor and councilmen as governing body members under this Act shall be Four Thousand Eight Hundred ($4,800.00) Dollars annually for the Office of mayor and Three Thousand ($3,000.00) Dollars annually for the Office of a member of the City Council; and provided, further, that there shall be no change, by either increase or decrease, of such governing body compensation during the term of any councilman or the mayor as a result of majority vote of the Council except as provided in Code Section 36-35-4 of the O.C.G.A. 
(b)  In the event that the Council designates the mayor as an administrator of the City pursuant to Section 2.20 of this charter, the Council shall establish compensation for the mayor for the assumption of such administrative duties. The compensation for such administrative duties is initially established as Thirty Thousand ($30,000.00) Dollars annually if the designation is for full-time administrative support or Fifteen Thousand ($15,000.00) Dollars annually if the designation is for part-time administrative support. The mayor shall also be paid an additional sum if time is spent in excess of the minimum hours as defined in Section 2.20. The additional sum shall be determined by dividing the minimum number of hours per year into the base annual salary, with said amount being multiplied by the number of additional hours that services are performed by the mayor. Such sum shall be in addition to the mayor's salary designated for performance of governmental duties as official spokesperson for the City and chief advocate for policy as set out in subsection (a) of this section. So long as the mayor continues to serve in an administrative capacity pursuant to ordinance of the City Council, he or she shall draw such salary as provided under this subsection. Changes in such compensation shall be subject to modification by ordinance annually in December of each year for the next succeeding year. Such designation to serve in an administrative capacity with the City shall be made at the next regular meeting of the Council following the effective date of this section and on an annual basis in December of each year thereafter, it being the intent of this section that the mayor shall possess no vested right to designation as an administrator for his or her entire elected term in the event that the Council determines it would be in the best interest of the City to hire an outside administrator. 
(c)  The mayor and councilmen shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. (Ga. L. 1996, p. 3503) 
Sec. 2.16 - Prohibitions. 
(a)  An elected official of the city will not be disqualified from holding an appointment to any state, county or city board, commission, committee or authority. An elected official of the city will not be prohibited from receiving compensation for services and reimbursement for expenses while serving on any state, county or city board, commission, committee or authority. 
(b)  Voting when personally interested . Neither the mayor nor any other member of the Council shall vote upon any question in which he or she is personally interested. 
(c)  Dealing with City . No person holding office under this charter shall at any time during the term of which he or she was elected or appointed, or while in office, be capable of contracting with the City for the performance of any work or the sale of anything which is to be paid for out of the Treasury, nor shall any such person be capable of holding or having any interest in such contracts entered into by himself or herself or another, directly or indirectly. This section shall not apply to sales of personal property or services of less than Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars per calendar quarter or sales of personal property and contracts of personal services made pursuant to sealed competitive bids made by any person holding office or employment of the City of Locust Grove, or any agency thereof either for himself or herself or on behalf of any other business entity. (Ga. L. 1996, p. 3503) 
Sec. 2.17 - Inquiries and investigations. 
The council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. 
Sec. 2.18 - General power and authority of the council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this charter, the council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Locust Grove as provided by Article I. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, the constitution, and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Locust Grove and may enforce such ordinance by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)  By ordinance the council may create, change, alter, abolish, or consolidate offices, agencies, and departments of the city and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies, and departments expressly provided for by this charter. 
[Division 2] The Mayor 

Sec. 2.20 - Powers and duties of mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall be the official spokesman for the City and the chief advocate of policy. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council, shall sign ordinances and resolutions on their final passage, and shall sign deeds, bonds, contracts, and other instruments or documents when authorized by the Council to do so. The mayor shall perform such other duties as may be imposed by this charter or by ordinance of the Council, including but not limited to performance of full-time or part-time administrative duties governing the day-to-day operation of City government. For the purpose of this section, "part-time" administrative duties shall mean directing the day-to-day operations of City government for no less than eighty (80) hours per month. For the purpose of this section, "full-time" administrative duties shall mean directing the day-to-day operations of City government for no less than one hundred sixty (160) hours per month. Upon the effective date of this section, and in each December thereafter, the Council shall evaluate the needs of the City to determine whether it is in the City's best interest to designate the mayor to serve as the administrative head of the City government. Should the mayor die or be removed from office prior to the expiration of his or her term the Council shall make a determination as to the duties which will be imposed upon the mayor's office. Such determination shall be made prior to the first date of qualification for the election to fill the remaining unexpired term of the mayor. 
(b)  The mayor and mayor pro tempore, while acting as mayor, shall have the right to vote on all questions before the Council when said vote is a tie. (Ga. L. 1996, p. 3503) 
[Division 3] Organization and Procedures 

Sec. 2.30 - Organizational meeting. 
The council shall meet for organization on the first Monday in January each year. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will well and truly perform the duties of (mayor or councilmember as the case may be) of the city, and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Note: Pursuant to changes in statewide election dates for municipal office, the organizational meeting of council is held in January of each year. 
Sec. 2.31 - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meetings on any day or hour it may fix, and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(b)  Special meetings of the council may be held on call of the mayor or four (4) members of the council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, or shall be left at their residence at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmen are present when the special meeting is called. Notice of any special meeting may be waived in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice of any special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members present. With such consent any business which may be transacted in a regular meeting may be conducted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the council may be public. 
Sec. 2.32 - Rules of procedure. 
The council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
Sec. 2.33 - Quorum; voting. 
The mayor, or mayor pro tempore, and any four (4) councilmen shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote, and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. The mayor or mayor pro tempore shall have the casting vote, and the majority of votes may determine any and all questions and elections before the council. 
Sec. 2.34 - Action requiring an ordinance. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, every official action of the council which is to become law shall be by ordinance. Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Locust Grove hereby ordains...." 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the council and read at a regular or special meeting of the council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall distribute a copy to the mayor, and to each councilmember, and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the council may designate. 
Sec. 2.35 - Computation of time; holiday. 
(a)  Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other provisions of this charter, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public or legal holiday as set forth in Code Section 1-4-1 of the O.C.G.A. or by city ordinance or resolution, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. 
(b)  Holidays. The city is authorized to declare the days when it shall observe official holidays, to the extent permitted by law. 
Sec. 2.36 - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 2.37 - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; authentication, recording, codification, printing. 
(a)  (1)  Every ordinance adopted by the council shall be presented promptly by the clerk to the mayor. 
(2)  The mayor, within 10 calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the clerk with or without his approval, or with his disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the clerk, if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at 12:00 noon on the 10th calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the council, through the clerk, a written statement of his reasons for his veto. The clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(3)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the clerk to the council at its next regular meeting and should the council then or at its next regular meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of five (5) members, it shall become law. 
(4)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided herein. 
(b)  The council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto, with this charter and any amendment thereto, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Locust Grove, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the council. 
(c)  The council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed or reproduced promptly following its adoption, and the printed or reproduced ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the council. Following publication of the first Code of the City of Locust Grove and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or addition to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
ARTICLE III - Executive Branch 
[Division 1] Organization & General Provisions 

Sec. 3.10 - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  The council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city, as they shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices, and agencies or of any departments, offices, and agencies hereinafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the function or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by this charter or by ordinance, and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the mayor and council. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed as provided by ordinance and shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. Vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed for an original appointment. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(e)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance of the city council. 
Sec. 3.11 - Board, commissions and authorities. 
(a)  All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the council for such terms of office and such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by applicable state law. 
(b)  No manner [member] of any board, commission or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(c)  Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or any applicable state law. 
(d)  No member of any board, commission or authority shall assume office until he shall have executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance of the council and administered by the mayor. 
(e)  Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of four (4) members of the council. 
(f)  Members of boards, commissions and authorities may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance. 
(g)  The qualifications required of members of boards, commissions and authorities shall be as prescribed by ordinance. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by applicable state law, each board, commission or authority of the city government shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice chairman for terms of one (1) year, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or applicable state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.20 - City manager. 
In the event that the Council determines that a full-time administrator is necessary for City operations and determines not to designate the mayor to serve in such capacity pursuant to Section 2.20 of this charter, the Council may appoint a City manager. The duties and authorities of the City manager shall be established by ordinance of the Council, and in so doing, the Council may specifically delegate to the City manager any of the administrative or budgetary duties of the mayor. (Ga. L. 1996, p. 3503) 
Sec. 3.30 - City attorney. 
The council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized by ordinance, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the recorder's court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. 
[Division 2] Administrative Officers 

Sec. 3.40 - City clerk. 
The council may appoint a city clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council and to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city, and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the council may direct. 
Sec. 3.41 - Tax collector. 
The council may appoint a tax collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other monies belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city, and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale, or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
Sec. 3.42 - City accountant. 
The council may appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Sec. 3.43 - Consolidation of functions. 
The council may consolidate any two or more of the positions of the city clerk, city tax collector, and city accountant, or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. The city manager may, with the approval of the city council, perform all or any part of the functions of any of the positions or offices in lieu of appointing other persons to perform the same. 
[Division 3] Personnel Administration 

Sec. 3.50 - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager may prepare a position classification and pay plan to be submitted to the council for approval. Said plans may apply to all employees of the City of Locust Grove, and of any of its agencies and offices. When a pay plan has been adopted, the council shall not increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except by amendment of said pay plan. 
Sec. 3.51 - Personnel policies. 
The council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of any position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; and 
(4)  Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the City of Locust Grove. 
ARTICLE IV - Municipal Court 

Sec. 4.10 - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Locust Grove. (Ga. L. 1990, p. 4451) 
Sec. 4.11 - Judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a majority vote of all the members of the city council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal. (Ga. L. 1990, p. 4451) 
Sec. 4.12 - Convening of court. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. (Ga. L. 1990, p. 4451) 
Sec. 4.13 - Powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 12 months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that the state law has been violated. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(i)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)  The municipal court if specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. (Ga. L. 1990, p. 4451) 
Sec. 4.14 - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Henry County, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. (Ga. L. 1990, p. 4451) 
Sec. 4.15 - Rules. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. (Ga. L. 1990, p. 4451) 
ARTICLE V - Elections 
[Division 1] Representation; General Provisions 

Sec. 5.10 - Regular elections. 
The regular municipal general election shall be conducted on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year. Such elections shall conform to Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Election Code.' 
Note: Pursuant to OCGA § 21-3-51, all municipal elections are now held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of odd-numbered years. 
Sec. 5.11 - Qualifying; nomination of candidates; absentee ballots. 
By ordinance the council may prescribe rules and regulations governing qualifying fees, nomination of candidates, absentee ballots, write-in votes, challenge of votes, and such other rules and regulations as may be necessary for the conduct of elections in the City of Locust Grove. 
[Division 2] Conduct of Elections 

Sec. 5.20 - Applicability of general laws. 
The mayor shall be elected by a plurality vote, and the person receiving the highest number of votes cast for mayor shall be elected. Councilmen shall be elected by a plurality vote, and the person receiving the highest number of votes cast for each council position shall be elected. The procedures and requirements for election of all elected officials of the city of Locust Grove as to primary, special or general elections shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code, approved April 4, 1968 (Ga. L. 1968, p. 885), as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.21 - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within nine (9) months of the expiration of the term of office of the mayor or any councilman, said vacancy in office shall be filled by appointment by the remaining members of the council. Both special elections and qualifications of candidates therefor shall conform to the applicable provisions of this charter and the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 21, Chapter 3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as now or hereafter amended. 
[Division 3] Removal of Elective Officers 

Sec. 5.30 - Grounds for removal. 
The mayor or any councilman shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(a)  Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(b)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(c)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office, as provided by this charter or by law; 
(d)  Willful violation of any express prohibition of this charter; 
(e)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(f)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by law. 
Sec. 5.31 - Procedure for removal. 
Removal of an elected officer from office may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(a)  By action of two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire membership of the council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than 10 days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right to appeal from the decision of the council to the Superior Court of Henry County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(b)  By information filed in the Superior Court of Henry County, as provided by law. 
ARTICLE VI - Finance and Fiscal 
[Division 1] Taxation 

Sec. 6.10 - Property taxes. 
All property subject to taxation for state or county purposes, assessed as of January 1 in each year, shall be subject to the property tax levied by the City of Locust Grove. The council by ordinance shall elect to use the county assessment for the year in which the city taxes are to be levied and shall request the county to furnish appropriate information for such purpose. 
Sec. 6.11 - Tax levy. 
The council shall be authorized to levy an ad valorem tax not exceeding 15 mills on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, and for any other public purpose as determined by the council in its discretion. The council is also authorized to provide for sufficient levy to pay principal and interest on general obligations. 
Note: The last sentence of Section 6.11 was deleted pursuant to a letter from the city dated March 24, 1995. The sentence previously read: "The City of Locust Grove is hereby exempted from the provisions of Georgia Code section 92-4101 through 92-4104 inclusive." 
Sec. 6.12 - Tax due dates and tax bills. 
The council shall provide by ordinance when the taxes of the city shall fall due and in what length of time said taxes may be paid and shall provide by ordinance for the payment of taxes due to the city in installments, or in one lump sum, and when and how and upon what terms such taxes shall be due and payable, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.13 - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi. fa. issued by the city clerk and executed by any police officer of the city under the same procedure provided by the laws governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property upon which city property taxes are levied for taxes and interest, as of the assessment date of each year, which lien shall be superior to all other liens, except that it shall have equal dignity with those of federal, state or county taxes. In cases of hardship, the council shall have discretionary authority to waive any and all penalties imposed by this charter for delinquent taxes, fees, assessments, interest, or on other amounts due to the city. 
Sec. 6.14 - Licenses, occupational taxes, excise taxes. 
The council, by ordinance, shall have full power to levy such license and specific or occupational taxes upon the residents of the City of Locust Grove, both individual and corporate, and on all those who transact or offer to transact business therein, or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein, as the council may deem expedient for the public health, safety, benefit, convenience or advantage to the city; to classify business, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful; to require such persons to procure licenses; to compel the payment of such licenses by execution or any other lawful manner; and to make laws and regulations necessary or proper to carry out the powers herein conferred, and to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof. The council shall have full power and authority to levy an excise tax not prohibited by general law. 
Sec. 6.15 - Sewer service charges. 
The council by ordinance shall have the right, power and authority to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer services rendered both within and without the corporate limits of the City of Locust Grove to provide for the cost and expense of providing for the collection and disposal of sewage through the sewage facilities of said city. If unpaid, said sewer service charge shall constitute a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be second in priority only to liens for county and city property taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
Sec. 6.16 - Sanitary and health services charge. 
The council shall have authority by ordinance to provide for, to enforce, and to collect the cost of sanitary and health services necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms and corporations, residing in or doing business in said city benefiting from such service. Such authority shall include the power to assess, levy and collect annual or monthly sanitary taxes or fees in such amount or amounts, and based upon and in accordance with such classification of property and sanitary service or service provided, as may be fixed by ordinance. Said sanitary taxes and the assessment thereof shall be a charge and lien against the real estate in respect to which said taxes are so assessed, and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except liens for county and city property taxes, and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
Sec. 6.17 - Special assessments. 
The council shall have power and authority to assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances, against the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent 30 days after their due dates, shall thereupon be subject, in addition to fi. fa. charges, to a penalty of 10 percent and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate of nine percent (9%) per annum from date due until paid. A lien shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens, except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes, and said lien shall be enforceable by the same procedures and under the same remedies as provided for in this article for city property taxes. 
Sec. 6.18 - Transfer of executions. 
The city clerk shall be authorized to assign or transfer any fi. fa. or execution issued for any tax or for any street, sewer, or other assessment in the same manner and to the same extent as provided by Georgia law regarding sales and transfers of fi. fa.s. Such transfer or assignment, when made, shall vest the purchaser or transferee with all right, title and interest as provided by Georgia law governing sales and transfers of tax fi. fa.s provided that, upon levy of execution and sale of property pursuant to such tax fi. fa., whether assigned, transferred, or executed by the city, the owner of such property, in fee simple or lesser interest, shall not lose his right to redeem the property in accord with the requirements of redemption of property sold under state or county ad valorem tax fi. fa.s, as said requirements now exist or as may be hereinafter provided by law. 
[Division 2] Borrowing 

Sec. 6.20 - General obligation bonds. 
The council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any projects, programs or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.21 - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the council as provided by an act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved March 31, 1937, known as the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761), as now or hereafter amended, or by any other Georgia law as now or hereafter provided. 
Sec. 6.22 - Short term notes. 
Pursuant to applicable state law the city may obtain temporary loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year. 
[Division 3] Accounting and Budgeting 

Sec. 6.30 - Fiscal year. 
The council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department or institution, agency and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.31 - Preparation of budgets. 
The council shall provide by ordinance the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvement program and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.32 - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the council but not later than 90 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget and such other comments and information as he may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open for public inspection. 
Sec. 6.33 - Action by council on budget. 
(a)  The council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor; except, that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditure required by law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves and revenues, constituting the fund availability of such fund. 
(b)  The council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first regular meeting in January of each year. If the council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriation ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose or activity as set out in the budget document. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.34 - Property tax levies. 
As the next order of business following adoption of the operating budget, the council shall levy, by ordinance, an annual tax on all real and personal property within the City of Locust Grove. The tax rate set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the City of Locust Grove. 
Sec. 6.35 - Additional appropriations. 
The council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget, at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose, but any such additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies. 
Sec. 6.36 - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council but not later than 90 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The council shall have power to accept with or without amendments or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening the lives, health, or property of the inhabitants, when passed by two-thirds (2/3) vote of the membership of the council. 
(b)  The council shall adopt the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first regular meeting in January of each year. No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his recommendations thereon. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a vote of the council. 
Sec. 6.40 - Contracting procedures. 
All contracts shall be made or authorized by the council, and no contracts shall bind the city unless reduced to writing and approved by the council. All contracts, and all ordinances or resolutions making contracts or authorizing the same, may be drawn by the city attorney or may be submitted to him before authorization by the council. 
Sec. 6.41 - Centralized purchasing and disposition of city property. 
(a)  The council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the City of Locust Grove. 
(b)  The council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the City of Locust Grove for governmental or other purposes, at a public or private sale, with or without advertisement, for such consideration as it shall deem equitable and just for the city. 
(c)  The council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(d)  Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII - General Provisions 

Sec. 7.10 - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of the City of Locust Grove, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require. 
Sec. 7.11 - Existing ordinances and regulations. 
Existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Locust Grove not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified, or amended by the council. Existing rules and regulations of departments or agencies of the City of Locust Grove not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified, or amended. 
Sec. 7.12 - Mayor and council continued. 
The mayor and councilmen of the City of Locust Grove, serving as such on the effective date of this act, shall continue to serve out the terms of office to which they were elected. Their successors shall be elected as provided for in sections 2.11 and 5.10. 
Sec. 7.13 - Section captions. 
The captions to the several sections of this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
Sec. 7.14 - Penalties. 
The violation of any provisions of this charter for which a penalty is not specifically provided shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 12 months or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ga. L. 1990, p. 4451) 
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
(Reserved) 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

1.04.010 - How code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "Code of Ordinances, City of Locust Grove, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Prior code § 1-1-1) 
1.04.020 - Rules of construction and definitions. 
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council: 
City. The words the "city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Locust Grove" followed. 
Computation of Time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege, or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having that privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise that privilege or to discharge such duty. 
"Council" means the council of the city of Locust Grove. 
"The county" or "this county" means the county of Henry. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving that authority to a majority of those persons or officers. 
"Keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
"Limits" or "corporation" shall mean the corporate limits (legal boundary) of the city. 
"Mayor" means the mayor of the city of Locust Grove. 
"Month" means a calendar month. 
"Municipality," whenever it appears in this code, means the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
Name of Officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the city of Locust Grove" were added. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and any others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
"Oath" means and includes affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken. An affirmation has the same force and effect as an oath. 
Or, And. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
"Owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
"Personal property" means and includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined in this chapter. 
"Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
"Property" means and includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
"Public place" means any place including, but not limited to, buildings or conveyances to which the public has or is permitted to have access, including restaurants, soda fountains, hotel dining rooms, lobbies and corridors of hotels, and any highway, street, lane, park or place of public resort or amusement. 
"Real property" means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
"Sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
"Signature" or "subscription" means and includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
"The state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, public alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
"Tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, means and includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, that building or land, either alone or with others. 
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
"Week" means seven days. 
"Written" or "in writing" means and includes any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
"Year" means a calendar year. 
(Prior code § 1-1-2) 
1.04.030 - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of those sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Prior code § 1-1-3) 
1.04.040 - Severability of parts of code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Prior code § 1-1-4) 
1.04.050 - Amendments to code—Effect of new ordinances—Amendatory language. 
A.  All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, repealed by subsequent ordinances, may be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances until such time that the code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the mayor and council. 
B.  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
C.  When necessary, sections and subsections to the code may be renumbered by the official codifier for the city to fulfill the intent of the governing body but all such changes shall be approved in advance by the city attorney. 
(Prior code § 1-1-6) 
1.04.060 - Altering code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this code in any manner except by ordinance or other official act of the mayor and council which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.08. 
(Prior code § 1-1-7) 
Chapter 1.06 - ANNEXATION PROCEDURE 
Sections: 

1.06.010 - In general. 
The procedure set out in this chapter shall be observed concerning the annexation of property into the city. 
(Ord. 2/14/94 § 1 (part)) 
1.06.020 - Application required. 
Any person, corporation or legal entity desiring to annex a parcel of property into the city shall obtain an application from the city clerk. The application shall be completed in quadruplicate and executed by each owner. 
(Ord. 2/14/94 § 1(a)) 
1.06.030 - Application—Plat of survey and legal description. 
Each applicant shall attach to the application a plat of survey and legal description of the property to be annexed into the city. 
(Ord. 2/14/94 § 1(b)) 
1.06.050 - City attorney review—Report to city when. 
The clerk shall forward a copy of the application, plat and legal description to the city attorney for his review and examination. The city attorney shall determine whether or not the application meets the requirements of the laws of the state of Georgia and this chapter. If the city attorney finds that the application meets said requirements, he shall give all notices required by the laws of the state of Georgia and issue a written report to the city. 
(Ord. 2/14/94 § 1(d)) 
1.06.060 - Consideration by mayor and council—City attorney notified when. 
Upon receiving the report from the city attorney, the application will be read and considered by the mayor and council. If the mayor and council approve annexation of the property, the city attorney will be notified. 
(Ord. 2/14/94 § 1(e)) 
1.06.070 - City attorney to provide notices required by law. 
Upon receipt of notice from the city that the property has been annexed, the city attorney shall provide to the state of Georgia and to the United States Department of Justice the notices required by law. 
(Ord. 2/14/94 § 1(f)) 
Chapter 1.08 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - General penalty—Continuing violations. 
A.  Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this code or in any ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of that provision of this code or that ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding twelve months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the city's charter or code. (Amended during 1994 recodification; prior code § 1-1-5) 
1.08.020 - Additional penalty. 
A.  This section is enacted for the purpose of providing funding for local victim assistance programs as provided by law. 
B.  Fine Imposed. 
1.  According to OCGA Section 15-21-130, et seq., the judge of the municipal court for the city of Locust Grove is authorized to impose an additional penalty (which shall be construed to include costs) upon any person convicted of any criminal offense, traffic offense, or any criminal ordinance violation, which penalty shall be a sum equal to five percent of the original fine. 
2.  Such sums shall be in addition to any amount required by OCGA Section 47-17-60 to be paid into the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund and in addition to any other amounts provided for in OCGA Section 15-21-130. 
C.  Payment of Funds. 
1.  These funds shall be collected by the court officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and shall be paid over on a monthly basis to the Lamar County commissioners office who shall deposit such funds into an account as part of the Flint judicial circuit budget for the purpose of funding a victims' assistance program for the circuit. 
2.  Monies collected shall be paid over by the last day of the month following the month in which they are collected. 
(Ord. 97-10.13, 1997) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 2.04 - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
Sections: 

2.04.010 - Compensation. 
A.  The mayor shall be compensated for services to the city in the amount of ten thousand eight hundred dollars per year, to be paid in twelve monthly installments of nine hundred dollars. 
B.  Each council member shall be compensated for services to the city in the amount of eight thousand four hundred dollars per year, to be paid in twelve monthly installments of seven hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 00-04.12 § 2) 
2.04.015 - Benefits. 
The mayor and council shall be entitled to, but are not required to, accept the same health insurance benefits as offered to city employees, with the understanding that the mayor and/or city council members, if accepting this benefit, will be required to pay the full premium amount of that coverage. 
(Ord. 06-01-011 § 1) 
(Ord. No. 09-10-042, § 1, 10-5-09) 
2.04.020 - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the mayor and council are held at the city hall at such other place as may be designated, on the second Monday of each month at seven-thirty p.m. 
(Prior code § 2-1-11) 
2.04.030 - Adjourned meetings. 
If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the mayor and council or if for any reason any meeting shall fail to complete transaction of the business before the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Prior code § 2-1-12) 
2.04.040 - Order of business. 
A.  The order of business at all regular meetings shall be as follows: 
1.  Approval of minutes of last meeting; 
2.  Approval of invoices; 
3.  Corrections, if any, to be made in same; 
4.  Reports of committees; 
5.  Unfinished business; 
6.  Reading by the clerk of any communications; and 
7.  New business. 
B.  If the mayor and council direct any matter to be the special business of a future meeting, that matter shall have precedence over all other business at that future meeting. 
C.  No proposition shall be entertained by the mayor and council until it has been seconded, and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor and any member, be reduced to writing. 
(Prior code § 2-1-13) 
2.04.050 - Rules of procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the procedures of the mayor and council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Prior code § 2-1-14) 
2.04.060 - Previous questions. 
The previous questions may be called at any time by a majority of the members present. The ayes and nays may be called for by any member. 
(Prior code § 2-1-15) 
2.04.070 - Motions having precedence. 
A.  When a question is under consideration no motion shall be received except as follows: 
1.  To lay on the table; 
2.  To postpone to a time certain; 
3.  To postpone indefinitely; 
4.  To refer to a committee; 
5.  To amend; 
6.  To strike out or insert; or 
7.  To divide. 
B.  Motions for any of these purposes shall have precedence in the order named. 
(Prior code § 2-1-16) 
2.04.080 - Motion to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. 
(Prior code § 2-1-17) 
2.04.090 - Council inquiry of employees. 
Members of the city council, including the mayor, may investigate and make inquiry of employees of the city, but may not individually issue directives to city employees. 
(Ord. 07-12-109 § 6) 
Chapter 2.08 - ELECTIONS 
Sections: 

2.08.010 - Election officials. 
The mayor and council shall by resolution annually appoint a municipal election superintendent, election managers, registrars, absentee ballot clerk and any other officials as are necessary, all of whom shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in the Georgia Municipal Election Code (OCGA, Title 21, Ch. 3), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Prior code § 2-2-1) 
2.08.020 - Voter registration deadline. 
The deadline for registration of voters in city elections shall be at five p.m. on the day thirty days prior to the date of the election. 
(Prior code § 2-2-2) 
2.08.030 - Notice of candidacy—Filing dates. 
Notice of candidacy shall be filed by candidates for offices of the governing authority no sooner than forty-five days prior to the election in the case of a general election and not sooner than thirty days prior to the election in the case of a special election. The deadline for filing the foregoing notices of candidacy shall be twenty-two days prior to the election in the case of a general election, and fifteen days prior to the election in the case of a special election. Notices of candidacy shall be filed in the office of the municipal election superintendent during normal business hours. 
(Prior code § 2-2-3) 
2.08.040 - Qualification fees. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election shall be three percent of the annual salary of the mayor and/or council members, which fees shall be received by the municipal election superintendent at the time of filing the notice of candidacy and paid over to the city. 
(Prior code § 2-2-4) 
2.08.050 - Polling place. 
The polling place shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 2-2-5) 
Chapter 2.10 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 

2.10.010 - Creation of office. 
The office of city manager was created by the city charter. 
(Ord. 02-11.04C § 2 (part)) 
2.10.020 - Appointment of city manager. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 3.20 of the Locust Grove City Charter, except in the case of a vacancy in the position of city manager or the city council's election to not hire a city manager, the city manager shall be hired and his or her salary determined by a majority of the city council at the first regularly scheduled city council meeting in January of each year. Both the employment and salary are to be effective immediately after the vote of the city council. The city manager shall be employed for no longer than a one-year term, although the term of employment may renewed for additional one-year terms. Notwithstanding the forgoing, the city manager is employed at the will of the majority of the mayor and city council. 
B.  The city manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with specific reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice with respect to the duties of the office hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. 07-12-109 § 1; Ord. 02-11.04C § 2 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 10-01-0004, § 1, 1-4-10) 
2.10.030 - Removal of the city manager. 
A.  To terminate the city manager prior to the natural expiration of his or her one-year appointment, the mayor shall obtain the vote of at least four council members at a regular or special called meeting of the city council. Mayor shall cause to be served on the city manager notice of written termination by certified mail within forty-eight hours of the council's decision. Termination contemplated under this code section does not include a non-renewal or expiration of the appointment of the city manager. 
B.  An automatic appeal of the action shall be heard by the council no sooner than thirty days and no later than forty-five days from the date the notice of termination was sent. On appeal, the council shall retain authority to overturn its decision to terminate the city manager. 
C.  During the interim, the city council may suspend the city manager from duty, but shall continue the city manager's salary and benefits, if any. 
(Ord. 07-12-109 § 2) 
(Ord. 12-04-042, § 1, 4-2-12) 
2.10.040 - Power and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative and budgeting officer of the city and shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. To that end, the city manager shall have the power and shall be required to: 
A.  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the city council at least ninety days prior to the beginning of the next fiscal year, in accordance with Section 6.32 of the Locust Grove City Charter, together with the important features, and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
B.  Act as a liaison between the mayor/city council and the public by responding to inquiries and resolving conflicts. 
C.  Attend all city functions, whether organized by the city council or any agency of the city, and attend and represent the city at all governmental functions to which the city has been invited, unless the mayor or city council expressly informs the city manager that his/her presence is not needed, or if he/she is not able to attend for health reasons or significant family commitment. 
D.  Develop materials for meetings of the city council; attend all city council meetings, make recommendations to the city council as needed; and implement decisions made by the council. 
E.  Ensure that city ordinances, resolutions and regulations are executed and enforced. 
F.  Administer policies and programs as approved by the city council by directing departments in the procedures necessary for implementation. 
G.  Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment after soliciting bids from qualified suppliers or contractors, which are necessary for the operation and maintenance of the city services, for amounts up to and including five thousand dollars for any single item purchased or service delivered so long as such funds are provided in the budget; receive written bids from at least three qualified suppliers or contractors for purchases or contracts in excess of five thousand dollars; and present all bids to the city council. 
H.  Keep the city council advised of the financial and administrative affairs affecting the city; prepare monthly written progress reports on both the financial and administrative affairs; make such recommendations as may be desirable for the mayor and city council to consider for action in the coming month; and said report shall be submitted to the mayor and city council at the second regularly scheduled city council meeting each month. 
I.  Develop short and long-term plans for city operations and act as city's principal liaison on economic development activities. 
J.  Recommend to the governing body (from time to time), adoption of such measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services. 
K.  Investigate the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof; investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and with regard to services maintained by the public utilities in the city; and see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. 
L.  Provide reports and information to the media as requested. 
M.  Perform such other duties as may be required by the city council not inconsistent with the City Charter, laws, or ordinances. 
N.  Supervise all Department Heads. 
O.  Possesses the authority to appoint (i.e., hire) and/or terminate employees covered by the city personnel policy and in accordance with said policy; and the city manager must keep the mayor and city council apprised of said appointments and terminations or resignations as they become effective. 
P.  The city manager shall not run for or hold public office. 
Q.  Hours of employment shall be from eight am to five pm, Monday through Friday, except for holidays recognized by the city; and city manager shall be entitled to accrue eight hours annual leave per month and other forms of leave in accordance with the city personnel policy and/or other procedures adopted by the city. 
R.  Must remain in the exclusive employment of the city and neither accept other employment nor become self-employed unless said employment is pre-approved by a majority of city council and identified as provided below in this paragraph; provide in writing all business affiliations (including employment, directorship, offices, membership or the like, but excluding ownership of shares) to the mayor and city council annually, on or before the last regularly scheduled November city council meeting, describing the nature of such business affiliation and hours per month required for same; work on any private matter not related to the business of the city must be performed outside of the hours of city employment so that such activities do not conflict with or take away from the duties and functions of the city manager. 
S.  Drive his/her personal vehicle during employment with city; maintain a current driver's license and liability insurance on said vehicle; be reimbursed a monthly amount to be set by the city council at or before its January meeting for the following fiscal year. 
T.  The city manager shall be entitled to health care benefits, insurance and retirement plan, and any other benefits in the same manner and to the same extent as the city personnel policy allows, if any are allowed. 
U.  Pursue professional development to adequately perform the duties of the city manager position; including but not limited to attendance of short courses, institutes and seminars which are necessary for professional development and for the good of the city; provided same has been approved by the city council. 
V.  Any expenses incurred by city manager of a non-personal and job-affiliated nature shall be reimbursed by the city upon presentation of receipt in proper form, excluding mileage. 
(Ord. 07-12-109 § 3) 
(Ord. No. 10-01-004, § 2, 1-4-10) 
2.10.050 - Reserved. 
2.10.060 - Emergencies. 
In case of accident, disaster, or other circumstance creating a public emergency, the city manager may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting said emergency, but the city manager shall file promptly with the council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(Ord. 02-11.04C § 2 (part)) 
2.10.070 - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. 02-11.04C § 2 (part)) 
Chapter 2.12 - CITY CLERK 
Sections: 

2.12.010 - Duties. 
In addition to the duties of the city clerk under the city charter, the city clerk shall perform the following duties: 
A.  Be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; 
B.  Preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city and maintain a proper index to all records and documents; 
C.  Receive all money due the city, including taxes, licenses and fees, and pay out the same only upon orders of the mayor and council; and 
D.  Perform any other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 2-4-1) 
Chapter 2.16 - CITY ATTORNEY 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - Duties. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in that capacity shall: 
A.  Prepare ordinances when so requested by the mayor and council; 
B.  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested and approve, as to form, all ordinances, bonds and city contracts; and 
C.  Render any other legal services as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 2-4-2) 
Chapter 2.20 - CITY DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

2.20.010 - Established. 
The following departments of the city are established: 
A.  City hall; 
B.  Police; and 
C.  Maintenance. 
(Prior code § 2-4-3) 
2.20.020 - Mayor designated administrative head of city government. 
In addition to the duties of the mayor set forth in the Charter, by ordinance, or in Chapter 2.20 as amended, the mayor shall perform part-time administrative duties governing the day-to-day operations of city government. 
The compensation of the mayor for the performance of such part-time administrative duties shall be that as set forth in Section 2.15(b) of the City Charter, as amended, and said sum shall be in addition to the compensation set forth in Section 2.15(a) as amended, and the receipt of actual and necessary expenses as set forth in Section 2.15(c), as amended. 
(Ord. 96-3.11 §§ 1, 2) 
Chapter 2.24 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 

2.24.010 - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such officers and employees of such ranks and positions as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 3-1-1) 
2.24.020 - Responsibilities. 
The department shall be responsible for patrol, traffic control, investigation of accidents, investigation of crimes, apprehension of offenders, court appearances, security of business establishments, and for any other matters of public safety and law enforcement as directed by the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 3-1-2) 
2.24.030 - Police standard operating procedures. 
The standard operating procedures (SOP) of the City of Locust Grove Police Department, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the Code of Ordinances for the city by reference. The SOP may be amended by the mayor and council from time to time and such amendments are incorporated into the Code of Ordinances for the city by reference. A copy of the SOP, as amended, shall be maintained in the office of the chief of police and the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 16-04-023, § 1, 4-4-16; Ord. No. 16-05-027, § 1, 5-2-16; Ord. No. 16-05-032, § 1, 5-16-16) 
Chapter 2.32 - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 

2.32.010 - City clerk as coordinator. 
The clerk of the city of Locust Grove is designated as the coordinator of the records management plan and authorized to act for and on behalf of the city in directing and coordinating all records management matters under the Georgia Records Act. 
(Ord. 4/12/84 (part)) 
2.32.020 - Records—Retention schedules—Maintenance—Destruction. 
A.  Records retention schedules approved by the city shall be documented in the record of the governing body deliberations; and 
B.  Records shall be maintained in accordance with approved retention schedules; and 
C.  No record shall be destroyed except as authorized by a State Records Committee approved retention schedule. 
(Ord. 4/12/84 (part)) 
Chapter 2.36 - CITY EMPLOYEE DRUG TESTING 
Sections: 

2.36.010 - Definitions. 
"Employee subject to random drug testing" means any employee of the city, whether paid or volunteer, who is: 
1.  Required to be certified by the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Council under the provisions of OCGA §§ 35-8-1 et seq.; or 
2.  Any employee required to be so certified and working under a personnel contract to provide services, including but not limited to medical, security or transportation services to the city; or 
3.  Any employee working in "high-risk" jobs, as hereinafter defined. 
"Established drug test" means the collection and testing of bodily fluids administered in a manner equivalent to that required by the Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs (HHS Regulations 53 Fed. Reg. 11979, et seq.), as amended, or any other professionally valid procedures approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
"High-risk work" means those duties where inattention to duty or errors in judgment while on duty will have the potential for significant risk of harm to the employee, other employees or the general public. For purposes of this chapter, the following positions shall be considered "high-risk work," and employees holding such positions shall be subject to random drug testing hereunder: drivers or operators of any city vehicle, including automobiles, trucks, tractors, motor graders, back hoes, street sweepers, forklifts, or any other vehicle used for transportation, construction or maintenance work; emergency medical technicians; firefighters; mechanics responsible for the maintenance or upkeep of safety devices on city vehicles and/or equipment; public safety dispatchers; operators of outdoor power equipment; sanitation truck operators (including employees responsible for operating mechanized equipment thereon); utility plant operators (electrical, water and sewer/wastewater), and those employees who handle hazardous chemicals. 
"Illegal drug" means marijuana as defined in paragraph (16) of OCGA § 16-13-21, as amended; a controlled substance as defined in paragraph (4) of OCGA § 16-13-21, as amended; a dangerous drug as defined in OCGA § 16-13-71, as amended; or any other controlled substance or dangerous drug that persons are prohibited from using. The term "illegal drug" shall not include any drug when used pursuant to a valid medical prescription or when used as otherwise authorized by state or federal law. 
(Ord. 7/9/90 § 1) 
2.36.020 - Drug-free workplace policy and testing procedures. 
The city of Locust Grove is authorized to adopt clearly reasonable ordinances, regulations, rules and manuals to facilitate the effective management of government. The city hereby amends its personnel policy to include rules and regulations regarding drug and alcohol use by applicants and employees of the city. The drug-free workplace policy and testing procedures are intended to supplement the provisions of this chapter, are hereby incorporated by reference to the City Code of Ordinances, and a copy shall be maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. 7/9/90 § 2) 
(Ord. No. 11-07-032, § 1, 7-5-11) 
2.36.030 - Duties of the city police chief. 
A.  The city police chief shall be responsible for: 
1.  Assuring that employees are selected for testing, on a random basis; 
2.  Assuring that privacy intrusions are minimized during collection of body fluid specimens; 
3.  Assuring that all body fluid specimens are stored and transported to testing laboratories at proper temperatures and under such conditions that the quality of the specimens shall not be jeopardized; 
4.  Assuring that knowledge of the identity of employees whose tests show the usage of an illegal drug is limited to the staff who are entitled to this information; and 
5.  Restricting access to drug test records and results only to those persons entitled to the information. The department head shall also adopt such other rules as he or she deems appropriate to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
B.  The mayor and council will review all rules adopted by the city police chief hereunder and shall have the discretion to change, modify or abolish any or all of said rules. 
C.  The city police chief shall establish and maintain a list of those laboratories qualified to conduct established drug tests and shall determine which illegal drugs will be the subject of testing; provided, however, that no laboratory shall be so certified unless that laboratory, on a daily basis, adds to its urine testing program a minimum of ten percent blind test specimens. 
(Amended during 1994 recodification; Ord. 7/9/90 § 3) 
2.36.040 - Penalties. 
The drug-free workplace policy and testing procedures are mandatory for all applicants and employees of the city, as further described therein. An applicant or employee's failure to comply with all rules and regulations contained in the drug-free workplace policy and testing procedures and any other provision of this chapter shall authorize the city to take adverse action, including but not limited to disqualification from employment, reprimand, suspension and termination. 
(Ord. 7/9/90 § 4) 
(Ord. No. 11-07-032, § 2, 7-5-11) 
Chapter 2.41 - CODE OF ETHICS 
Sections: 

2.41.010 - Definitions. 
(A)  "Authorization" shall mean a vote of approval by the mayor and council and shall include budgets approved by mayor and council. 
(B)  "Board" shall mean the board of ethics, as established under this chapter. 
(C)  "Candidate" shall mean an individual who is a candidate for an elective city office or an applicant for city employment, or a candidate for an appointive position in the city government. 
(D)  "Complaint" shall mean a written, sworn statement filed with the city clerk containing specific allegations or misconduct by an employee or public servant. 
(E)  "Confidential information" shall mean any information that is not public information. 
(F)  "Deciding body" shall mean the council and any board, committee, authority, agency or entity created or empowered by the city. 
(G)  "Employee" shall mean any person who is employed in a position covered by the position classification plan of the city; any person who is employed part-time by any operating department of the city; and any person who is employed through a contractual agreement with the city. 
(H)  "Government" or "city" shall mean the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
(I)  "Immediate family" shall mean spouse, child, parent, or sibling of an employee or public servant of the city. 
(J)  "Interest" shall mean any direct or indirect financial gain accruing to an employee or public servant as a result of a contract or transaction that is, or may be, the subject of an official act or action by, or with, the city. Interest may also include holding a paid position of authority in an entity as an officer, director, agent, member or having ten percent ownership interest in an entity. Interest shall not mean any direct or indirect financial gain which is remote or insignificant. Interest shall not mean an award publicly presented in recognition of public service, a commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the law of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction, and/or campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. 
(K)  "Public information" shall mean information which would be subject to disclosure pursuant to Georgia's "Open Records Act" O.C.G.A. §§ 50-18-70, et seq., or other applicable state or federal law. 
(L)  "Public servant" shall mean any member of the governing body of the city or of any city agency, board, commission, committee, or other deciding body. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.020 - Intent. 
It is the intent of this code of ethics that public servants and employees who serve the city shall not knowingly engage in any activity which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair his or her judgment or actions in the performance of his or her official duties. Public servants should avoid any action which might result in or create the appearance of the following: 
(A)  Using public office for private gain. 
(B)  Impeding city efficiency or economy. 
(C)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of those who conduct the affairs and business of the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.030 - Principle policies. 
The principle policies which form the foundation of this code of ethics are: 
(A)  The trust of citizens in their government is cultivated when individual public servants act with integrity and when the public is aware that its servants act with integrity. 
(B)  The Constitutions, laws, and regulations of the United States and State of Georgia and the charter and ordinances of the city should be upheld as a de minimus standard of conduct. 
(C)  The most effective way to eradicate unethical practices is to consistently act with the highest moral principles and to consistently react appropriately to the ethical decisions of others. 
(D)  Elected officials should exercise sound judgment and apply ethical principles in making decisions that in any manner reflect upon their elected office. 
(E)  All citizens should be treated with courtesy, impartiality and equality. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.040 - Conflict of interest. 
(A)  Public servants or employees shall not: 
(1)  Have a direct or indirect interest that conflicts with his or her responsibilities and duties as a trustee of the public good; or 
(2)  Either directly or indirectly engage in financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained in the course of his or her office or received due to his or her position that is not public information. 
(B)  Public servants and employees shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving the following: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family. 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the public servant or employee may receive any payment or other benefits. 
(3)  Any business in which the public servant or employee is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder. 
(C)  With the exception of lawful campaign contributions, public servants and employees shall not accept any gifts, loans, rewards, favors or services that may reasonably tend to improperly influence them in the discharge of their official duties. This limitation is not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value (fifty dollars or less) which are distributed generally not to prohibit employees from accepting loans from regular lending institutions. 
(D)  Public servants and employees shall not use or attempt to use their position to secure and economic benefit or advantages, special privileges or exemptions for themselves or others by using confidential information obtained by or through their employment by virtue of their position. 
(E)  Public servants and employees shall not accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity which they may reasonably expect would require or induce them to disclose confidential information acquired by them by reason of their position. 
(F)  Public servants or employees shall not solicit nor accept, directly or indirectly, any benefit from any person, corporation or group which has, or is seeking to obtain, contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city. 
(G)  Public servants and employees shall not transact any business in their official capacity with any business entity of which he/she is an officer, director, agent, member or in which he/she owns a controlling interest, excluding civic, charitable or religious organizations without sworn written disclosure to the mayor and council of that public servant's or employee's relationship with or interest in said business prior to an authorization to engage in said business. 
(H)  No person holding office under the charter shall at any time during the term of which he/she was elected or appointed, or while in office, be capable of contracting with the city for the performance of any work or the sale of anything which is to be paid for out of the treasury, nor shall any such person be capable of holding or having any interest in such contracts entered into by him/herself or another, directly or indirectly. This section shall not apply to sales of personal property or services of less than two hundred dollars per calendar quarter or sales of personal property and contracts of personal services made pursuant to sealed competitive bids made by an person holding office or employment of the city, or any agency thereof either for him/herself or on behalf of any other business entity. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.050 - Disclosure of interest. 
(A)  A public servant who has an interest or relationship that he/she has reason to believe may be affected by his/her official acts or actions or by the official acts of action of the city shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written statement at least ten calendar days prior to the deciding body taking action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. Furthermore, a public servant shall disclose the nature or any such interest of relationship he/she has at the time such matter is presented for discussion to the deciding body which he/she sits. Such verbal and written statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the public servant shall refrain from all ex parte communications with the other public servants on the deciding body regarding the application in which he/she has interest. 
(B)  A public servant shall not participate in the discussion, debate, deliberation or vote, or otherwise take part in the decision making process on any agenda item, any official act or action in which he or she has a conflict of interest, other than the required disclosure. 
(C)  To avoid the appearances of impropriety, after any public servant is determined to have a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest in any matter, the public servant shall leave his or her regular seat on the deciding body and not return to it until deliberation and action on the matter is completed. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.060 - Political activity. 
(A)  No employee may either publicly or otherwise holds him/herself out as a candidate in any city election while holding employment with the city. 
(B)  No employee may solicit, orally or by letter, or be in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessments, contributions or services for any political party from any employee during his/her hours of duty, service or work for the city. 
(C)  No employee may represent the city by wearing any uniform or portion thereof that is issued by the city while he/she is participating in any campaign at any time. 
(D)  No public servant or employee may utilize any city equipment or vehicles in support of any political campaign. 
(E)  The city in no way seeks to influence public servants or employees in their choice of party affiliations or candidates, recognizing that this is a matter for each person to decide. Therefore, nothing contained herein shall be construed to restrict the right of public servants or employees to hold membership in and support a political party, to vote as he/she chooses, to express opinions on political subjects or candidates, to maintain political neutrality, to attend political parties after work hours, or to campaign actively during off hours in all areas of political activity. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.070 - Use of public property. 
Public servants or employees shall not use city property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he or she direct employees to use such property for other than official purposes. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.080 - Use of confidential information. 
A public servant or employee shall not disclose confidential information gained by reason of their official position, nor shall they otherwise use such information for their personal gain or benefit, nor shall they permit others to make use of city information which is not public information. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.090 - Coercion. 
(A)  A public servant shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any benefits to him/her or to persons within his/her immediate family, or for those with whom the public servant has business or financial ties. 
(B)  A public servant shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing any other public servant or employee, an appointed official of the city or a contract employee to provide any benefit to him or her or to persons with his or her immediate family. 
(C)  A public servant shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, a municipal court judge in the outcome of matters before the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.100 - Purchases. 
Public servants and employees shall not order any goods or services for the city or on behalf of the city without prior authorization from the mayor and council or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.110 - Use of city employees. 
A public servant shall not use an employee for personal or private business during regular business hours or during the employee's scheduled shift. Should a public servant use a city employee during times not prohibited by this section, the public servant shall pay just compensation to the employee and shall not receive a discount or special rate. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.120 - Travel expenses. 
A public servant or employee shall not draw per diem or expense money from the city to attend a seminar, convention, conference or similar meeting and then fail to attend the seminar, conference, convention or similar meeting. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.130 - Candidates. 
No candidate shall make a false or materially misleading statement or in any manner commit fraud or conceal wrong doing or withhold information regarding wrong doing in relation to any city or public business. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.140 - Proprietorship of creation. 
All plans, designs, reports, specifications, drawings, devices, inventions and other items produced or created by employees during working hours, or through the use of city facilities or equipment, or at the request of the city, shall be and becomes the sole property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.150 - Ethics board. 
(A)  The mayor and council shall appoint an ethics board (hereinafter the "board") consisting of three persons: one appointed by the mayor serving a two-year term, one appointed by a majority of the council members exclusive of the mayor serving a two-year term and one appointed by a majority of the mayor and council serving a three-year term. All members shall be residents of the city. Members of the board shall not be a public servant or employee of the city except in his/her service to the city as a member of the board. The mayor and council may remove any board member by a supermajority consisting of no less than five votes. 
(B)  The members of the board shall serve without compensation. However, members of the board shall be reimbursed their reasonable and necessary expenses in conjunction with their performance for committee. 
(C)  The city attorney is designated to be the legal advisor for the board, except that the city attorney is not authorized to represent the board in any legal action if doing so would create a conflict which would prevent the city attorney from also representing council members, the mayor, the city manager, the city clerk or him/herself. The city attorney shall recue himself/herself from any advice or representation of the board if he/she is the subject of an investigation. 
(D)  The board shall have the following general duties and powers: 
(1)  To appoint a chairman and other officers as needed annually, establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs. 
(2)  To prescribe forms and other instruments, approved by the city attorney, to implement the terms of this chapter. 
(3)  To issue advisory opinions as provided in this chapter. 
(4)  To receive, investigate, hear and rule on complaints of violations of this chapter in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(E)  The city clerk shall be solely responsible for the acceptance of requests for advisory opinions and complaints and for the distribution of same in accordance with this chapter. The city clerk or his/her designee shall be responsible for scheduling and noticing all meetings of the board. The city clerk or his/her designee shall receive and distribute advisory opinions and decisions of the board and decisions by the mayor and council as provided under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 10-04-027, § I, 4-5-10) 
2.41.160 - Advisory opinions. 
Upon written request of any public servant, employee or candidate, the board shall provide an advisory opinion in writing within twenty calendar days of the filing of a request stating whether or not the action contemplated would constitute a violation of this chapter. The party requesting the recommendation may rely upon the advisory opinion and shall not be prosecuted for violations of this chapter alleged as result of relying on that opinion. Requests for advisory opinion shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall forward such requests to the city attorney and the board within five calendar days of filing. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.170 - Complaints. 
(A)  Except for providing advisory opinions, as provided in Section 2.41.160 of this chapter, the board shall not initiate any investigation or inquiry into any matter under its jurisdiction without the filing of a verified complaint. All such complaints against the public servant, employee, or candidate shall be in writing and verified under oath to the best information, knowledge, and belief of the complainant. The falsification of which shall be punishable as false swearing under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-71. Complaints shall be filed with the city clerk and the city clerk shall refer the complaint and all supporting documents to the city attorney and board in such form as may be prescribed by the board. All complaints against a public servant, employee or candidate shall be sworn and filed in writing with the city clerk and referred to the city attorney and the board in such form as may be prescribed by the board. Complaints filed one hundred eighty calendar days after discovery of the alleged misconduct shall not be actionable under this chapter. All complaints shall be sealed. Except for review by the board, city attorney and accused, within ten calendar days after the board takes action on a complaint, the complaint shall be unsealed. The city clerk shall deliver the sealed complaint to the board, city attorney and accused in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(B)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board shall: 
(1)  Review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary action or is to be considered for further investigation. 
(2)  Be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the public servant: provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he or she might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent government servant. 
(3)  Be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add to the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(4)  Be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings. 
(5)  Be empowered to exercise the power of subpoenas. 
(6)  Issue findings of fact, determinations of violation and make recommendations to the council to invoke disciplinary action as described in this chapter. 
(C)  If the board does not dismiss a complaint in accordance with subparagraph (B)(2) of this section; it shall hold a hearing within sixty calendar days after the city clerk received the complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in a dismissal of the complaint which arises from the same incident(s) and/or transaction(s) for a period of one hundred eighty calendar days. 
(D)  The decision by the board shall be reduced to writing and served upon all parties at interest within ten calendar days of reaching a decision. Failure to serve the accused shall constitute a dismissal. The decision of the board shall be considered by the mayor and council for final decision. 
(E)  If the complaint is against a member of the board, the mayor and council shall execute the powers of the board. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.180 - Due process. 
(A)  Upon receipt of a complaint, but in any event not later than five working days after receipt, the city clerk shall acknowledge receipt to the complainant, and forward the complaint simultaneously to the board, the city attorney and the accused. A failure to provide service of the complaint to the accused shall necessitate a rescheduling of the hearing to a date no earlier than ten calendar days from the date of the initially scheduled hearing. 
(B)  Service of the complaint, notices of hearing and decisions of the board and/or the mayor and council shall be served on the accused for the matter involving the accused by personal service or certified mail. 
(C)  During any investigation and during any hearing which is conducted to determine whether a violation of this chapter has occurred, the accused may be represented by counsel of his or her choosing. 
(D)  The accused or his or her representative, if any, shall have an opportunity to: 
(1)  Challenge the sufficiency of any complaint which has been filed against him or her; 
(2)  Examine all documents and records obtained or prepared by the board in connection with the matter heard; 
(3)  Bring witnesses; 
(4)  Establish all pertinent facts and circumstances; 
(5)  Question or refute testimony or evidence, including the opportunity to confront and cross examine adverse witnesses; and 
(6)  Exercise to the extent the board in its discretion determines to be just and reasonable, any pre-trial, discovery procedure usually available in civil actions. 
(E)  During any hearing conducted by the board to determine whether a violation of this chapter has occurred, all evidence including certified copies of records which the board considers shall be fully offered and made a part of the record in the proceedings. 
(F)  All hearings shall be transcribed by a court reporter and that transcription shall be a part of the record. Witnesses shall be sworn in by the court reporter. 
(G)  During any hearing conducted by the board to determine whether a violation of an ordinance has occurred, the accused shall be afforded an adequate opportunity to rebut or offer countervailing evidence. 
(H)  Through its investigation, the board shall inform any accused or his or her counsel of any exculpatory evidence uncovered during the course of the investigation. 
(I)  The standard of evidence required to find a violation of this chapter shall be clear and convincing evidence. 
(J)  All decisions of the boarding, including advisory opinions, shall require a unanimous vote of the eligible members of the board. Decisions on complaints shall include a finding fact, a determination of violation and a recommended punishment in accordance with this chapter. 
(K)  A decision of the board on complaints shall be forwarded to the city clerk who shall serve the accused, the mayor and council and the city attorney with a copy of said decision within ten calendar days of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.190 - Action by mayor and council. 
(A)  After receipt of a decision by the board, the mayor and council shall take action upon the recommendation of the board at the next regular meeting of the mayor and council, provided that the recommendation is received by the city clerk not less than ten calendar days prior to said meeting. If the recommendation is not received within ten calendar days prior to a regular meeting of the mayor and council, then action on the recommendation shall be scheduled for the next regular meeting of the mayor and council. 
(B)  The mayor and council shall decide whether to adopt or reject the finding(s) and determination(s) of the board and impose, modify or reject the punishment recommended by the board. The mayor and council shall not hold a hearing on the recommendation of the board, nor accept new evidence in said matter. The mayor and council shall uphold the findings and determination(s) of the board if there is any evidence to support same. Failure to review and render a decision on the board's decision within sixty calendar days of it being filed with the City clerk shall constitute a dismissal. 
(C)  If the mayor and council are sitting as the board pursuant to Subsection 2.41.170(E), then the decision of the mayor and council shall constitute a final decision. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.200 - Right to appeal. 
An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Henry County within thirty days after the decision of the mayor and council. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes on the final decision of the mayor and council. Review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence to support the decision of the mayor and council. Provided, however, no action of the board or council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.210 - Newly discovered evidence. 
Should newly discovered credible evidence come to light after the decision of the council pursuant to this chapter, the party who received a sanction under the chapter shall have the right to petition the board to reopen the hearing and consider the new evidence and call for a recommendation to reverse any sanctions previously imposed. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.220 - Penalties. 
Any violation of this code of ethics shall subject the offender to disciplinary action which may include private reprimand or public reprimand. 
(Ord. No. 09-04-018, §§ I, II, 4-6-09) 
2.41.230 through 2.41.300 - Reserved. 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 3.04 - FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

3.04.010 - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on January 1st and end on December 31st of each year. 
(Prior code § 2-5-1) 
3.04.020 - Annual budget—Appropriations. 
An annual budget and an appropriations ordinance shall be adopted by the mayor and council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than forty-five days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget and the appropriations ordinance are not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, this section automatically authorizes the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the city. The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues (including appropriated unencumbered surplus) equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. 
(Prior code § 2-5-2) 
3.04.030 - Purchasing. 
A.  Each department head shall be responsible for purchases for his department involving expenditures of less than one thousand dollars, and shall: 
1.  Arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all equipment, supplies and contractual services for his department, and sell or otherwise dispose of surplus equipment and supplies; and 
2.  Maintain an inventory of all materials, supplies or equipment owned by his department. 
B.  Expenditures in excess of one thousand dollars and sales of surplus property valued at one thousand dollars or more shall require the approval of the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 2-5-3) 
Chapter 3.08 - PROPERTY TAXES 
Sections: 

3.08.010 - Date due. 
All property subject to property tax levy by the city shall be due and payable on or before December 20th of each year. 
(Ord. 5/20/80 § 1) 
3.08.020 - Failure to pay—Issuance of tax fi. fa. 
In the event the property tax due the city is not paid on or before December 20th of each year, then a tax fi. fa. shall be issued on said property. 
(Ord. 5/20/80 § 2) 
3.08.030 - Form of tax fi. fa. 
The form of the tax fi. fa. to be issued shall be as follows: 
STATE OF GEORGIA  COUNTY OF HENRY  CITY OF LOCUST GROVE 
TO THE CHIEF OF POLICE OF THE CITY OF LOCUST GROVE AND ALL HIS LAWFUL OFFICERS. 
 You are commanded, that of the goods and chattels, if any be found, otherwise of the lands and tenements of party or parties named below, you make levy and sale thereof the sum of $;$rule; for City taxes for the year 19 ____________ with interest from date at the highest legal rate provided by law, per annum from said date, provided that the minimum interest payment on such unpaid taxes shall be one dollar, and legally provided costs, and you are hereby required to return this writ to me, with your actings and doings thereon, and the sum aforesaid, within the time prescribed by law, herein fail not. Given under my hand this 20th day of December, 19 ____________ . 
_____ Clerk, City of Locust Grove,  Georgia 
(Ord. 5/20/80 § 3) 
3.08.040 - City clerk authorized to issue fi. fa. 
The clerk of the city is authorized and directed to issue said fi. fa.s on the 21st day of December of each year for the city property taxes that have not been paid. 
(Ord. 5/20/80 § 4) 
3.08.050 - Certain persons authorized to execute fi. fa. 
The chief of police of the city, or any of his authorized officers, is authorized and directed to execute said fi. fa. under the same manner and procedure as provided by the laws of the state of Georgia governing executions for such process from the Superior Court. 
(Ord. 5/20/80 § 5) 
3.08.060 - Inspection of fi. fa. to clerk of Superior Court. 
The clerk of the city shall issue to the clerk of the Superior Court of Henry County, Georgia, said fi. fa. with the following notice attached thereto: 
To the Clerk of the Superior Court of Henry County, Georgia. 
 You are hereby authorized and directed to file the foregoing tax fi. fa. on the general execution document of the official records of Henry County, Georgia. 
 This ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
_____ Clerk, City of Locust Grove,  Georgia 
(Ord. 5/20/80 § 6) 
3.08.070 - Issuance of fi. fa.s for outstanding bills?Recordation where. 
The clerk of the city is directed to immediately issue fi. fa.s for all outstanding property tax bills that are due to the city, and forward the same to the attorney for the city for recording in the office of the clerk of Superior Court of Henry County, Georgia. 
(Ord. 5/20/80 § 7) 
3.08.080 - Levy on property?Collection of delinquent taxes. 
Once the fi. fa. has been issued, the chief of police of the city is directed to make the necessary levy on the property for the unpaid taxes and notify the city attorney. Said attorney is then authorized and directed to commence collection of all delinquent taxes as provided by law. 
(Ord. 5/20/80 § 8) 
Chapter 3.10 - IMPROVEMENTS AND SERVICES FINANCING 
Sections: 
Article 1. - Generally 

3.10.010 - Constitutional authority for establishing special tax districts within the city. 
The mayor and city council of the City of Locust Grove, Georgia is authorized by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph VI of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, to create special districts for the provision of local government services within such districts and to levy and collect fees, assessments and taxes within such districts to pay, wholly or partially, the cost of providing such services therein. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.020 - Purpose and scope. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the services and improvements set forth in this section, and to provide for the manner and method of assessing the costs of such services and improvements, or the creation of special tax districts to pay for such services and improvements. The following services and improvements are covered by this article: 
(1)  Garbage and solid waste collection and disposal; 
(2)  Public health facilities and services, including hospitals, ambulances, emergency rescue services and animal control; 
(3)  Street and road construction and maintenance, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic on streets and roads; and, 
(4)  Parks, recreational areas, programs and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.030 - Preliminary survey and recommendation. 
Whenever a proposal to adopt or provide any of the improvements or services as set forth in Section 3.10.020 has been filed with the mayor and city council, or the mayor and council on their own motion have considered a proposal to furnish such improvement or to provide such utility, the mayor and council shall cause the appropriate department head to make a preliminary survey and recommendation to the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.040 - Hearing; notice. 
Whenever the city council shall determine from the preliminary survey that such project has merit and will serve a public need, and that the costs thereof shall be borne in whole or in part by the owners of the property affected, the city council shall set a time and place for a public hearing before the city council on such preliminary survey. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the owners of the property affected, by regular mail, if practicable, at least ten days in advance of such hearing, and by publication of such notice, one time, not less than ten days in advance of such hearing, in the legal organ of Henry County. Such notice shall generally describe the improvement or service to be constructed or furnished, the area affected and the manner in which the costs therefore shall be assessed or taxed against the owners of the affected property. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.050 through 3.10.100 - Reserved. 
Article 2. - Street Light Tax Districts 

3.10.110 - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide the citizens of the city with a procedure for the installation, maintenance and operation of street lights in certain public rights-of-way in the city of Locust Grove. To that end, this article is adopted in order to effect the creation of street light tax districts to pay for services rendered by such street lights. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.120 - Definitions. 
(a)  Property owner. The term "property owner" or "owner", as used in this article, shall include all persons holding fee simple title according to the real estate records of the county within a proposed street light tax district at the time the petition for the creation of said district is submitted as provided herein. For the purpose of petitioning the mayor and city council for the creation of a new street light tax district, the property owner/owners shall have one vote per platted lot within a particular proposed street light tax district. The term "property owner" or "owner" specifically excludes tenants in possession of property within the street light tax district. 
(b)  Street light tax district. A "street light tax district" is a specific type of special tax district within the city. This type of special tax district is authorized pursuant to Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph VI of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. Street light tax districts may be created in order to collect the electricity charges incurred for street lights in said district. 
(c)  Existing residential subdivision. The following subdivisions, which a final plat has been approved by the city as stated herein are, declared "existing subdivisions" as of the effective date of this article due to their date of final plat approval and/or the percentage of development on the lots as of the effective date of this ordinance [June 7, 2010]: 

 
(d)  New residential subdivision. Any residential subdivision which a final plat is approved by the city after the effective date of this article, or, for the following subdivisions enumerated below that, as of the effective date of this article, is less than 50% developed with residential homes: 

 
(e)  Commercial development. Any subdivision or development consisting of nonresidential uses, multifamily apartment uses, and/or industrial uses which a final plat has been prepared and approved by the city prior to the effective date of this article, or, in which a final or existing conditions plat has been prepared in accordance with this article for the purpose of street light improvements assessment. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.130 - Street light tax districts created; register; responsibility for costs. 
(a)  New special tax districts which shall be known as street light tax districts may be created upon submission of proper petition and resolution of the mayor and city council as provided hereinafter. Each new street light tax district so created shall be assigned a number and shall be designated by recorded plats showing each lot therein. 
(b)  A register of street light tax districts shall be maintained in the office of the city manager or his designee and the office of the county tax commissioner. Such registers shall be available to the public for inspection upon reasonable notice to either of these offices. 
(c)  The cost of the street lights and poles, the cost of installing the street lights, and any costs for the subsequent maintenance of said street lights shall be the responsibility of the developer, the property owners, the utility company contracting to provide electrical services for the street lights in that district, or such other entities having an interest in such service. The city shall not be responsible for any such costs, except as provided herein. 
(d)  The cost of electricity and maintenance for street light services, as provided by this article, shall be the responsibility of the owners of the property within the special tax district. The pro rata cost of the electricity and maintenance shall be assigned to each platted lot within the special tax district. 
(e)  Administrative costs incurred by the city in the collection of the street light tax shall be the responsibility of the property owners in the district for which said costs were incurred. This administrative charge assessed each year shall be set by the mayor and city council, but shall not exceed fifteen percent of the total charges of the utility company for that district for the preceding year; provided. Provided further, that the mayor and city council shall be authorized to establish different administrative charges for different special tax districts and to adjust the respective rates from time to time by resolution, after taking into consideration all of the cost factors involved in collecting the charges contemplated by this article, including, but not limited to, the delinquency rate within a particular special tax district. The pro rata portion of administrative charges for the tax district for each lot shall be charged to the owners of the property. Notwithstanding anything herein, the minimum annual administrative charge for any special purpose street lighting tax district shall be fifty dollars. 
(f)  The total charge to property owners for street light services in a new residential subdivision shall be on a per lot basis as is determined by resolution of the mayor and city council, giving consideration for the electrical service and maintenance charges from the utility company for street light services provided within the district; the administrative costs incurred by the city in the collection of the street light tax; and the number of lots irrespective of size or improvements on such lots. 
(g)  The total charge to property owners for street light services in a commercial development shall be based either on a per lot basis, lot frontage basis, total square footage of improvements on said lots, or by some combination of assessment as is determined by resolution of the mayor and city council, giving consideration for the electrical service and maintenance charges from the utility company for street light services provided within the district; the administrative costs incurred by the city in the collection of the street light tax; and the number, size, frontage, or amount of improvements on said lots in said development. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.140 - Collection and responsibility for administration. 
(a)  The charges for street lighting in each street light district shall be paid as a street light district fee, and shall be collected concurrently with the ad valorem tax billed to each lot owner within each street light tax district. The date for determining ownership of each lot shall be January 1st of each year. 
(b)  The administration payment and accounting of the services herein authorized shall be the responsibility of the mayor and city council or some department of the county government to which that responsibility shall be assigned by the mayor and city council. Any proration of such charges between owners of lots to which title is transferred during any year shall be the responsibility of the sellers and buyers of said lots. 
(c)  The office of the tax commissioner of the county shall be responsible for the timely collection of the taxes, fees and assessments assessed to each street light tax district and shall remit said sums to the mayor and city council in the same manner as other taxes, fees, and/or assessments are remitted. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.150 - Lien created. 
In addition to any other rights of collection for late or unpaid charges, the city shall have all rights available under the laws of the state for assessment, the creation of a lien upon the property of the owner receiving the service provided, together with all rights of execution, levy, foreclosure and sale. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.160 - Deposit required; forfeiture. 
In addition to other charges authorized in this article, the mayor and council shall have the right to require deposits from the lot owners receiving the street light service in any or all such street light tax districts created hereunder in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost of such service for the respective lot until the due date for the tax bill containing the lot owners' share of expenses for the lighting service. This deposit shall be held by the city as security for payment for services rendered pursuant to this article, and the city shall have the authority to setoff against the deposit for nonpayment for services at such times and on such occasions as shall be determined by the city. Notice of such setoff shall be given to the lot owner by mail at the address of the property serviced by the street lights, although advance notice of such setoff shall not be required. In the event of a reduction in the deposit of a property owner because of failure to pay charges assessed pursuant to this article, the lot owner shall be required to restore the deposit to its required level upon request by the city. Any required deposit as contemplated herein shall be retained by the city, so long as the street light tax district is in existence. Upon termination of the existence of such district, any refund of such deposits will be made to the record owner of said lot on the date of termination. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.170 - Lighting in existing residential areas and subdivisions; creation of street light districts; constructive knowledge of this article and the street light districts created pursuant to said article. 
(a)  Any property owner in an area of the city may present a request for the creation of a street light district to the city manager or his designee. The request shall designate boundaries for a street lighting district which shall serve the lot owner presenting the request and other property owners within said geographical area. The request shall include a plat or plats showing the proposed street lighting district. The office of the city manager shall then provide a petition for the creation of the proposed street lighting district to be circulated by the presenter of the request among the lot owners in the proposed district. If the proposed street lighting district extends beyond the bounds of an existing subdivision or a new subdivision and includes lots or parcels outside the existing or new subdivision, then equally seventy-five percent of the owners of the lots within the existing or new subdivision and seventy-five percent of the owners outside the existing or new subdivision and within the proposed district must sign the petition in order to be presented to the mayor and city council. In all other instances, seventy-five percent of the owners of lots within the proposed street lighting district must sign the petition for the creation of a street lighting district for the petition to be presented to the mayor and city council for consideration. Unless one hundred percent of the lot owners have signed the petition, a public hearing shall be held by the mayor and city council after having been advertised one time in the official organ of the county not less than fifteen days before the public hearing; and a sign or signs shall be posted in the proposed street lighting district giving notice of the hearing, at least fifteen days before the public hearing. 
(b)  The petition for creation of the proposed street light district must be returned to the city manager within ninety days after it is obtained from such manager's office. The city manager or his designee shall verify the signatures on the petition and that the requisite numbers of property owners have signed said petition. 
(c)  By signing the petition for the creation of a new street light district, all petitioners within a proposed street light district shall be deemed to have actual or constructive notice of this article and all the provisions contained herein. In consideration of the street light services provided pursuant to this article, said petitioners shall agree to abide by and comply with all the provisions of this article. 
(d)  All successors-in-interest to the lot owners within a certain district at the time of the creation of said street light tax district shall be deemed to have constructive notice of this article and the existing street light district wherein the lot is located due to the existence of public records containing such information. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a petition as provided herein and after a public hearing, if one is required, the mayor and city council shall take under consideration the establishment of the requested special tax district. The mayor and city council, in its sole discretion, may vote to create one or more of such districts, but nothing contained herein shall be construed as creating an obligation on the mayor and city council to create any one or more of such districts. Likewise, nothing contained herein shall create any absolute right by any property owner or owners to the creation of any such district. The discretion as to whether to create any such district shall be that solely of the mayor and city council, based upon the evidence available at the time of determination. Further, the creation by the mayor and city council of one or more such districts shall not create an absolute right by petitioners for another district or districts to the creation of such other district, nor shall the creation of one or more districts generate a precedent or obligation of the mayor and city council regarding the creation of additional special tax districts. The petition for each such special tax district shall be considered by the mayor and city council based upon the totality of the evidence regarding each respective proposed special tax district. The decision of the mayor and city council, in the exercise of its discretion, shall be final. 
(f)  The decision of the mayor and city council to create special street lighting district shall be evidenced by resolution adopted at a regular or special meeting of the mayor and city council. The form of said resolution shall be substantially in the form attached hereto as appendix "A" [attached to Ordinance No. 10-06-035]. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.180 - Street light construction by property developers for new residential subdivisions; constructive knowledge of street light districts created under this article. 
(a)  All developers of new residential subdivisions, at the time of the submission of the preliminary plats or drawings of the development to the community development department, shall present a proposed street light service for the development and the establishment of a special street light tax district for the subdivision. The proposal presented by the developer must be approved by the mayor and city council prior to installation of street lights in the development. All fixtures and poles to be used shall be approved not only by the mayor and city council but also by the utility company which will provide electricity to the street lights and which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities. Upon approval by the mayor and city council and receipt of written approval from the utility company regarding the fixtures and poles, the mayor and city council may, upon petition, consider the creation of a special street light tax district for said subdivision. All rights and obligations shall be the same as set forth in Section 3.10.170(e) above. 
(b)  The developer shall be billed by the city or utility provider for those charges contemplated in Section 3.10.130(f) above for the calendar year of creation of the special tax district and the calendar year thereafter. For subsequent years owners shall be billed their pro rata share of said costs in the same manner as existing subdivisions which are designated as special tax districts. In addition, all purchases of lots located in a new subdivision which has been designated as a special tax district as provided herein shall be deemed to have constructive notice of said district and the obligation imposed thereby due to the public records containing such information. 
(c)  All successors in-interest to a developer in a new residential subdivision wherein a street light district has been approved under this section shall have constructive notice of said district due to the existence of public records containing such information. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.190 - Street light construction by property developers for commercial developments; constructive knowledge of street light districts created under this article. 
(a)  All developers of commercial developments, either at the time of the submission of the preliminary plats or drawings of the development to the community development department but before any public rights-of-way have been accepted by the city, may present a proposed street light service for the development and the establishment of a special street light tax district for the commercial development. The proposal presented by the developer must be approved by the mayor and city council prior to installation of street lights in the development. All fixtures and poles to be used shall be approved not only by the mayor and city council but also by the utility company which will provide electricity to the street lights and which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities. Upon approval by the mayor and city council and receipt of written approval from the utility company regarding the fixtures and poles, the mayor and city council may, upon petition, consider the creation of a special street light tax district for said development, including any dedication plat and final plat designating the district boundaries and method of assessment (per lot, by property frontage, by lot size, by the size of improvements on the lot, or by a combination of methods). All rights and obligations shall be the same as set forth in Section 3.10.170(e) above. 
(b)  The developer shall be billed by the city or utility provider for those charges contemplated in Section 3.10.130(f) above for the calendar year of creation of the special tax district and the calendar year thereafter. For subsequent years owners shall be billed their pro rata share of said costs in the same manner as existing subdivisions which are designated as special tax districts. In addition, all purchases of lots located in a commercial development which has been designated as a special tax district as provided herein shall be deemed to have constructive notice of said district and the obligation imposed thereby due to the public records containing such information. 
(c)  All successors in-interest to a developer in a commercial development wherein a street light district has been approved under this section shall have constructive notice of said district due to the existence of public records containing such information. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.200 - Pre-payment for services. 
(a)  Upon submission of the petition as contemplated by Section 3.10.170 above, or request for consideration after mayor and city council approval as contemplated by Section 3.10.180 or Section 3.10.190 above, there shall be delivered to the mayor and city council by the party or parties seeking tax district creation under this chapter, sufficient certified funds to pay for the estimated total costs, including administration fees, of providing the services for the special street lighting tax district from the time of inception of said tax district until the end of the calendar year in which the tax district is created, said sum to be deposited by the city and drawn upon to pay the expenses of street light services until the ad valorem tax bills for the year in which the tax district is created are due, which said tax bills shall include the charges to the respective property owners for the next calendar year as hereinafter provided. The total cost based on any previous year's actual usage multiplied by the current cost of the respective utility provider for electricity and maintenance, including administrative costs, for the calendar year following the year of creation, shall be billed on the ad valorem tax notices due on December 20th of the year of creation and likewise for each year thereafter. 
(b)  The requirements of this section are supplemental to, and not a substitute for, any requirements imposed pursuant to Section 3.10.160 above. 
(c)  A special fund shall be established to provide for certain capital expenditures for lighting of street intersections or in other areas of the city of Locust Grove where there is substantial engineering evidence, traffic accidents, or incidents of crime presented to the mayor and city council. Said funding amount shall be established by the mayor and council in the annual budget and shall cover the amounts for poles, fixtures, bulbs, and installation of said lighting appurtenances. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.210 - Authority to contract with public utilities. 
The mayor and city council may contract with the public utilities for the purpose of carrying out the terms of this article. Annually, prior to the first day of October, the city manager, or his designee, shall secure a guaranteed rate from the applicable public utilities for the forthcoming year of service in such street light tax districts, as tax assessment for the service is calculated and billed in advance. Should the public utilities fail or refuse to guarantee the rate for the forthcoming year, the mayor and city council may resolve to terminate or eliminate the applicable street light tax districts according to Section 3.10.220. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.220 - Termination/elimination of street light tax district by city; by lot owners within district. 
(a)  Termination by city. The mayor and city council may terminate or abolish any and all street light tax districts within the city by resolution. Any such termination or abolition shall be effective January 1st of the year following the adoption of said resolution. Upon said termination, the county shall not be responsible for the collection of fees, assessments, and taxes for electrical services rendered for street lights after the date of termination and shall not be responsible for the charges of the utility company for electricity for said street lights after termination. 
(b)  Termination by lot owners within the district. At any time, the property owners within a street light district may request the mayor and city council to terminate said district by submission of a petition containing the signatures of the owners of seventy-five percent of the lots within the district. Based upon all available information, the mayor and city council shall be authorized but not required to grant the property owners' request to terminate the street light tax district. Any such termination shall be effective January 1st of the year following the adoption by the mayor and city council of the termination resolution. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.230 - Federal, state laws to prevail in conflicts. 
If any provision of this article is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation or order of any agency of this state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the mayor and city council that the state or federal law or rule, regulation or order, as the case may be, shall prevail so that the remaining portion of this article shall be deemed to be of full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-035, § 2, 6-7-10) 
3.10.240 through 3.10.300 - Reserved. 
Chapter 3.12 - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY 
Sections: 

3.12.010 - All claims to be in writing—Form of claims. 
A.  All claims for damage or loss against the city are to be in writing, attested to under oath, and signed and dated by the claimant; if a claim is submitted by a claimant's representative, the claimant must nevertheless attest to and sign the claim. 
B.  The claim is to be addressed to the mayor and council, and shall be entitled "Notice of Claim." 
(Ord. 7/9/90 § 1) 
3.12.020 - Delivery of notice of claim. 
All notices of claims are to be hand delivered to the city clerk, who shall date stamp the receipt on the notice of claim itself; alternatively, the claim may be mailed to the attention of the city clerk, by registered mail, return receipt requested, and the city clerk shall date stamp the receipt of each notice of claim on the notice itself. 
(Ord. 7/9/90 § 2) 
3.12.030 - Content of notice of claim. 
All notices of claims shall describe in detail: 
A.  The date, time and place of the incident or loss in question; 
B.  The identity of any city employees or officials involved or connected in any way with the incident or loss; 
C.  The nature of the incident allegedly resulting in the damage or loss; 
D.  The dollar amount of the claimant's alleged injury or loss; and 
E.  A description of all meetings or discussions between the claimant and any city employee or official wherein the claim was discussed or investigated, including: 
1.  The date and place of the meeting or discussion; 
2.  The identity of each and every city employee or official involved in the meeting or discussion, and 
3.  A description of any statements or representations made by any city employee or official. 
(Ord. 7/9/90 § 3) 
3.12.040 - Accompanying documents in support of claim. 
Each notice of claim shall be accompanied by any and all receipts, estimates, appraisals, bills, invoices or other documents upon which the claimant relies in support of his/her claim for damage or loss. 
(Ord. 7/9/90 § 4) 
3.12.050 - Official custodian of notices of claims—Notice of claim file. 
A.  The city clerk is designated as the official custodian of all notices of claims. The city clerk shall maintain a notice of claim file, which shall include an index of each notice of claim received by the city; the index shall be maintained in two separate forms: 
1.  By the claimant's last name (including the date received); and 
2.  By chronological order received (i.e., by date received). 
B.  The original of each notice of claim and all accompanying documents thereto shall be kept in the notice of claim file. 
(Ord. 7/9/90 § 5) 
3.12.060 - Procedure upon receipt of notice of claim. 
Upon receipt of a notice of claim, the city clerk shall apprise the claimant of any deficiencies in the form or content thereof; the city clerk may return any notice of claim not in substantial compliance with this chapter, and shall maintain a written record of all notices of claims so returned. Upon receipt of each notice of claim in compliance with this chapter, and after indexing same in the notice of claim file referred to in Section 3.12.050, the city clerk shall immediately transmit a copy of the notice of claim (together with any accompanying documents) to: 
A.  The mayor and council; 
B.  The city attorney; and 
C.  The agent for each insurance company that may possibly have coverage for the loss or claim (by certified mail, return receipt requested). 
(Ord. 7/9/90 § 6) 
Chapter 3.16 - CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS 
Sections: 

3.16.010 - Payment by credit card. 
All sums due the city, including but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees, permit fees and registration fees, may be paid by the use of credit cards. The mayor shall establish the procedures for acceptance of credit card payments for amounts due the city. The mayor is authorized to enter into agreements with credit card issuers to facilitate the acceptance of credit card payments by the city. 
(Ord. 96-7.8.C § 1 (part)) 
3.16.020 - Credit card agreement. 
A credit card agreement may provide for the acceptance of the credit card payments from the credit card company at a discount from the face amount of the payment or for the withholding of administrative fees from the face amount of the payment. Such discounted fee is granted in exchange for the improved governmental cash flow, reduction of administrative expenses and increased public convenience as a result of credit card payments. 
Any agreement with a credit card issuer for the acceptance of payments via credit shall contain a provision that the agreement may be canceled at any time by the city. 
(Ord. 96-7.8.C § 1 (part)) 
3.16.030 - Surcharge. 
A surcharge equal to the administrative fees charged by the credit card issuer to the city shall be imposed upon any person making a payment by credit card, when such surcharges are permitted by the operating rules and regulations of the credit card issuer. 
(Ord. 96-7.8.C § 1 (part)) 
3.16.040 - Liability for payment of obligation. 
No person making payment by credit card to the city is relieved from liability for the underlying obligation except to the extent that the city actually receives final payment of the obligation in cash or its equivalent. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, the underlying obligation for the money due is not extinguished. All applicable penalties, interest and collection fees on the unpaid amount shall be due from the person making the payment by credit card. 
Such penalties, interest and fees on an unpaid amount shall accrue from the date the unpaid obligation was first due under the applicable statute or ordinance. The city shall follow the collection procedures for the unpaid amount that would have otherwise been applicable had the credit card payment not been attempted. 
(Ord. 96-7.8.C § 1 (part)) 
Chapter 3.20 - CHECK PAYMENTS 
Sections: 

3.20.010 - Payment by check. 
All sums due the city, including but not limited to ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees, permit fees and registration fees, may be paid by the use of personal checks issued by the payor. The mayor shall establish the procedures for acceptance of check payments for amounts due the city. 
(Ord. 01-05.03A § 2) 
3.20.020 - Charge for returned checks. 
Upon notification by a financial institution that a check presented to the city will be returned for insufficient funds ("NSF"), because it is not properly payable, or for any other reason, the city shall be authorized to charge the payor or individual issuing said check a penalty equal to twenty-five dollars for each returned check or instrument. The city may, but shall not be required to, post a notice to this effect at one or more places where payments are delivered to the city. 
(Ord. 01-05.03A § 3) 
3.20.030 - Liability for payment of obligation. 
No person making payment by check to the city is released from liability for the underlying obligation except to the extent that this city actually receives final payment of the obligation in cash or its equivalent. If final payment is not paid by the payor, a financial institution, or any other guarantor of payment in the transaction, the underlying obligation for money due is not extinguished. All applicable penalties, interest and collection fees on the unpaid amount shall be due from the person making the payment by check. 
Such penalties, interest and fees on any unpaid amount shall accrue from the date the unpaid obligation is first due under the applicable statute or ordinance. The city shall follow the collection procedures for the unpaid amount that would have otherwise been applicable had the check payment not been attempted. 
(Ord. 01-05.03A § 4) 
Title 4 - CEMETERY 
Chapters: 
Chapter 4.02 - CEMETERY REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

4.02.010 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Burial space or grave" is a location where a dead body (typically that of a human, although sometimes that of an animal) is buried. See Cemetery Lot or Plot. 
"Cemetery plot" means and consists of enough land in which a deceased person may be buried in single spaces, as defined in the plat of the cemetery and as described in the deed of the burial rights to the owner thereof. Also knows as a cemetery lot, grave, or burial space. The parts of a cemetery plot usually consist of the following: 
"Grave cut." The excavation that formed the grave. This can vary from a shallow scraping, to removal of topsoil to a depth of six feet, or more where a vault is to be constructed. 
"Excavated spoil." The material dug up when the grave is excavated. Often piled up close to the grave for backfilling and then returned to the grave to cover it. 
"Burial vault." A vault is a structure built within the grave to receive the body as part of the interment. It may be used to prevent crushing of the remains. Sometimes a crypt is used and is typically an above-ground or sometimes an in-ground burial chamber often where the body of the deceased is placed. 
"Interment or burial." The process of placing a deceased person in the cemetery plot, with or without personal possessions of the deceased. 
"Grave backfill." The soil returned to the grave cut following burial. The fill may be left level with the ground or mounded. 
"Monument or marker." Headstones are best known but they can be supplemented by decorative edging, foot stones, posts to support items, a solid covering or other options. 
"Disinterment." The process by which a deceased person is removed from a cemetery plot as prescribed herein. 
"Square" means the unit area of land consisting of fourteen feet by twenty feet within the cemetery that contains a minimum of six contiguous cemetery plots, 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.020 - Burials; location restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any dead body except in a public or private cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.025 - Memorial decorations. 
Memorial decorations are defined as cut flowers, small signs, flags, banners and solar powered light devices no more than three feet in height and eighteen inches wide are permitted at an existing grave site in the city cemetery. No other memorial decorations shall be permitted and shall be removed and discarded. 
(Ord. No. 15-09-037, §§ 1, 2, 9-8-15) 
4.02.030 - Cemetery plots subject to restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations; authority of city manager. 
A.  All cemetery plots owned and purchased within the public cemetery of the city, and all such plots sold, shall be subject to the restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations in this chapter and shall be subject to such other rules, regulations, amendments or alterations and ordinances as shall be adopted and regularly passed by the city from time to time. A reference to such rules and regulations in the deed or certificate of ownership shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth therein. 
B.  The city manager or his authorized designee is authorized to supervise the upkeep, care and operations of city cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.040 - Purchase price of plots. 
The purchase price of plots in the public cemetery is one thousand two hundred dollars per square of six cemetery plots. The price may change as established by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 15-02-013, § 1, 2-2-15) 
4.02.050 - Burial rights in public cemetery; supervision of sale and conveyances, execution, form and conditions of certificate of ownership. 
A.  Sale of burial rights. The city clerk shall generally supervise the sale and conveyance of burial rights purchased in the public cemetery of the city. The city clerk shall execute to the purchaser of the burial rights a cemetery record "Certificate of Ownership" made in substantially the following form: 
"City of Locust Grove, Henry County, Georgia: 
This indenture, Made this ____________ day of ;daterule;, 20, ____________ between the City of Locust Grove, Henry County, Georgia, of the first part, and ____________ of the second part. 
Witnesseth: That the party of the first part, for and in consideration of the sum of ____________ Dollars, to it in hand paid by the said party of the second part, the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, has granted, bargained, sold and conveyed, and by these presents doth grant, bargain and sell unto said party of the second part, ____________ , heirs and assigns, the exclusive rights of interment in and to a certain cemetery plots in the Locust Grove Cemetery, in said city which is known and distinguished in the plan of said cemetery as (description) the number and description of said plot being made with reference to the surveys and plats on file in the city clerk's office and by which the parties to this conveyance acknowledge themselves bound; to have and to hold said exclusive privilege to the said party of the second part and ____________ heirs forever, subject to all the requirements of any ordinance of the Mayor and Council of the City of Locust Grove now in force or hereafter ordained, regulating said cemetery, upon this express condition, nevertheless, that no sale or transfer of the rights of burial and interment in said burial plots ____________ shall at any time by party of the second part or by any future owner be valid without the notification of the City of Locust Grove, and an entry of which shall be made on the books of the City of Locust Grove. And provided, that the party of the second part or any future owner of the burial and interment rights in said cemetery plots ____________ shall not at any time or times hereafter demand or receive any compensation for an interment in said cemetery plots ____________ . 
And provided also that the rights and premises granted hereby shall be subject to the restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations made and to be made hereafter by said City of Locust Grove for the government of its cemetery, lot holders, visitors to the cemetery and burial of the dead. 
The restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations as they appear in Chapter 4.02 of the Code of the City of Locust Grove, Georgia, are hereby specifically included in this certificate by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
And the said party of the first part for itself and its successors, the said exclusive privilege, unto the said party of the second part against said party of the first part and its successors, and against all and every person, and persons whomsoever, will warrant and forever defend. 
In testimony whereof, the said party of the first part hath hereunto signed its corporate name and affixed its corporate seal the day and year first above written. 
The City of Locust Grove 
By: 
____________  City Clerk of the City of  Locust Grove 
____________  City Manager, City of  Locust Grove 
Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 
____________  Notary Public, Henry Co., Ga." 
B.  Conditions, record of transfer. All certificates to burial rights given by the city after March 1, 2010 shall be upon this expressed condition, nevertheless, that no sale or transfer of the rights of burial and interment in such cemetery at any time by the purchaser thereof or by any future owner shall be valid without the notification to the city. The record of transfer shall be kept by the city upon a book, map, plat and or electronic database specifically kept for the purpose of recording such transfers. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.060 - Ownership construed; use and division; reversion to city. 
Ownership of a plot consists only in the right of interment. The plot can be used for no other purpose and cannot be divided into smaller portions than originally laid down in the plot. Should a lot holder die without devise of the lot or any known kindred, title to such lot shall revert to the city, for the protection of those who may be interred therein. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.070 - Issuance of certificate. 
A  certificate of ownership shall be issued to each lot holder on full payment of the purchase money of such lot. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.080 - Owner's change of address, duty to notify city; sufficient and proper legal notification described. 
It shall be the duty of a cemetery plot owner to notify the city of any change in his post office address. Notice sent to a cemetery plot owner at the last address on file in the office of the city clerk shall be considered a sufficient and proper legal notification. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.090 - Certain rights and privileges reserved by city. 
The following rights and privileges are hereby expressly reserved by the city in its conveyance of any cemetery lot, plot or space: At any time and from time to time, the city may: 
A.  Resurvey, enlarge, diminish, replat, alter in shape or size or otherwise change all or any part, portion or subdivision of the property mapped and platted. 
B.  File amended maps or plats thereof and use the same for the erection of buildings or for any purposes or uses connected with, incident to, or convenient for the care, preservation or preparation, for the disposal or interment of dead human bodies, or other cemetery purposes, together with easements and rights-of-way over and through such premises for the privilege of, installing, maintaining and operating pipelines, conduits or drains for sprinklers, drainage, electric or communication lines, or for any other like purposes. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.100 - Easements or rights of interment in roads, drives, alleys or walks. 
No easement or right of interment is granted by the city to any cemetery plot in any road, drive, alley or walk within a cemetery, but such road, drive, alley or walk may be used as long as the city devotes it to that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.110 - Transfer or assignment; prerequisite to validity. 
No transfer or assignment of any cemetery lot, space or plot or interest therein shall be valid until the acknowledgment by the city thereon and the same has been recorded on the books, maps, plats or electronic databases of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.120 - Plots having several owners; representation by designated owner. 
When there are several owners of the rights of interment in a cemetery plot, they may designate one or more persons to represent the cemetery plot and file written notice of designation with the city clerk. In the absence of such notice or of written objection to its so doing, the city is not liable to any owner for interring or permitting an interment or refusing an interment in the cemetery plot upon the request or direction of any co-owners of the cemetery plot. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.130 - Improvements or alterations of individual property; notification to city; removal when unsightly. 
All improvements or alterations of individual property in the cemetery shall be under the notification to the city; and should they be made without its consent, the city shall have the right to remove, alter or change such improvements or alterations at the expense of the cemetery plot owner, or in any event at any time when, in its judgment, they become unsightly to the eye. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.135 - Right to remove trash, debris, tall grass and weeds. 
If trash or debris accumulates on any lot or the grass or weeds on any lot reaches a height of more than twelve inches as measured from the prevailing level ground in the lot, the city reserves the right to enter upon the lot and remove trash and debris and cut overgrown grass or weeds. 
(Ord. No. 15-09-037, §§ 3, 4, 9-8-15) 
4.02.140 - Right to remove detrimental trees and shrubs. 
If any tree or shrub, situated in any lot, shall, by means of its roots or branches, become detrimental in any way to the adjoining lot, avenue or walk, it shall be the duty and privilege of the city, and it hereby reserves the right, to enter upon the lot and remove the trees or shrubs, or any part thereof. But no tree growing in any lot or border shall be pruned or removed without the consent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.150 - Signs, notices or advertisements prohibited. 
No signs, notices or advertisements of any kind shall be allowed in any cemetery, except by the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.160 - Responsibility for damage. 
The city disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage from causes beyond its reasonable control, and especially from damage caused by the elements, an act of God, a common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots or orders of any military or civil authority, whether the damage is direct or collateral. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.170 - Interments, disinterments and removals; time; opening and closing graves; notification. 
(a)  All interments, disinterments and removals must be notified to the city. 
(b)  All state and local health and safety laws must be complied with prior to any interment in any city cemetery. 
(c)  All interments must be inside containers of minimum standard as approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.180 - Reservation of right to require sufficient notice before interment and verification of ownership. 
The right is reserved by the city to require sufficient notice before any interment for the verification of ownership and the proper location of the cemetery plot. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.190 - Liability for interment permit and identify of person sought to be interred. 
The city shall not be liable in damages for an error in the interment permit nor for a mistake or error in the identity of a person sought to be interred. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.200 - Responsibility for telephone orders or mistakes caused by vague instructions. 
The city shall not be held responsible for any order given by telephone, or for any mistake occurring from the want of precise and proper instructions as to the particular space, size and location in a plot where interment is desired. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.210 - Disinterment—Notification prerequisite. 
No disinterment from any lot shall be made except with notification to the city. The city may require that an order from a proper court of law first be secured by those seeking the disinterment. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.220 - Limitation on number of bodies interred in same cemetery lot. 
Not more than one body, nor the remains of more than one body, shall be interred in any one cemetery plot. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.230 - Visitation hours; loitering in cemetery. 
(a)  City cemetery shall be open for visitation during the following hours, unless otherwise posted: Between one-half hour after sunup and one-half hour before sundown. 
(b)  Loitering in city cemetery is prohibited. The presence of any person in any of such cemetery during prohibited hours shall be prima facie evidence of loitering. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.240 - Persons within grounds to use only avenues, walks, alleys and roads. 
Persons within the cemetery grounds shall use only the avenues, walks, alleys and roads and shall not walk, drive or ride upon the cemetery plots. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.250 - Motor vehicles regulated. 
Motor vehicles shall not be driven through the cemetery grounds at a greater speed than ten miles per hour, and must always be kept on the right-hand side of the cemetery roadway. Motor vehicles are not allowed to park or to come to a full stop in front of an open grave unless such motor vehicles are in attendance at the funeral. No off-road recreational vehicles shall be allowed in city cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.260 - Maintenance account. 
The city shall establish a maintenance account for the long-term care and preservation of the city cemetery. The maintenance account established in this section shall be a part of the city's general trust fund and will include all donations and other appropriations relating to the cemetery which the city may deem proper. The city can use only the interest from such maintenance account for the care and preservation of the city cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.270 - Interpretation, application and enforcement of provisions. 
This chapter shall be interpreted, applied and enforced by the public works committee. In cases of hardship, necessity or unreasonableness in the application or enforcement of any of the rules and regulations in this chapter, the majority of the public works committee shall have the right to alter the application and enforcement of these rules and regulations so as to relieve the hardship or unreasonableness, and the same shall not constitute forfeiture nor shall it have the effect of changing or abridging any rule, covenant or regulation under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
4.02.280 - Violation of chapter. 
Any person performing any act forbidden by this chapter or failing to perform any act required by this chapter shall have breached this chapter and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by Section 1.08 of the Code of Ordinances of the city of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-017, § 3, 3-1-10) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY 
Sections: 

5.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words where used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, shall be deemed to have the following meanings: 
Administrator. The city clerk shall be the administrator for the licensing of businesses under this chapter and may be assisted by employees of the clerk's office. 
"Business" means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling of any kind for gain or profit, directly or indirectly; provided that this shall not include any business, trade, profession and the like licensed by the state unless city licensing is allowed by state law, nor shall it include any business operating solely under a franchise granted by the city. 
Engaged in business. Any person shall be deemed to be engaged in business and thus subject to the requirements of this chapter when he performs any act of selling any goods or services or solicits business or offers goods or services for sale for payment in an attempt to make a profit, including the sales or services of the character as made by a wholesaler or retailer or involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, either as an owner, operator or agent in any business within the city. 
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or group of individuals, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
(Prior code § 7-1-1) 
5.04.020 - License required. 
Every business in this city or person doing business or engaged in business within the city is required to have a business license from the city for the privilege of engaging in a business, profession or occupation within the corporate limits, unless city licensing is prohibited under state law or the activity is exempted by this code. 
(Prior code § 7-1-2) 
5.04.030 - Separate businesses. 
Where a person conducts a business at more than one store, location or place, each store, location or place shall be considered a separate business under the terms of this chapter and a separate license shall be required. Should more than one business on which a business tax is levied by this code be conducted in or in conjunction with one place or kind of business, each business shall be separately licensed under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7-1-3) 
5.04.040 - Application—Fee—Temporary business. 
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this code shall submit an application for the license to the administrator, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section in addition to any other provisions of this code. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in this code, each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city and submitted before the last day of February of each year or within ten days of opening a new business or reopening of a business under a new ownership. 
B.  Each application shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name and home address of the applicant if an individual, or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
2.  Place where the proposed business is to be located; 
3.  Kind and class of business to be carried on; 
4.  Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership; 
5.  Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation; 
6.  Any information as may be required by the administrator for the purpose of determining the amount of any business taxes to be collected under this code; and 
7.  Any additional information which the administrator may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter, which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, state or federal government other than minor traffic violations. 
C.  Each application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer if a corporation. 
D.  All information furnished or secured under the authority of this chapter of the code shall be kept in strict confidence by the city; shall not be subject to public inspection; and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter and the city's business taxes. 
E.  False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license or denial of the application. 
F.  Any application, license and registration fees as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council or business taxes required under this code shall accompany the application. 
G.  Transient and temporary businesses shall pay any fees or taxes provided for in this code. No license granted these businesses shall be valid after one hundred eighty days. 
(Prior code § 7-1-4) 
5.04.050 - Administration of chapter. 
The administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the application for and issuance of business licenses under this chapter of the code. 
(Prior code § 7-1-5) 
5.04.060 - Duties of administrator. 
The administrator, or an authorized representative, shall have, among others, the following duties: 
A.  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for the registration and application for a business license and for the submission of any required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter; 
B.  To issue to each person a business license within a reasonable time after the payment of the license fee assessed and any business taxes, property or other city taxes levied in this code; provided, however, where under other portions of this code, permits, certifications and compliance with enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the administrator shall not issue a business license until the applicant exhibits to the administrator the obtained permits, certification and compliance. 
(Prior code § 7-1-6) 
5.04.070 - Duration of license. 
Any license referred to in this chapter shall automatically expire on December 31st of the year of its issuance. 
(Prior code § 7-1-7) 
5.04.080 - Casual and isolated activity. 
Except as otherwise provided in this title, nothing herein contained shall be interpreted so as to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, where they involve personal assets only and are not the principal occupation of the individual, to obtain a business license and pay a fee therefor. 
(Prior code § 7-1-8) 
5.04.090 - Special daily business license. 
In lieu of obtaining a business license as provided in this chapter, a person not maintaining a fixed place of business in the city may obtain from the administrator a special daily business license which shall expire at twelve midnight of the day for which it is issued. A new license shall be obtained for each day on which any type of business is to be conducted. Any person desiring to engage in a business licensed under this section shall obtain a license prior to engaging in business on the day for which the license is issued and pay all license fees and business taxes required under this code. 
(Prior code § 7-1-9) 
5.04.100 - Procedure for issuance. 
A.  If any provision of this code provides for the review of an application for a license by a city officer designated therein, the administrator shall forward a copy of the application to that officer. The officer charged with the duty of reviewing the application shall make a recommendation thereon, favorable or otherwise, and shall return the recommendation to the administrator after receiving a copy of the application. 
B.  Upon the receipt of the recommendation of the reviewing officer as hereinabove provided, or upon the receipt of the application if no reviewing officer is designated, the administrator shall forward the recommendation and application to the mayor and council for consideration and action at its next regularly scheduled public meeting, if approval by the mayor and council is required. 
C.  No license shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with all minimum standard building codes adopted by the city. 
D.  No license shall be issued to any applicant who has any outstanding indebtedness to the city, including but not limited to property taxes, business license fees, business taxes, utility bills and any other taxes or assessments. 
E.  Upon the express approval of the mayor and council, when so required, or otherwise upon a determination by the administrator that the application is in order and all requirements have been met, the administrator shall issue a business license to the applicant therefor, which license shall state the nature of the business authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the administrator. 
F.  If the administrator determines that the application is not in order or any requirements for the license have not been met, then the administrator shall deny the application and immediately provide written notice of the denial and the grounds therefor to the applicant. The applicant may appeal the denial to the mayor and council within ten days of the denial notice being issued. The mayor and council shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within ten days of the appeal being filed with the city clerk. The mayor and council, within ten days of the hearing, may order the license granted with or without conditions or may affirm the denial of the application. The decision shall be based only upon a finding by the mayor and council that the administrator was correct or erred in the interpretation of the regulations involved or the facts of the case. 
G.  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, all license applications shall be approved or disapproved within ten days of filing with the administrator. 
H.  Nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in that business. 
(Prior code § 7-1-10) 
5.04.110 - Display of licenses and registrations. 
All persons shall exhibit and display all licenses and registrations issued to them under this code in some conspicuous place in their business establishment at which address the license or registration was issued. Any transient or nonresident person, firm or corporation doing business within the city shall carry the license or registration either upon his or her person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in the business, and the person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(Prior code § 7-1-11) 
5.04.120 - Renewal of licenses. 
Each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on forms supplied by the administrator no later than the last day of February of each calendar year, which application may require substantially the same information as the initial application. 
(Prior code § 7-1-12) 
5.04.130 - Revocation—Suspension. 
The mayor and council after affording the licensee a five-day notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, may, if they find this code to have been violated by the licensee, his or her agent, or employee in the operation of the business, revoke any and all city licenses in their entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation or place other conditions thereon as the mayor and council may deem necessary after a hearing thereon. 
(Prior code § 7-1-13) 
5.04.140 - Change of address. 
Any person licensed here under moving from one location to another shall notify the administrator of the move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the administrator no later than the day of moving. The same business license will be valid at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning, subdivision and building regulations of the city and any other location transfer requirements of this code. 
(Prior code § 7-1-14) 
5.04.150 - Transfer of licenses. 
Business licenses shall not be transferable except as provided in this section. In the event that the owner of a business holding a currently valid paid-up business license should sell or transfer the business to another person, the purchaser of the business shall obtain free of charge a new license in his name for the balance of the current term of the seller's business license, upon making application to the administrator, and the purchaser shall be punishable for violation of this chapter if the transfer of the business license provided for in this section is not made before the transferee begins to engage in the business. At the date of renewal of the seller's business license, the buyer must obtain a new annual business license and pay all license fees and business taxes required by this code and comply with all applicable provisions of this code and all ordinances in the same manner as if he had been the original owner of the business. 
(Prior code § 7-1-15) 
5.04.160 - Issuance of replacement licenses. 
In the event that the administrator is notified that the licensee has lost his copy of the license, he shall make a new copy, upon showing by the licensee that the required fees have been paid. In addition, the licensee shall be charged a replacement fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. Replacement licenses shall be signed by the administrator and shall indicate the time and date upon which issued. The possession of a replacement license shall not be a defense to any charge of violation of this chapter except a charge made after the time of the issuance of the replacement license. 
(Prior code § 7-1-16) 
5.04.170 - Special provisions for disabled veterans. 
All disabled veterans desiring to enter business without paying city license fees or business taxes must present a state disability license to the administrator whereupon a city license will be issued and marked "FREE" on the face of the same. 
(Prior code § 7-1-17) 
5.04.180 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, whether based in the city or elsewhere, to transact any business of a type for which this chapter requires a license, or to carry on any business for which a license is required however briefly or however transitorily, without first obtaining a license to do so, under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, whether based in the city or elsewhere, made liable for obtaining a business license under this chapter, to fail to show the license or a copy thereof to any police officer within a reasonable time after the making of a demand therefor by the police officer. 
C.  It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to pay the license fees required by this chapter by the date on which such payments are due. 
D.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Prior code § 7-1-18) 
5.04.190 - Defense to prosecution. 
It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this chapter for failing to obtain a business license before engaging in business, that a license has in fact been issued in the manner provided by law. It shall be presumed that no license has been issued unless at his trial, the accused produces in court his currently valid business license or a certified copy thereof. In no event shall the claim by the accused that he has been issued a currently valid business license which has been lost be sustained unless that person shall have first reported the alleged loss to the administrator and made demand for the issuance of a new license. The report of loss or demand for issuance of a replacement license must have been made prior to the arrest for the violation for which the accused is charged. 
(Prior code § 7-1-19) 
5.04.200 - Owner and manager both punishable for violations. 
In the event that a business is being conducted without a license, both the person owning the business and the person in charge of the management of the business in the city may be held liable for the violation of the provisions of this chapter, and upon conviction, either or both may be punished as provided for in Section 5.04.180. 
(Prior code § 7-1-20) 
5.04.210 - Subsequent amendments—Other fees. 
This chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess, levy and collect any of the license fees prescribed. The payment of any license fee provided for in this chapter shall not be construed as prohibiting the assessment, levy or collection of additional license or permit fees upon the same person, firm or corporation. 
(Prior code § 7-1-21) 
Chapter 5.08 - BUSINESS TAXES GENERALLY 
Sections: 

5.08.010 - Definitions. 
The following words where used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, shall be deemed to have the following meanings: 
"Business" means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation, or calling of any kind for gain or profit, directly or indirectly. 
Engaged in business. Any person shall be deemed to be engaged in business and thus subject to the requirements of this chapter when he performs any act of selling any goods or service or solicits business or offers goods or services for sale for payment in an attempt to make a profit, including the sales or services of the character as made by a wholesaler or retailer or involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, either as an owner, operator or agent in any business, trade, profession or occupation within this city. 
"Manufacturer" means a person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or commercial use any articles, substances or commodities; including all the activities of a commercial nature wherein labor or skill is applied by hand or machinery to materials so that as a result thereof a new, different or useful article of tangible personal property or substance of trade or commerce is produced; and including the production or fabrication of specially or custom-made articles; and including the making, fabricating, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, preserving, canning and preparing and freezing of fresh foods, fruits, vegetables and meats. 
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or group of individuals, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
"Retailer" means a person who sells to the consumer or any other person for any purpose other than for resale in the form of tangible personal property. 
"Services" means the accommodating or performing of a duty or work by a person utilizing time or talents for direct or indirect remuneration. 
"Wholesaler" means a person who sells to jobbers or to another person other than the consumer anything in the form of tangible personal property. 
(Prior code § 2-5-21) 
5.08.020 - Levy of tax. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, there is levied and assessed a business tax, as set forth in a schedule entitled, "Business, Profession and Occupation Tax Schedule," on all occupations and businesses in the city which, under the laws of the state of Georgia, the city has the authority to collect a tax therefor. 
B.  The business, profession and occupation tax schedule for the city is adopted and incorporated by reference herein and copies thereof shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 2-5-22) 
5.08.030 - Separate businesses. 
Where a person conducts a business at more than one store, location or place, each store, location or place shall be considered a separate business under the terms of this chapter and a separate tax shall be levied and paid; and should more than one business on which a tax is levied by this chapter be conducted in or in conjunction with one place or kind of business, each such business shall be subject to a separate tax under this chapter unless such a combination is listed in the tax schedule. 
(Prior code § 2-5-23) 
5.08.040 - Registration required. 
Every person engaged in any business, occupation or profession within the city upon which a tax is imposed or levied by this chapter, shall register that business, occupation or profession with the city clerk on or before February 2nd of each year, or within ten days of the opening of a new business or the sale of any established business, upon forms to be supplied by the city clerk, giving the name, address and type of business, occupation and profession and any other information as may be required by the city clerk for the purpose of determining the amount of tax to be imposed or assessed by this chapter. A city business license application shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this section. 
(Prior code § 2-5-24) 
5.08.050 - Payment of tax. 
All taxes imposed and assessed in this chapter shall be due and payable on or before February 2nd of each year. Except in the case of any business commenced or under new ownership after that date, the taxes shall be due and payable within ten days of when the business is commenced or reopened under new ownership. Payment of the tax may be made personally to the city clerk in cash, or by company check, money order, bank draft, certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. The tax shall be payable in a single installment. 
(Prior code § 2-5-25) 
5.08.060 - Issuance of tax certificate. 
Upon the payment of the taxes assessed in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue to each person a business or occupational tax receipt and certificate. A city business license shall be sufficient for this section. 
(Prior code § 2-5-26) 
5.08.070 - Certificate to be displayed. 
All persons shall exhibit and display the city tax certificate or city license in some conspicuous place in their business establishment. Any transient or nonresident person, firm or corporation doing business within the city shall carry the certificate or license either upon his or her person or on any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in the business, and the person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when requested to do so. 
(Prior code § 2-5-27) 
5.08.080 - Change of address. 
Any person moving a nontransient business from one location to another shall notify the city clerk of the move and the new address in writing, no later than 10 days after moving. The same tax certificate shall be valid at the new location. 
(Prior code § 2-5-28) 
5.08.090 - Change of ownership—Transfers. 
No tax certificate may be transferred from one person to another. Additions to or deletions from the ownership of a business, which do not affect the liability and the principal ownership of a business for which the certificate is issued, may be made without canceling the old business or occupational tax certificate and applying for a new certificate. Whenever any person shall lease, operate or control the business franchise or property of other persons, they shall obtain a separate business tax certificate for each such business; provided, no business shall pay the tax more than once under such an arrangement. 
(Prior code § 2-5-29) 
5.08.100 - Enforcement. 
The city clerk shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes imposed and assessed by this chapter. The unpaid taxes and executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due the city. 
(Prior code § 2-5-33) 
5.08.110 - Penalties. 
Any person failing to register on or before February 2nd of each year or, in the case of a new business or new owner, within ten days of commencing business, or failing to pay the tax due under the terms of this chapter by the due date, shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the business or occupational tax when due per month for each month or fractional part thereof for which the tax is due or unpaid. 
(Prior code § 2-5-34) 
5.08.120 - Criminal penalties—Licenses revoked. 
Any person, firm or corporation, including the officers, agents or employees of same, violating the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. Each day in violation hereof shall be a separate offense hereunder. Any person so convicted shall be subject to the revocation of any city business license. 
(Prior code § 2-5-35) 
Chapter 5.12 - ADMINISTRATIVE FEES, REGULATORY FEES AND OCCUPATION TAXES 
Sections: 

5.12.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Administrative fee" means the component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the registration of the business from whom the occupation tax is collected. 
"Dominant line" means the type of business within a multiple service or product business from which the greatest amount of revenue is derived. 
Gross Receipts. 
1.  "Gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; 
d.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
2.  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnership or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
"Location or office" means and includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction worksite which serves a single customer or project, or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
"North American Industry Classification System (NAICS)" means the categories of occupations and industries established by and promulgated by the Office of Management and Budget of the United States of America in conjunction with the U.S. Economic Classification Policy Committee, Statistics Canada and the INEGI of Mexico as published in the NAICS Manual of 2002 or latest edition as may be amended. 
"Occupation tax" means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue purposes. 
"Occupation tax certificate" means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
"Person" means and includes sole proprietors, practitioners of professions, corporations, partnerships, or any other form of organization. 
"Practitioners of professions" means: 
1.  Lawyers; 
2.  Physicians licensed under U.S.C. Chapter 34 of Title 43; 
3.  Osteopaths licensed under U.S.C. Chapter 34 of Title 43; 
4.  Chiropractors; 
5.  Podiatrists; 
6.  Dentists; 
7.  Optometrists; 
8.  Psychologists; 
9.  Veterinarians; 
10.  Landscape architects; 
11.  Land surveyors; 
12.  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
13.  Public accountants; 
14.  Embalmers; 
15.  Funeral directors; 
16.  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineers; 
17.  Architects; and 
18.  Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors. 
Such term shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
"Profitability class" means the category into which an occupation is placed for occupation tax purposes in accordance with Section 15.12.040. 
"Regulatory fee" means the payment required by the city as an exercise of its police power as part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business, the amount of which shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city.* 
"Regulatory fee certificate" means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of regulatory fee. 
(Ord. 08-12-073 § 1; Ord. 95-12.12A § 1; Ord. 94-12.A (part)) 
*  Regulatory fees do not include an administrative fee. Also, development impact fees or other costs imposed as conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees for purposes of this chapter. See OCGA § 48-13-5(6). 
5.12.020 - Administrative fee. 
An annual nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of fifty dollars is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.030 - Regulatory fee. 
A.  An annual regulatory fee in the amount shown as Appendix C is imposed on persons engaged in businesses described in said appendix. 
B.  If a person engages in an activity regulated by the city on or after July 1st in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. 
C.  Every person subject to payment or regulatory fee levied by this chapter shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If a taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate shall be shown to any police officer or any other person charged with enforcing this chapter upon request. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.040 - Occupation tax levied. 
A.  An occupation tax is levied upon those persons with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-7, upon out-of-state persons with no location or office in Georgia in accordance with the following occupation tax schedule: 
1.  Businesses in their first year of operation may elect to report and pay the applicable tax by bracket of estimated gross receipts and profitability class listed in Appendix A for the first year only, or may choose the option below. 
2.  For all other businesses occupational taxes shall report actual gross receipts and pay as follows: 
Occupational Tax = Gross Receipts x Tax Rate (by Profitability Ratio shown below) 

 
B.  A person shall be placed in the profitability class based on the dominant line of business or service of the person and profitability ratios as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States shall be used to classify the dominant lines of business by tax class. Profitability classes by North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code shall be listed as Appendix B. 
C.  Persons with no physical location in the state, but which perform services or sell products within the corporate limits of the city, shall be subject to the administrative fee and occupation tax if such person has more than nominal business activity within the city, including:* 
1.  One or more employees who exert effort within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
2.  Owns real or personal property which is located within the jurisdiction of the city and which generates income or is used to generate income. 
(Ord. 08-12-073 §§ 2—4) 
* See O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-7(b). 
5.12.050 - Occupation tax limitations. 
A.  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a person. 
1.  If a person with no location or office in the city provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the person's gross receipts in this state, then the person shall be exempt from the occupation tax levied by this chapter. 
2.  A person who has locations or offices elsewhere in Georgia who is subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in Georgia shall be subject to occupation tax by the city, unless the person provides documentation to the city of current payment of an occupation tax, measured by gross receipts of the person to the other Georgia local governments. 
B.  Persons from out of state with no office or location in Georgia subject to an occupation tax under this chapter shall be required to pay an occupation tax to only one local government in Georgia. Such local government shall be the government of the municipal corporation or county in which the largest dollar volume of business is done or services are performed by the person. Such persons submitting documentation to the city showing payment of a local business or occupation tax to another local government in Georgia shall be exempt from the occupation tax levied by this chapter. 
C.  If a person commences business in the city on or after July 1st in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
D.  1.  Real estate brokers shall be subject to the occupation tax imposed by this chapter only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city.* 
2.  Real estate brokers whose offices are located outside the city and who sell property inside the city shall be subject to the occupation tax based upon the gross receipts from sales of property located within the city. 
E.  1.  No person shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
2.  No occupation tax will be required upon more than one hundred percent of a business's gross receipts. 
3.  No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
4.  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
5.  Out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in OCGA § 14-13-7 which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state of Georgia. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
*  Licensing and taxation of insurers is governed by OCGA § 38-8-8 et seq. and should be covered by a separate ordinance. Likewise, alcoholic beverage businesses are subject to special provisions in Title 3 of the Georgia Code. 
5.12.060 - Registration of line of business. 
The registration by each person shall identify the dominant line of business, profession or occupation conducted. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.070 - Businesses conducted at more than one location. 
Wherever a business or occupation is conducted at more than one location or place within the city, each such location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.080 - Multiple-location businesses—Assessing of gross receipts. 
A.  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts generated by each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts cannot be allocated among multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and an equal percentage of such gross receipts shall be allotted to each location. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
1.  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
2.  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
B.  Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.090 - Taxation of professionals. 
A.  Practitioners of professions, as defined in Section 5.12.010, shall elect for their occupation tax either: 
1.  The occupation tax as set forth in Section 5.12.040; or, 
2.  A tax of two hundred dollars for each practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. 
B.  Such election shall be made on or before February 1, 1995. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the professional on or before February 1st of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.100 - Fees and taxes payable when—Delinquent when—Remedies. 
Each administrative fee, regulatory fee and occupation tax, as applicable, shall be for the calendar year. Any administrative fee, regulatory fee or occupation tax shall be payable January 1st of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by April 1st of each year. Any amounts owed which are not paid by April 1st shall be subject to the penalties for delinquency as described in this chapter. For any new profession, occupation or business begun in the city after January 1st of any year the administrative fee, regulatory fee and occupation tax, as applicable, shall be obtained immediately upon beginning business, and if not so obtained shall be delinquent. A regulatory fee certificate and an occupation tax certificate indicating that the profession, occupation or business has paid the fees and taxes owed shall be issued by the city clerk. Any person practicing a profession, occupation or business without having valid certificates issued to him or her shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section 5.04.180 of this code. 
In addition to the above remedies, the city clerk may proceed to collect the delinquencies in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.110 - Occupation tax certificate. 
Every person subject to payment of the occupation tax amended by this chapter shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer or any other person charged with enforcing this chapter upon request. Display of a current occupation tax certificate is not a pre-condition to the practice of the occupation. 
(Ord. 98-13.7.A § 1 (part)) 
5.12.120 - Exemptions. 
A.  No occupation tax shall be levied upon the following: 
1.  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, of the state or a municipality or county of the state; 
2.  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
3.  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; 
4.  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agricultural business; 
5.  Nonprofit agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to OCGA § 2-10-105; 
6.  Motor common carriers pursuant to OCGA § 46-7-15; 
7.  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cotton seed or cotton seed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to OCGA § 48-5-355; 
8.  Persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in the state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within ninety days of the introduction of the product into the city;* 
9.  Depository institutions pursuant to OCGA § 48-6-93;** or 
10.  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state of Georgia or the United States.*** 
B.  The exemptions and limitations contained in this chapter shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
* See OCGA § 48-5-356. 
**  See this statute regarding the collection of occupation tax from banks and other financial institutions. 
***  The city may wish to provide an exemption from the occupation tax, administrative fee and/or regulatory fee for charitable organizations. If so, the ordinance provision providing an exemption should recite that the exemption is part of a plan by the city to encourage such business, pursuant to OCGA § 48-13(e), and should be narrowly defined to allow only true charitable organizations to take advantage of the provision. 
5.12.130 - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year—Filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. 
A.  All occupation taxes levied under this chapter are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the current calendar year. However, for convenience of both city and the taxpayer, each business subject to the occupation tax shall, on or before the dates hereinafter set forth, file with the city the return hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth herein. 
B.  The person subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before April 1st of the current calendar year, file with the city, on a form furnished by the city, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current calendar year. 
C.  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.140 - Filing of return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year—Procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. 
A.  On or before April 1st of each year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the city, on a form furnished by the city, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year. 
B.  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this chapter, is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed by the business, the difference in said amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on April 1st of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before said date. 
C.  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this chapter, exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed by the business, the difference in said amount shall be refunded by city to the taxpayer; or, if said business continues to be conducted in the city during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by said business for the current year. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.150 - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a return to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and the amount of the occupation tax or the levy or collection of occupation tax levied pursuant to this chapter is confidential and exempt from disclosure.* Such information may be provided by the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay an occupation tax. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
* See OCGA § 48-13-15 which exempts such information from discovery under the Georgia open records statute. 
5.12.160 - Evidence of state registration—Other qualifications. 
A.  Each person who is licensed under Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated by the Examining Boards of Secretary of State's Office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
B.  Any person required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
C.  Any person required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.170 - Liability of officers and agents—Registration required—Failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax required in this chapter shall be required to take out the necessary registration for said business prescribed in this chapter. In default thereof the officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a certificate. Each person commencing business in the city after January 1st of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided herein before commencing such business. 
(Ord. 98-13.7.A § 1 (part)) 
5.12.180 - Due date—Court penalty and interest. 
A penalty is imposed on each business and practitioner of an occupation which or who fails to apply for and obtain appropriate registration and to pay any and all regulatory and administrative fees and occupation taxes required by this chapter prior to April 1st of each year. Said penalty shall be in the amount of ten percent of the regulatory and administrative fee and occupational tax determined to be due and owing under the provisions of this chapter. Such delinquency shall also bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent for each month or partial month of such delinquency. Penalties provided herein shall be in addition to any other penalties, civil or criminal, which may be applicable. 
(Ord. 96-4.8.E § 1) 
5.12.190 - Criminal penalty for violation of this chapter. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided in Section 5.04.180 of this code; provided, however, practitioners of professions and any other persons whose qualification to practice their profession is determined by the general laws of the state of Georgia and who fails to pay an occupation tax as provided in this chapter shall be subject only to the civil penalty and interest provisions as provided in Section 5.12.220. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.200 - Inspection of records. 
The city, through its employees, officers, or agents, may inspect the books of any person subject to an occupation tax as to determine the accuracy of the documents and information submitted by a business or practitioner to the city. Failure to submit such books or records within thirty days shall be grounds for the revocation of the regulatory fee certificate. Adequate records shall be kept in the city or made available in the city for examination by the designated city agents. If, after examination of the books or records it is determined that a deficiency exists as a result of improper designation of a dominant line of a business, profession, or occupation, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and an additional interest of one percent per month of the amount of the deficiency shall be assessed. 
(Ord. 98-98-13.7.A § 1 (part)) 
5.12.210 - Revocation. 
Failure of any person to pay an applicable administrative fee, regulatory fee or occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to permit inspection of books as required, shall result in any business tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate granted by the city under this chapter permitting such person to do business in the city for the current year being automatically revoked without any further action required of the city. No new occupation certificate or regulatory fee certificate shall be granted by the city for the occupation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax or fees herein required are unpaid nor shall such certificates be issued to a person who has failed to submit adequate records for inspection as required by Section 5.12.200. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.220 - Execution, liens. 
A.  The mayor, or his or her designee, upon any tax or installment of any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue an execution for the amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, including interest at the rate of one percent per month accruing thereon. The lien shall cover the property of the person liable for said tax as provided by this code, charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The lien for said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time that such tax or installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the appropriate city agent upon the property of the person liable for said tax and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and cost allowed by law. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the code and charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the charter of the city and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. 
B.  When a Nulla Bona entry has been entered by the proper authority upon execution issued by the city against any person defaulting on an occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the Nulla Bona. If at any time after the entry of the Nulla Bona has been made, the person against whom the execution pays the tax in full, together with all interest penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges for services and goods due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.230 - Application to prior delinquencies. 
This chapter does not repeal or affect the enforcement of any ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore passed for fees and taxes levied when such fees and taxes have not been paid in full. Such ordinances and parts of ordinances heretofore passed providing for the issuing and enforcing execution for taxes or assessments required by such ordinances or that imposed fines or penalties for nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees pursuant to such ordinances, or failure to comply with the other provisions thereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
5.12.240 - Public hearing before future tax increases. 
Prior to adopting any ordinance, subsequent to January 1, 1996, which increases the occupation tax as set forth in this chapter, the mayor and council shall conduct at least one public hearing. 
(Ord. 94-12A (part)) 
APPENDIX A  GROSS RECEIPTS BRACKETS CLASSIFICATION SCHEDULE 

 
*  If estimated gross receipts are more than $10 million, multiply applicable Tax Rate of Profitability Class x Gross Receipts to arrive at applicable occupational tax.  Round off all taxes to the nearest dollar. 
 Rates do not include a $50.00 administrative fee.  All taxes above are figured on maximum gross receipts per bracket. 
APPENDIX B  BUSINESSES CLASSIFIED BY PROFITABILITY RATIOS (TWO CLASSES) 

 
APPENDIX C  REGULATORY FEES FOR THE CITY OF LOCUST GROVE—1995 

 
Chapter 5.16 - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Sections: 

5.16.010 - Business license tax. 
Pursuant to OCGA, Section 48-6-93, there is levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of one-fourth of one percent of the gross receipts of said institutions. "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in OCGA, Section 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be one thousand dollars per year. 
(Prior code § 2-5-31 (a)) 
5.16.020 - Due date—Filing of return. 
A.  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1st of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in subsection (d) of Code Section 48-6-93 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. The tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. 
B.  The due date of taxes levied by this chapter shall be April 1, 1984, and April 1st of each subsequent year. 
(Prior code § 2-5-31 (b)) 
Chapter 5.20 - FLEA MARKETS 
Sections: 
Article I. - In General 

5.20.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Flea Market Ordinance for Locust Grove, Georgia." 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § I (1)) 
5.20.020 - Purpose—Function. 
A.  This chapter is adopted in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of Locust Grove, Georgia, by regulating the location, design and maintenance of flea markets. 
B.  This chapter establishes minimum standards for flea markets. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § I (2)) 
5.20.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the context of this chapter requires, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and administration of the chapter. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not optional. 
"Booth" means a designated space or a structure constructed for the purpose of displaying and selling merchandise within a flea market. 
"Flea Market" means any business whereby there is operated a center for shopping where a vendor or vendors sell merchandise to the public including salvage operations, antique stores, thrift stores, jewelry stores, coin shops, clothing shops or other businesses involving the sale of common merchandise. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § I (3)) 
5.20.040 - Variances. 
Where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter would cause an unnecessary hardship the mayor and city council may authorize a variance, if such variance can be made without destroying the intent of these regulations. In granting variances, the mayor and city council may impose such conditions as will, in its judgement, secure substantially the objective of the standards of requirements so varied. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § I (4)) 
5.20.050 - Conflict of ordinances. 
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the municipality, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § I (5)(a)) 
5.20.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than ninety days in prison; and each day's failure of compliance with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § I (6)) 
5.20.070 - Persons excluded. 
All temporary fund-raising events which involve the sale of merchandise by school, church or nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from the coverage of this chapter. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § I (7)) 
Article II. - Permit and License 

5.20.080 - Permit requirement. 
It is unlawful for any person to locate a flea market or to construct, alter or extend any flea market within the limits of the city, unless a valid permit is issued by the city council of the city. Construction, if necessary, must begin within one hundred eighty days after issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § II (1)) 
5.20.090 - Applications. 
A.  All applications for permits for flea markets shall be submitted to the clerk of the city, which said application shall be in a form prescribed by the city. Said application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors; 
2.  Name and address of the owner of the land upon which the flea market is to be located. In the event that the applicant intends to locate and/or operate a flea market on leased property, a copy of the lease shall be submitted with the application. If, however, the property is owned by the applicant, said applicant shall attach to the application a copy of the deed conveying title unto the applicant; 
3.  Telephone number of the applicant; 
4.  A list of references, including banking institutions and character references; 
5.  Social security number of the applicant; 
6.  Date of birth and identification (i.e., driver's license) of the applicant; 
7.  Fingerprints of applicant; 
8.  The location and legal description of the flea market; 
9.  A drawing or sketch showing the location of the flea market and design of parking spaces. 
B.  All applications for a business license to operate a booth within flea markets shall be submitted to the clerk of the city, which said application shall be in a form prescribed by the city. Said application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors; 
2.  Name and address of the flea market within which the booth will be located; 
3.  Telephone number of the applicant; 
4.  A list of references, including banking institutions and character references; 
5.  Social security number of the applicant; 
6.  Date of birth and identification (i.e., driver's license) of the applicant; 
7.  Fingerprints of applicant. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § II (2)) 
5.20.100 - Business license. 
A.  Any person, firm, organization or corporation conducting a flea market on property located within the city shall obtain a business license for such flea market and shall pay a yearly business license fee of five hundred dollars. 
B.  Any person, firm, organization or corporation operating a booth within a flea market located within the city shall obtain a business license for such booth and shall pay a yearly business license fee of two hundred fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § II (3)) 
Article III. - Inspections and Revocation of Permits 

5.20.110 - Inspections. 
A.  The police are authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter. 
B.  The police shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to enforcement of this chapter. 
C.  The police may request inspections by and verifications of compliance from the department of public health relating to any of the rules and regulations of state and/or local health department. Representatives of the department of public health shall have the same powers of entry and inspection as provided for the police. 
D.  Upon enactment of this chapter, all existing flea markets shall be inspected by the police to determine compliance or noncompliance with the terms as set forth within. (Amended during 1994 recodification; Ord. 12/6/88 § III (1)) 
5.20.120 - Revocation. 
A.  Any permit for a flea market may be revoked when it is found to be in violation of this chapter. 
B.  Should the city council of the city find that conditions exist which are in violation of any provision of this chapter, it shall give notice to the permittee or owner that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within thirty days, the permit will be revoked. Notice shall be served either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
C.  If at the end of the thirty days a further inspection reveals that the conditions or practices have not been corrected, the city council/mayor shall then revoke the permit and give notice of such suspension in writing to permittee or owner. Upon notice of revocation, the permittee or owner shall cease operation and/or construction of the flea market. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § III (2)) 
Article IV. - Technical Standards 

5.20.130 - Minimum size of booths. 
The minimum size of a booth within a flea market shall be ten feet by ten feet. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § IV (1)) 
5.20.140 - Structural requirements. 
All flea markets shall be within a permanent structure which meets the minimum standards of the city building code. Move-in buildings or temporary structures of any type are prohibited. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § IV (2)) 
5.20.150 - Site requirements. 
A.  Generally. Condition of soil, groundwater level drainage in topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectional smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazard. 
B.  Soil and Ground Cover. Exposed ground surfaces and all parts of every flea market shall be paved, or covered with stone, screenings or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust and/or mud. 
C.  Site Drainage Requirements. The ground surface and all parts of every flea market shall be graded and equipped to drain off surface water in a safe, efficient manner in order to eliminate water pockets, low areas or bogs. 
D.  Street System. All flea markets shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets, roads or highways. Access to flea markets shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. 
E.  Parking. Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all flea markets. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of five and one-half spaces per one thousand square feet of gross sales area. 
F.  Zoning. All flea markets must be located within a commercially zoned area. 
G.  Signs. All signs located at a flea market site shall be in compliance with the city sign ordinance, as now and hereafter amended. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § IV (3)) 
5.20.160 - Water supply requirements—Generally. 
An accessible, adequate safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each flea market. Each flea market shall be connected to city water. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § IV (4)) 
5.20.170 - Restroom and sewage disposal. 
A.  There shall be a minimum of one central restroom facility located on the premises. Within that central restroom, there shall be separate facilities for men and women. 
B.  Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory and sink; cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. 
C.  All flea markets shall be accessed to the public sewerage system for conveying and disposing of all sewage. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § IV (5)) 
5.20.180 - Refuse handling. 
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the flea markets shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § IV (6)) 
5.20.190 - Exterior of structure. 
There shall be no displays permitted on or around the outside of the structure which houses a flea market. 
(Ord. 12/6/88 § IV (7)) 
Chapter 5.21 - PAWNBROKERS, SCRAP METAL DEALERS, AND DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 
Sections: 
Article I. - General Provisions that Apply to All Articles in Chapter 

5.21.010 - Definitions pertaining to the entire chapter. 
A.  "City" means the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
B.  "Clerk" means the city clerk of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
C.  "Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
D.  "Dealer in precious metals or gems" means: 
1.  Any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or 
2.  A person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
E.  "Electronic reporting system" means a computer based system, as specified by the chief of police and approved by the manager, which is designed to record and transmit data and information electronically. 
F.  "Gems" means any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
G.  "Itinerant dealer in precious metals or gems" means a person who, due to the temporary manner in which the business is operated, is not required to have an occupation tax certificate to operate a business in the city of Locust Grove and who enters the city on a temporary, itinerant basis for a period of time not more than fifteen days and advertises by any form of media communication to the public that it will buy, sell or otherwise trade in and receive precious metals or gems at a nonpermanent location within the city. 
H.  "Licensed seller" means any person, firm, or corporation licensed by a state board of registration in this state for salvage dealers, dismantlers, or rebuilders which may be in existence as of July 1, 1981, or which may be created thereafter. 
I.  "Nonpermanent location" means any location designated to be used to conduct a business engaged in dealing in precious metals or gems by an itinerant merchant, in any temporary place, including but not limited to hotels or motels, any movable vehicle, or other temporary or movable structure to be used to conduct such business for a limited or specific time. 
J.  "Numismatic coins" means coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
K.  "Pawnbroker" means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this section. 
L.  "Pawn or pledge" means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the power of sale on default. 
M.  "Pawnshop" means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
N.  "Pawnshop transaction" means to take or receive any article of property or, from any customer, by pawning, pledging, trading, exchanging, purchasing, or other means. 
O.  "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
P.  "Precious metals" means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
Q.  "Proper identification" means any one of the following: 
1.  A Georgia driver's license which was properly issued by the appropriate state agency; 
2.  A valid Georgia voter identification card or other valid identification card issued by a branch, department, agency, or entity of the state of Georgia, any other state, or the United States authorized by law to issue personal identification, provided that such identification card contains a photograph of the customer; 
3.  A valid United States passport; 
4.  A valid employee identification card containing a photograph of the customer and issued by any branch, department, agency, or entity of the United States government, this state, or any county, municipality, board, authority, or other entity of this state; 
5.  A valid United States military identification card, provided that such identification card contains a photograph of the customer; or 
6.  A valid tribal identification card containing a photograph of the customer. 
R.  "Scrap metal processor" means any person, firm, or corporation which is engaged in the business of buying scrap vehicles, automotive parts, or other metallic waste by weight to process such material into scrap metal for remelting purposes; which utilizes machinery and equipment for processing ferrous and nonferrous metallic scrap into prepared grades; and whose principal product is metallic scrap. 
S.  "Scrap vehicle" means any vehicle which has been crushed or flattened by mechanical means or which has been otherwise damaged to the extent that it cannot economically be repaired or made roadworthy. 
T.  "Third party administrator" means any individual, business or corporation designated by the chief of police to administer the reporting requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.020 - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The Locust Grove Police Department along with the code enforcement officer shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter. Sworn officers of the Locust Grove Police Department and the code enforcement officer shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city of Locust Grove officer or employee to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.030 - License required. 
No person shall conduct business as a pawnbroker, scrap metal dealer, and dealer in precious metals or gems or maintain an establishment for the purposes of conducting business as a pawnbroker, scrap metal dealer, and dealer in precious metals or gems until a business license has been obtained from the city clerk. Such license application shall be made to the city clerk and license issued upon approval of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.040 - Application for business license. 
An application for business license for pawnbrokers, scrap metal dealer and dealers in precious metals or gems shall be filed with the city clerk. The clerk shall furnish a copy of the application to the chief of police of the city of Locust Grove. The application shall be on forms furnished by the city clerk and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant; 
B.  At least three persons of good character that may be used as character references for the applicant; 
C.  The name of one person not living at the same address of the applicant who will always know where the applicant is living if the applicant has moved; 
D.  The places of residence of the applicant for the last two years; 
E.  Information as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony; 
F.  If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, or limited liability company, the information required by subsections A through B of this section shall be furnished as to each partner, officer and director of the entity; 
G.  Any other information the city clerk may need in order to properly evaluate the application. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.050 - Revocation and suspension of licenses. 
A.  Revocation and Suspension of Licenses. Licenses issued under Chapter 5.21 of this code may be revoked or suspended upon the following: 
1.  A conviction of the licensee or an employee of the licensee or plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the licensee or an employee of the licensee in any municipal court, state court or federal court of any offense involving theft-related offenses; 
2.  A showing of evidence to the mayor and city council that a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter has occurred or that provisions of this chapter have not been complied with by the licensee or any employee, officer or agent of the licensee. 
B.  Procedures for Revocation and Suspension of License. The following procedures shall be followed in the revocation or suspension of licenses under Chapter 5.04 of this code: 
1.  Notice shall be sent by the city clerk to the holder of a license at least fourteen days in advance that the mayor and council of the city will hear a recommendation that the license be revoked and/or suspended. Said notice shall: 
a.  Notify the license holder and the chief of police of the city of Locust Grove as to the time and place that a recommendation for revocation will be heard, and 
b.  Include the grounds on which this recommendation to council will be made, including provisions of the code which have been violated; 
2.  The city council of the city shall hear a recommendation for revocation and/or suspension at one of its meetings, at which time the holder of a license and any other interested parties will be heard; 
3.  No license shall be revoked or suspended until a majority of the city council so decide at the time of or subsequent to the hearing on the recommendation for revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.060 - Transfer of licenses. 
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable to any other person, except by a majority vote of the city council, and upon the filing and approval of an application as provided in Section 5.21.040. It is unlawful for any person to do business, or attempt to do business, under a license transferred to him without such approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.070 - Business hours. 
No pawnshop, scrap metal dealer and/or dealer in precious metals or gems shall open his place of business or conduct any business therein between the hours of nine p.m. and eight a.m.; provided, however, that such a place of business may remain open until ten p.m. on Friday and until eleven p.m. on Saturdays. No dealer in precious metals or gems shall open his place of business or conduct any business therein on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.080 - Fees—Application fee, occupation tax and regulatory fee. 
Pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this code, the following fees will be imposed on each pawnbroker, scrap metals dealer, and dealer in precious metals or gems doing business within the city, or for each individual establishment maintained for the purpose of doing business as a pawnbroker, scrap metal dealer, and/or dealer in precious metals or gems within the city: 
A.  Application fee. One-time non-refundable fee: ..... $210.00 
B.  Annual occupation tax: ..... Based on  gross receipts 
C.  Annual regulatory fee - Precious metals dealer ..... 1,200.00 
D.  Annual regulatory fee - Scrap metals dealer ..... 1,200.00 
E.  Annual regulatory fee - Pawnbroker ..... 1,200.00 
F.  Annual regulatory fee - Pawnbroker + Precious Metals Dealer ..... 1,700.00 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.090 - Daily electronic reporting. 
(a)  All businesses regulated by this chapter shall make correct and truthful entries of information as required by the applicable article as soon after the transaction as possible and in no event more than one hour after the applicable time set for closing of the business. The daily electronic reporting shall be by an electronic reporting system required by the chief of police with the approval of the manager. Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic reporting system. The administrator of the electronic reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the police department. 
(b)  In the event that the electronic reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, businesses will be notified as soon as possible by the police department. In this event, the businesses will be required to make records of transactions in paper form as prescribed by the police department. Such paper forms must include all information required under the applicable article related to the business. Businesses shall be responsible for maintaining an adequate inventory of these forms. 
(c)  The chief of police with the approval of the manager shall select and designate the required electronic reporting system and required equipment needed. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.100 - Violations—Punishment, revocation and/or suspension of license. 
A.  Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for each offense, or confinement in the common jail of Henry County for a period not to exceed sixty days for each offense, or any combination of both. 
B.  Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall result in an application for revocation and/or suspension of license being filed with the mayor and city council. 
C.  Any person found by the mayor and city council to have violated any provision of this chapter can result in: 
1.  The mayor and city council assessing a civil fine not to exceed one thousand dollars per violation; 
2.  Placing licensee on probation for a definite period of time not to exceed two years on each violation; 
3.  Suspending the license for a period of time not to exceed one year for each violation; 
4.  Revocation of license; 
5.  And such other punishment that the mayor and city council deem to be appropriate based upon the facts and circumstances of each individual case. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.110 - Requirements of this chapter in addition to requirements of Chapters 5.04, 5.08 and 5.12. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of Chapter 5.04 (Business Licenses Generally), Chapter 5.08 (Business Taxes Generally) and Chapter 5.12 (Administrative Fees, Regulatory Fees and Occupation Taxes). Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by Chapters 5.04, 5.08 and 5.12, this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.120. - Compliance with state law. 
Nothing in this chapter shall relieve pawnbrokers, scrap metal dealers or dealers in precious metals or gems from the necessity of complying with state law. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.130—5.21.190 - Reserved. 
Article II. - Pawnbrokers 

5.21.200 - Limitation on issuance. 
A.  Preliminary Findings. 
1.  As a municipality located within the Atlanta Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area which is experiencing rapid growth and change due to urbanization of Henry County and being familiar with the experiences of other urban and suburban counties and municipalities including, but not limited to, the City of Atlanta, Clayton County, DeKalb County, and Fulton County, Georgia, whose experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the city, the mayor and council take note of the well known and self-evident conditions attendant to the operation of businesses by pawnbrokers, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. 
2.  Moreover, it is the finding of the mayor and council that operation of businesses by pawnbrokers under certain circumstances could lead to an increase in the surrounding area of criminal behavior and creates undesirable community conditions. 
3.  Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with the operation of businesses by pawnbrokers, are theft, burglary, drug trafficking, drug use and corruption of minors. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with such businesses are actual or perceived depression of property values or acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation in expenditures for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and an increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described in this section. 
4.  Accordingly, it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to reduce the adverse impact of businesses operated by pawnbrokers by limiting the proximity of such uses, so as to reduce the negative impacts of such businesses upon other business uses, neighborhood property values, residential areas and public and semipublic uses; to ensure that businesses operated by pawnbrokers do not impede development, redevelopment and neighborhood revitalization efforts. 
5.  Therefore, the close proximity of businesses operated by pawnbrokers is in the public welfare and is a matter of governmental interest and concern to minimize the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with such activities. To that end, the ordinance codified in this section is adopted. 
B.  No pawnbrokers' license shall be issued to any person or to any pawnbroker who has been convicted of any crime involving, as an element thereof, the theft of property. 
C.  There shall be no other pawnbroker's establishment within one thousand five hundred feet of another licensed pawnbroker. 
D.  All pawnbroker establishments must be located within the C-3 (heavy commercial) zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.210 - Premises open to police. 
Every pawnbroker shall admit to his premises any police officer, or designated civilian employee of the police department, who in the performance of official lawful duties as prescribed by the chief of police may desire at any time to search for articles missing or stolen, or to make any inspection authorized by this chapter, without the formality of a search warrant. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.220 - Inspection of pledges and purchases and records. 
All articles pledged or sold to pawnbrokers shall, at all times, be subject to inspection and examination by the police. All records required to be kept by this chapter or by policies of the chief of police shall be subject to inspection and examination by the police. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.230 - Recordkeeping requirements. 
All pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting all pawnshop transactions as follows: 
(a)  At the time of the actual transaction pawnbrokers shall complete the transaction form designated by the chief of police. A pawnbroker shall maintain a copy of the completed transaction form on the licensed premises for at least one year after the date of the transaction. However, the pawnbroker shall maintain a copy of the transaction form either on-premises or off-premises at a location within the city of Locust Grove approved by the chief of police for not less than four years. Such records may be kept electronically as long as a copy of the electronic records can be provided to the city of Locust Grove police or other law enforcement agency upon demand. 
(b)  The record required above shall contain: 
(1)  The time, date, and place of the transaction. 
(2)  A complete and accurate description of the goods acquired, including the following information, if applicable: 
a.  Brand name. 
b.  Model number. 
c.  Manufacturer's serial number. 
d.  Size. 
e.  Color, as apparent to the untrained eye. 
f.  Precious metal type, weight, and content if known, as well as a digital photograph. 
g.  Gemstone description, including the number of stones, if applicable, as well as a digital photograph. 
h.  In the case of firearms, the type of action, caliber or gauge, number of barrels, barrel length, and finish. 
i.  Any other unique identifying marks, numbers, or letters. 
(3)  The pawnbroker shall require verification of identification of the person from whom the goods are acquired by accepting only proper identification as defined in Article I herein, as well as a description of the person including: 
a.  Full name, current residential address, workplace, and home and work phone numbers. 
b.  Height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair color, eye color, and any other identifying marks. 
(4)  The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon. 
(5)  The seller shall sign a statement verifying that the seller is the rightful owner of the goods or is entitled to sell, consign, or trade the goods. 
(6)  Any other information required by the format designated by the chief of police and approved by the manager. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.240 - Daily accurate report; false statements. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker, his employees or agents, shall make correct and truthful entries of the above-required information in the daily electronic reporting required in Section 5.21.050. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for person engaged in the business of pawnbroker to make any false entry in any report. Any person making any willfully false or misleading statements in the report shall be punished as provided in Section 5.21.100. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.250 - Minors. 
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, or agent or employee thereof to receive any article in pawn or purchase any article for resale from any person under seventeen years of age. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.260 - Goods held for thirty days; Police holds. 
(a)  Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the word "goods" being used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold the goods so taken in pawn or purchase for at least thirty days before disposing of the goods by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(b)  The Locust Grove police department has the authority to place property that is the subject of police investigation on "police hold." In that event, the Locust Grove police department shall notify the pawnbroker of the need for a police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from police hold status or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.270—5.21.290 - Reserved. 
Article III. - Scrap Metal Dealers 

5.21.300 - Limitation on issuance. 
A.  Preliminary Findings. 
1.  It is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to reduce the adverse impact of businesses operated by scrap metal dealers by limiting the proximity of such uses, so as to reduce the negative impacts of such businesses upon other business uses, neighborhood property values, residential areas and public and semipublic uses; to ensure that businesses operated by scrap metal dealers do not impede development, redevelopment and neighborhood revitalization efforts. 
2.  Therefore, the close proximity of businesses operated by dealers in precious metals or gems is in the public welfare and is a matter of governmental interest and concern to minimize the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with such activities. To that end, the ordinance codified in this section is adopted. 
B.  No scrap metal dealer's license shall be issued to any person or to any dealer in precious metals or gems who has been convicted of any crime involving as an element thereof the theft of property. 
C.  There shall be no other precious metal or gem dealer's establishment within one mile of another licensed precious scrap metal dealer. 
D.  All scrap metal dealer establishments must be located within the M-2 (general industrial) zoning district with a conditional use. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.310 - Maintenance of records required; contents; term. 
(a)  Every scrap metal processor shall maintain records in both paper form and in an electronic format as long as a copy of the electronic records can be provided to the city of Locust Grove police or other law enforcement agency upon demand. All records shall contain in legible English the following information: 
(1)  For all purchases of vehicles or scrap vehicles from licensed sellers: 
(A)  The date of purchase; 
(B)  The name of the seller; 
(C)  A general description of the purchase; 
(D)  The number of scrap vehicles purchased; 
(E)  The vehicle identification number of vehicles which are not scrap vehicles, if available; or, if not available, a notation of the make and year of such vehicles; 
(F)  The amount paid for the purchase; and 
(G)  Any other information required by the format designated by the chief of police and approved by the manager. 
(2)  For all purchases of vehicles or scrap vehicles from nonresident sellers or sellers who are not licensed: 
(A)  The date of purchase; 
(B)  The name and address of the seller; 
(C)  The name and motor vehicle operator's license number of the driver delivering the material; 
(D)  A general description of the purchase; 
(E)  The number of scrap vehicles purchased; 
(F)  The vehicle identification number, if available, of vehicles purchased which are not scrap vehicles; or, if not available, a notation of the make and year of such vehicles; 
(G)  The amount paid for the purchase, and 
(H)  Any other information required by the format designated by the chief of police and approved by the manager. 
(b)  The records required by this code section shall be maintained for a period of not less than two years. 
(c)  The records required by this code section shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.320 - Vehicle certificate of title or license plate to be transmitted to department of revenue upon receipt. 
Should a scrap metal processor be presented the certificate of title or vehicle license plate for any vehicle or scrap vehicle purchased, that scrap metal processor shall mail or deliver the same to the department of revenue as required by law. In lieu of a certificate of title, an affidavit in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of code Section 40-3-36 shall be obtained by a scrap metal processor. All other requirements of subsection (a) of code Section 40-3-36 shall be complied with, including maintenance of a copy of such affidavit, and any other rules promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.330—5.21.390 - Reserved. 
Article IV. - Precious Metals Dealers and Gems Dealers 

5.21.400 - Limitation on issuance. 
A.  Preliminary Findings. 
1.  As a municipality located within the Atlanta Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area which is experiencing rapid growth and change due to urbanization of Henry County and being familiar with the experiences of other urban and suburban counties and municipalities including, but not limited to, the City of Atlanta, DeKalb County, and Fulton County, Georgia, whose experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the city, the mayor and council take note of the well known and self-evident conditions attendant to the operation of businesses by dealer in precious metals or gems, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. 
2.  Moreover, it is the finding of the mayor and council that operation of businesses by dealers in precious metals or gems under certain circumstances, could lead to an increase in the surrounding area of criminal behavior and creates undesirable community conditions. 
3.  Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with the operation of businesses by dealers in precious metals or gems, are theft, burglary, drug trafficking, drug use and corruption of minors. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with such businesses, are actual or perceived depression of property values or acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation in expenditures for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and an increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described in this section. 
4.  Accordingly, it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to reduce the adverse impact of businesses operated by dealers in precious metals or gems by limiting the proximity of such uses, so as to reduce the negative impacts of such businesses upon other business uses, neighborhood property values, residential areas and public and semipublic uses; to ensure that businesses operated by dealers in precious metals or gems do not impede development, redevelopment and neighborhood revitalization efforts. 
5.  Therefore, the close proximity of businesses operated by dealers in precious metals or gems is in the public welfare and is a matter of governmental interest and concern to minimize the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with such activities. To that end, the ordinance codified in this section is adopted. 
B.  No precious metal or gems dealer's license shall be issued to any person or to any dealer in precious metals or gems who has been convicted of any crime involving as an element thereof the theft of property. 
C.  There shall be no other precious metal or gem dealer's establishment within one thousand five hundred feet of another licensed precious metal or gem dealer. 
D.  All precious metal or gem dealer establishments must be located within the C-3 (heavy commercial) zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.450 - Articles with no serial number or with number removed shall not be accepted. 
A.  No dealer in precious metals or gems, or employee, officer or agent of a dealer in precious metals or gems, or person holding a license under this chapter, shall accept any of the following precious metals or gems: 
1.  Those precious metals or gems which have had the serial or identification number removed; or 
2.  Those precious metals or gems which bear no serial or identification number and the dealer in precious metals or gems knows should have a serial or identification number upon it. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.460 - Dealing with minors. 
It is unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems, his officers, agents or employees, to receive from persons under the age of seventeen or receive from minors precious metals or gems. Any dealer in precious metals or gems, his officers, agents or employees, accepting articles or precious metals or gems pursuant to this chapter, shall obtain sufficient identification from the customer in order to verify the customer's name, address and date of birth. Such documentation must include a photo identification of the customer, 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.470 - Acceptance of articles—Compliance with Section 5.21.050 required. 
No dealer in precious metals or gems, his officers, agents or employees, shall take precious metals or gems without entering such items on his books as provided in Section 5.21.050. Any violation of this section shall be punished as for a misdemeanor and/or revocation or suspension of the dealer in precious metals or gems license. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.480 - Fingerprint required. 
All dealers in precious metals or gems, his officers, agents or employees, will require any person from whom they accept precious metals or gems to place the fingerprint of his right index finger on both hands in ink on the back of the copy of the sales ticket which is to be sent to the county police department. Fingerprints must be clear, without smears. Any violation of this section shall be punished as for a misdemeanor and/or revocation or suspension of the dealer in precious metals or gems license. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.490 - Recordkeeping requirements—Police inspection authority. 
A.  Every dealer in precious metals or gems shall maintain a book, in permanent form, in which shall be entered at the time of each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems the following: 
1.  The date and time of the purchase; 
2.  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller; 
3.  The name, age, and address of the seller of the items purchased and the distinctive number from such seller's driver's license or other similar identification card containing a photo of the seller; 
4.  A clear and accurate identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial, model, or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon; 
5.  The price paid for the goods purchased; 
6.  The number of the check issued for the purchase price, if payment is made by check; and 
7.  The signature of the seller. 
B.  The permanent record book required by this code section shall be in legible English. Entries shall appear in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems for at least two years. The book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
C.  Dealers exclusively engaged in buying or exchanging for merchandise scrap dental gold and silver from licensed dentists by registered or certified mail or statutory overnight delivery may record the post office record of the mailed parcel in lieu of the seller's age and driver's license number as required in Section 5.21.490(A)(3) and in lieu of the seller's signature as required in Section 5.21.490(A)(7). 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.500 - Records maintained for four years. 
The record of each precious metals or gems purchase transaction as herein provided shall be maintained for a period of not less than four years. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.510 - Daily report to police—Contents. 
A.  Every dealer in precious metals or gems shall make a report in writing to the appropriate law enforcement officer of the county or city in which he is registered, on forms approved or prescribed by the appropriate law enforcement officer of the county or the municipality, of all precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems purchased on the day previous to the date of the report. The report shall contain the information specified in Section 5.21.490(A)(1) through (5) and shall be typewritten or handwritten in legible English and mailed or delivered to the appropriate law enforcement officer of the county or the municipality within twenty-four hours after the day on which the transactions occurred. 
B.  All reports shall be maintained in a locked container under the direct supervision of the appropriate law enforcement officer of the county or municipality and shall be available for inspection only for law enforcement purposes. 
C.  The appropriate law enforcement officer of the county or municipality may, in his discretion, authorize any person who demonstrates theft of precious metals or gems by the presenting of an incident report or other similar document to inspect the report in an effort to locate stolen property. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
5.21.520 - Unlawful acts. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems or any agent or employee of a dealer in precious metals or gems who makes purchases of precious metals or gems or of goods made from precious metals or gems to: 
1.  Fail to register as required by state law; 
2.  Fail to obtain a business license as required by this chapter; 
3.  Fail to maintain and make entries in the permanent record book as required by this chapter; 
4.  Make any false entry in such permanent record book; 
5.  Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of business such permanent record book; 
6.  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such permanent record book, or any precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems in his possession, during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time; 
7.  Sell, exchange, or remove from the legal possession of the buyer, or to alter the form of, any precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems purchased by remounting, melting, cutting up, or otherwise altering the original form until at least seven calendar days have elapsed from the time of purchase or acquisition; 
8.  Fail to make the written report to law enforcement personnel as required by this chapter; or 
9.  Purchase any precious metals or gems from any person under seventeen years of age. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or transact business as a dealer in precious metals or gems without first registering pursuant to state law and securing a business license required by this chapter. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems to purchase precious metals in a melted or smelted state unless the purchase is from a registered dealer in precious metals or gems. 
D.  If the appropriate law enforcement officer of the county or municipality has probable cause to believe that precious metals or gems have been stolen, he may give notice in writing to the dealer to retain the precious metals or gems for an additional five days; and it shall be unlawful for the dealer to dispose of the property unless the notice is revoked in writing within the fifteen-day period. 
E.  Any person who violates this code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 12-01-010, § 1, 1-3-12) 
Chapter 5.24 - INSURANCE COMPANIES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-12-066, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2011, repealed the former Chapter 5.24. §§ 5.24.010—5.24.060, and enacted a new Chapter 5.24 as set out herein. The former Chapter 5.24 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 01-11-05C, §§ 1—5; Ord. 95-1212C(part); and Ord. 11-06-026, § 1. 

5.24.010 - Insurer's license fee. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Locust Grove, Georgia in the amount of fifty dollars. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 5.24.020, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the City of Locust Grove, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of fifty dollars. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. Section 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 11-12-066, § 1, 12-5-11) 
5.24.020 - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of seventeen and 50/100 dollars per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 11-12-066, § 1, 12-5-11) 
5.24.030 - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the corporate limits of the City of Locust Grove, Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by Section 5.24.010 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-12-066, § 1, 12-5-11) 
5.24.040 - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in Sections 5.24.010 and 5.24.020, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by Section 5.24.010 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-12-066, § 1, 12-5-11) 
5.24.050 - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in Sections 5.24.010, 5.24.020 and 5.24.040 of this ordinance shall be due and payable on the first day of January 2012 and on the first day of January each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 11-12-066, § 1, 12-5-11) 
5.24.060 - Administrative provisions. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this ordinance to the Insurance Commissioner of the State of Georgia within forty-five days of its enactment. 
(Ord. No. 11-12-066, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Chapter 5.28 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES* 
Sections: 
Article I. - General Provisions 

5.28.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply to the terms defined in this section: 
"Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of the ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
"Alcoholic beverages" means all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
"Applicant" means a person applying for any license authorized by this chapter. 
"Application" means a form supplied by the city for the purpose of applying for any license authorized by this chapter. 
"Brewpub" means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in OCGA Section 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. As used in this definition, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least fifty-one percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
"Church" means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
"Distilled spirits" means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to whiskey, rum, gin, brandy, vodka, tequila and fortified wines. 
"Election day" means that period of time beginning one hour prior to the opening of the polls and ending one hour after the closing of the polls for any city, county, state or federal election or referendum in which residents of the city are voters. 
"Family" means any person related to a licensee within the first degree on consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
"Fortified wine" means any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added, including but not limited to, brandy. 
"Grocery store" means any retail business which is: 
1.  Engaged primarily in the sale of food and groceries; 
2.  Having a minimum inventory of food and groceries other than alcoholic beverages valued at no less than five thousand dollars, the values of such items being the same as those indicated in the applicant's annual returns to the Henry County tax commissioner for ad valorem tax purposes. In any event, the values so indicated shall be the cost of such items to the applicant and not the price which the applicant charges in retail stores. However, automotive supplies specifically shall not be considered in determining said inventory; and 
3.  Containing a minimum of one thousand five hundred square feet of retail floor space (that is, not including warehouse, office or other space not generally accessible or open to retail customers). 
"Hotel" means any building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where a minimum of fifty sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, and food is actually served and consumed in one or more dining rooms, having an adequate and sanitary kitchen and minimum seating capacity of forty-nine; said sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted on the same premises. 
"Interest in license" means an interest held by an owner or co-owner of a license; a partner of a partnership which owns or co-owns a license; a stockholder in any corporation who owns ten percent or more of the stock in a corporation which owns or co-owns a license; an owner, co-owner, lessor, sublessor, partner in a partnership or stockholder in a corporation owning or leasing any real estate on which is located a retail consumption dealer, a retail package dealer or wholesale dealer; or anyone sharing in the income or corpus of any trust or estate having such an interest. 
"License" means authorization granted by the city to operate as a retail consumption dealer, retail dealer or wholesale dealer. 
"License department" means the city clerk, or in his or her absence, the mayor. 
"Licensee" means a person holding a license. 
"Lounge" means a separate room physically connected with, a part of and adjacent to a restaurant under the same ownership and open for business at the same hours, the principle activity of which is the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. This term shall not include any room in which there is permitted any disc jockey, live entertainment, dancing or other such activity. 
"Malt beverage" means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer, but not including sake. 
"Motel" means any building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where a minimum of fifty sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, and food is actually served and consumed in one or more dining rooms, having an adequate and sanitary kitchen and a minimum seating capacity of forty-nine; said sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted on the same premises. 
"Natural person" means a human being. 
"Package" means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
"Pool hall" means a commercial establishment containing pool or billiard tables for which a charge is made for use of the equipment or payment of an entry charge into the establishment is required. 
"Premises" means the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether a room, shop or building. 
"Private club" means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
1.  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
2.  Has at least two hundred regular dues-paying members; 
3.  Owns, hires or leases land, a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which land, building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and a minimum seating capacity of forty; and 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests a minimum of three days per week; and 
4.  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
"Private recreational club" means any for-profit corporation organized under the laws of this state which: 
1.  Has at least two hundred regular dues paying members; 
2.  Owns, hires or leases land, a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which land, building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and a minimum seating capacity of forty; and 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests a minimum of three days per week; and 
3.  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
"Proper identification" means a document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person and the person's photograph and the person's date of birth. For purposes of this chapter, "proper identification" shall include, but not be limited to, the following: A driver's license; a passport; and/or an identification card authorized under OCGA Section 40-5-100 requiring the Georgia Department of Public Safety to issue identification cards to handicapped or disabled persons who do not nave a motor vehicle driver's license. However, for the purposes of this chapter, "proper identification" does not include a birth certificate. 
"Restaurant" means: 
1.  Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where at least one meal per day is served five days a week, excluding periods for holidays, vacations, and redecorating; 
2.  Having adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and a minimum seating capacity of forty-nine; and 
3.  Wherein the principle business is the serving of such meals which, excluding the sale of alcoholic beverages, account for at least fifty-one percent of the gross revenue of the business. 
"Retail consumption dealer" means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
"Retail package dealer" means any person who sells unbroken packages, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
"Seating capacity" means the amount of individual seating which is located at tables for the purpose of serving the dining public, members and guests, but not including any seating located in a lounge, bar, or other area designated primarily for the serving of alcoholic beverages. 
"Wholesaler or wholesale dealer" meant any person who sells alcoholic beverages to retail consumption dealers, retail package dealers or other wholesale dealers for resale. 
"Wine" means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added, including, but not limited to, sparkling wine, champagne, combinations of such beverages, vermouth, special natural wine, rectified wine and like products, but not including cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.020 - Construction of definitions. 
Words and terms not explicitly defined in this chapter shall have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.030 - License—Required. 
Any person desiring to operate in the city as a retail consumption dealer or retail package dealer or to maintain a fixed location in the city as a wholesale dealer shall apply for and obtain a license from the city prior to commencing operations. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.040 - License for consumption—Eligibility. 
A.  No retail consumption license shall be issued to any applicant whose establishment does not meet the requirements of a restaurant, hotel, motel, private club, or private recreational club as defined by this chapter. 
B.  No retail consumption dealer license shall be issued to any applicant whose establishment meets the definition of a pool hall pursuant to Section 5.28.010, of this chapter. 
C.  The sale of alcoholic beverages in a lounge is permitted under the same retail consumption dealer license as the restaurant provided the lounge qualifies under the definitions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.050 - License—Issuance restrictions. 
The following restrictions shall apply to persons seeking a license under this chapter. 
A.  No person shall hold a license to operate as a retail consumption dealer or recall package dealer who also has an interest in a license to operate as a wholesale dealer. 
B.  No person shall have an interest in more than two licenses for the package sale of distilled spirits issued by the city. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.060 - License—Distance restrictions. 
A.  Licenses shall not be issued to authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages at any location which does not meet or exceed the following minimum distance separation requirements from the following establishments: 
1.  For distilled spirits dealers, the licensee's premises cannot be within one hundred yards of any church building; or within two hundred yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. 
2.  For wine or malt beverage dealers, the licensee's premises cannot be within one hundred yards of any church building, school building, school grounds, educational building, or college campus. 
3.  No person shall sell distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within one hundred yards of any alcohol treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. 
4.  For distilled spirits package sales, the licensee's premises cannot be within five hundred yards of any other business licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package. 
B.  As used in this section: 
1.  The terms "school building," "educational building" or "college campus" shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at other schools in which are taught such subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state. 
2.  The term "school grounds" shall mean and include all real estate owned, leased or controlled by any organization meeting the definition of "school" in this section. Such term shall include, but not be limited to classroom buildings, administrative buildings, athletic fields, gymnasiums, libraries and cafeterias. 
C.  For the purposes of this section, distances from the proposed licensed establishment to any church building, school building, school grounds, college campus and alcohol treatment centers shall be measured in the following manner: 
1.  From the front door of the structure or partial building unit from which the alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; thence 
2.  In a straight dine, regardless of obstructions, to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; thence 
3.  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; thence 
4.  In a straight line to the front door of the building, or to the nearest portion of the grounds, whichever is applicable. 
D.  None of the provisions of this section shall serve to prevent licensed establishments in operation prior to the existence of a church building, school building, or educational building within these distances, from continuing to operate under its license. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.065 - Certain areas exempt from distance restrictions for sale for consumption on premises. 
A.  Any applicant for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises located within the following area shall not be required to comply with the distance requirements set forth in Section 5.28.060. 
1.  Any property located within the Locust Grove Historic Preservation District Overlay (HPDO) boundary as defined by Chapter 17.04, Section 17.04.137. 
2.  Within a planned shopping center where a church or school is located after June 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-024, § 2, 5-22-11) 
5.28.070 - Premises—Commercial location required. 
A.  Buildings for which alcohol licenses are sought must comply with the building and zoning ordinances of the city, regulations of the State Revenue Commissioner and the laws of the state of Georgia. 
B.  For retail consumption licenses, no license to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued unless the location has been zoned commercial under the zoning laws of the city. 
C.  For retail package licenses for distilled spirits, no license to engage in retail package sale shall be issued unless the location has been zoned commercial. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.080 - Premises—Entrance visibility conditions. 
The front entrance of all licensed premises shall be clearly visible from a public street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply where the premises are located in a hotel, motel, restaurant, shopping center or multiple-story business building. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.090 - Premises outside city limits—Effect of annexation. 
All retail consumption dealers, retail package dealers and wholesale dealers operating lawfully at a location outside the corporate limits of the city and thereafter annexed in the city may continue in operation subject to this chapter, provided they meet all standards of this chapter other than location, and further provided they were in compliance with all state laws at the time of annexation. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.100 - License issuance—Retail package dealer inventory requirements. 
A.  Retail package dealer licenses for malt beverages and wine shall be issued only to premises which meet the definition of "grocery store" or which are licensed for the sale of distilled spirits by the package. 
B.  As used in this section, "grocery store" means: 
1.  A retail business engaged primarily in the sale of food and groceries; 
2.  Having a minimum five thousand dollar inventory of food, tobacco products, household supplies and periodicals, the values of such items being the same as those indicated in the applicant's annual returns to the Henry County tax commissioner for ad valorem tax purposes. In any event, the values so indicated shall be the cost of such items to the applicant and not the price which the applicant charges in retail stores. However, automotive supplies specifically shall not be considered in determining said inventory; 
3.  Containing a minimum of one thousand five hundred square feet of retail floor space (that is, not including warehouse, office or other space not generally accessible or open to retail customers). 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.110 - Purchasing requirements. 
No retail consumption dealer license or retail package dealer license shall be issued or renewed to any applicant whose business does not obtain alcoholic beverages exclusively from persons licensed by the state to sell alcoholic beverages to said licensees. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.115 - Maximum number of distilled spirits retail licenses permitted. 
This chapter anticipates the issuance of a maximum of four licenses for the sale of distilled spirits by the package. No additional licenses shall be authorized unless and until the population of Locust Grove reaches twenty thousand, at which time one additional license may be permitted for each five thousand population over the twenty thousand initial threshold. In determining population, the city shall utilize the most recent population figures published by the Atlanta Regional Commission. In the absence of such figures, the city shall utilize the U.S. Census of 2000 or any future decennial census. This provision alone shall not bar the issuance of a license for applications submitted in accordance with this chapter as of the enactment date of this provision or renewals of licenses lawfully held as of the enactment date of this provision. Should an application submitted prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter be denied, then this provision shall apply to any subsequent application for the same location. 
(Ord. 05-02-11 § 1) 
Article II. - License Procedures 

5.28.120 - Application—Required—Fee. 
A.  Every person desiring to operate within the city as a retail consumption dealer or retail package dealer or wholesale dealer maintaining a fixed location in the city shall make an application therefor. Forms necessary for the application shall be furnished by the city. 
B.  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable investigation fee of fifty dollars. In addition to such investigation, fee, the applicant shall pay the actual cost of fingerprinting and a criminal background investigation check to the city's designated law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.130 - Applicant qualifications. 
A.  The applicant shall be the owner of the proposed business if the business is solely owned or the co-owner if a partnership or firm. If a proposed licensee is a corporation, the applicant may be an officer of the corporation or the corporation's general manager at the particular business location. If the corporation is a publicly held corporation, the application may be made and license issued in the corporate name. 
B.  Corporate applicants which are authorized to apply for and to hold a retail consumption license, a retail package license or wholesale license in their corporate names, shall name on such application an agent and/or manager actively employed in the operation of the establishment who shall be responsible for operating under the license and who shall qualify in all respects under this chapter. Should the manager and/or agent leave the employment of the corporation licensed under this provision, a new agent and/or manager shall be named by the licensee within ten days thereafter. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.140 - Hotels, motels, restaurants and private clubs. 
Hotels, motels, private clubs and private recreational clubs may maintain multiple licenses. The first such license issued shall be for the license fee set out for hotels, motels, private clubs or private recreational club in Section 5.28.240 and shall include therein the authority to provide alcoholic beverages to private parties located on the premises of the hotel, motel, private club or private recreational club, to provide in-room sales for travelers and paying guests of hotels and motels and to provide mini-bars within hotel and motel rooms. Any second or subsequent location in a hotel, motel, private club or private recreational club requiring a separate license under state law shall be issued a separate city license for a license fee of one thousand dollars for each additional location on the premises so licensed. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.150 - Application—Information required. 
A.  The application shall list and, if issued, the license shall indicate the following as licensees: 
1.  The name under which the business shall be operated; 
2.  The owner if the business is solely owned; 
3.  Each co-owner if the business is a partnership or firm; 
4.  Each officer, each director and each shareholder owning more than ten percent of the corporate stock if the business is a corporation; 
5.  Corporate name if a corporate entity; 
6.  Names of members if an LLC; and 
7.  The general manager of the particular business location. 
B.  Each licensee who is a natural person shall be a citizen of the United States or a permanent resident alien as defined by the Immigration and Nationality Laws of the United States. 
C.  Each licensee shall have been and continue to be a resident of the state for the period of one year immediately preceding the date of application. Corporations, however, must either be incorporated in the state or must have registered to do business in this state. LLC's must be entities of the state. 
D.  Each licensee who is a natural person shall be at least twenty-one years of age. 
E.  No licensee shall have been convicted of, have entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, or been adjudicated as guilty or liable or entered a first offender plea, within the ten years immediately preceding the date of application for any felony, misdemeanor or violation of regulations of the state or other state involving gambling, possession or sale of controlled substances, or the purchase, possession, sale, manufacture, distribution, handling or dealing in alcoholic beverages. In those instances involving corporations, this prohibition shall also apply to the corporation's president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer and all stockholders owning ten percent or more of the corporation's stock. In those instances involving LLC' s, this prohibition shall also apply to any member. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.160 - License—application contents. 
The application shall be submitted utilizing the city application form and shall contain, under oath, the following information and additional documents: 
A.  Name and address of each applicant and each person who would have an interest in the license, however including only those stockholders owning ten percent or more of the corporation's stock and all members of the LLC; 
B.  Name and address for the past ten years of each individual licensee, including registered agent where necessary; 
C.  The name, address and date of birth of each employee working at the business location; 
D.  Description of the business operation, its location and facilities; 
E.  Blueprint or scale drawing of the business facilities and outside premises of the building in which said business will be conducted, including the boundaries or limits of any parking assigned to or under the control of the business; 
F.  Plat of survey by a registered surveyor or engineer of the state showing the subject property, existing and adjacent zoning districts and indicating the distance to the nearest school, church, and alcoholic treatment center; and 
G.  The license fee required by this chapter, in the form of cash or a bank-certified check; 
H.  The nonrefundable investigative fee, in the form of cash or a bank-certified check; 
I.  Financial statements for each person identified in Section 5.28.150; and 
J.  Such other information and documents as may be required by the license department. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.170 - Considerations for granting of licenses. 
It shall be the duty of the license department to issue or refuse to issue a license to any applicant. In determining whether or not any application shall be granted and a license issued, the license department shall consider all mandated standards of this chapter and the following information in the public interest and welfare: 
A.  If the applicant and/or any licensee as defined in Section 5.28.150 has ever violated any federal, state, county or municipal law or administrative regulation regarding alcoholic beverages, their possession, sale, manufacture, distribution, handling, or dealing therein; 
B.  The manner in which the applicant and/or any licensee as defined in Section 5.28.150 has conducted any business within the city as to necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any federal, state, county or municipal law, administrative regulation or ordinance or as to the necessity for city action to compel the applicant's and/or licensee's adherence to any federal state, county or city law, administrative regulation or ordinance; 
C.  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, public safety, and general character of the neighborhood; and 
D.  Whether the applicant and/or any licensee as defined in Section 5.28.150 has ever had any alcoholic beverage or business license suspended or revoked by any state or any political subdivision thereof, or whether any alcoholic beverage business with which the applicant and/or any licensee has been associated has been cited for a violation of the laws or regulations of any state or any local ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages, and the outcome of such proceedings. 
E.  Whether the location for which license is sought has had a history of violations of laws, ordinances or administrative regulations regulating alcoholic beverages, disorderly or lewd conduct, or illegal conduct involving drugs, sufficient to warrant concern that the premises proposed for licensing are unsuitable for alcoholic beverage sales. For purposes of this subsection, "premises are unsuitable for alcoholic beverage sales" if the premises have been the situs for four or more violations of any named categories of offense in the five-year period preceding the current license application, regardless of license holder. In the event the city makes a determination that premises are unsuitable for alcoholic beverage sales, no alcoholic beverage license shall issue for that location for two years from the council determination. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.180 - License department authority. 
A.  The license department shall review all applications for alcoholic beverage licenses for compliance with this chapter. All applicants shall furnish upon request all additional data, information and records necessary for a complete investigation. Failure to furnish such additional documentation upon request shall be grounds for denial of a license. 
B.  The license department shall also have authority to prescribe such forms as it deems necessary for the proper administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.190 - Misleading, omitted or obsolete information—Report—Penalties. 
A.  Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission left out of an original or renewal application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be cause sufficient for the denial thereof. 
B.  Any information which changes or otherwise becomes obsolete shall be reported immediately. 
C.  When any license is issued on the basis of an application containing misleading or untrue information or omitted or unreported changed material information such circumstances shall be cause for revocation of same. 
D.  In the event a licensee receives notice of violation of any federal or state law or administrative regulation, such licensee shall, within ten days of receipt of such notice, provide a copy of the notice to the city by certified mail. The licensee shall keep the city informed as to the progress of the matter for which notice of violation was issued and shall promptly communicate the outcome of all proceedings to the city. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.200 - Grant of application—Notice of denial. 
A.  All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses meeting this chapter shall be granted by the license department for a period of up to one year, expiring on the last day of December in each year, unless some specific cause regarding location, traffic conditions, environmental conditions or the specific causes set out in Section 5.28.170 justifies a refusal. In the event of denial for location, traffic conditions or environmental conditions, the applicant shall be entitled to file a new application of like kind for a different location without the loss of any part of the application fee. 
B.  In the event the license department denies an application for a license, the applicant shall be provided notice in writing of the denial, and a listing of the reasons therefor. The applicant shall have the right to appeal that denial to the mayor and council in writing no more than ten days following receipt of the denial notice. A hearing shall be held in not less than thirty days from the date of the written notice of appeal. Within thirty days from the date of the conclusion of the hearing, the mayor and council shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its decisions and its reasons therefor. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.210 - Licenses issued for calendar year—Renewal. 
A.  All licenses shall issue for the calendar-year period, or the remainder thereof. Fees shall be prorated on a quarterly basis on initial licenses issued for less than one full year. No license shall extend from one calendar year to the next. 
B.  All licensees desiring to operate during the following year shall make application for renewal, with all accompanying documents and fees, on or before January first of that year. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.220 - License renewal conditions. 
A.  The renewal of an existing alcoholic beverage license at the expiration of the term of the license shall be dependent upon proof that the licensee meets all requirements for a license under laws, ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of renewal. 
B.  Licensees must provide at the time of application for renewal of license an affidavit substantiating their continued compliance with the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.230 - Transfers of license—Limitations. 
A.  Licenses granted under this chapter shall not be transferable, either by location or among persons, except as hereinafter provided. 
B.  In the case of death of any person having an interest in a license, the license may be transferred to the estate of the deceased person; however, an individual shall be named as responsible for such interest and the individual shall be subject to the qualifications of an applicant and licensee. 
C.  One or more partners in a partnership holding a license may withdraw in favor of one or more of the existing partners. In addition, a licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or for the expansion of facilities and that the licensee himself is receiving none of the additional capital invested. All such additional partners or new principal stockholders must be approved by the city. Otherwise, no new ownership may be allowed an interest in a license. 
D.  The mayor and city council reserves the right to authorize the transfer of a license by owner to another location. The owner of a license may apply to the mayor and council for permission to transfer the license to another location. The mayor and council may approve the transfer of the license to another location if the location meets all other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.240 - Classes of licenses—Fee schedule. 
A.  Licenses shall be issued only to those establishments and only for those beverages permitted by the fee schedule of subsection B of this section. 
B.  The fee schedule for all alcoholic beverage licenses shall be as follows: 
1.  Retail package dealers: 
a.  Malt beverages ..... $ 500.00 
b.  Wine ..... 500.00 
c.  Distilled spirits ..... 5,000.00 
2.  Retail consumption, restaurants, hotels and motels: 
a.  Malt beverages (including brewpubs) ..... $ 500.00 
b.  Wine ..... 500.00 
c.  Distilled spirits ..... 2,500.00 
3.  Retail consumption, private clubs and private recreational clubs: 
a.  Malt beverages ..... $ 500.00 
b.  Wine 500.00 
c.  Distilled spirits ..... 2,500.00 
4.  Wholesale dealers maintaining a fixed location within the city: ..... $ 100.00 
5.  Additional licenses for hotels, motels, private clubs and private recreational clubs pursuant to Section 5.28.140 ..... 1,000.00 
C.  All license fees shall be paid on or before January first of each calendar year or within ten days of the an application for a license. 
D.  The fee for any licensee obtaining an initial license for less than a full license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis. No proration nor refund shall be made for licenses issued after the initial license period. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.250 - Effect of denial of state license. 
In the event an applicant is denied a license by the state, upon proof of such refusal, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the license fee less fifty dollars for clerical costs regarding the granting of the license. Such refund may be made by the city clerk without the necessity of any action by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
Article III. - Taxes 

5.28.260 - Taxes imposed. 
In addition to the license fees required in this chapter and in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, all licensees hereunder shall pay to the city the taxes imposed in this article. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.270 - Package sales—Amount and payment of the tax. 
A.  There is imposed an excise tax on alcoholic beverages in the following amounts: 
1.  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of six dollars on each container sold containing not more than fifteen and one-half gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of fifteen and one-half gallons; 
2.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents per twelve ounces and a proportionate tax on all fractional parts of twelve ounces; 
3.  On the first sale or use of wine, a tax of twenty-two cents per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter; 
4.  On the package sale of distilled spirits and on the sale of distilled spirits to private clubs, a tax of twenty-two cents per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
B.  The excise taxes provided in subsection A of this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. 
C.  Each wholesaler responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report with the city itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of alcoholic beverages, by size and type of container, sold during the preceding month in the city. 
D.  The wholesale dealer shall remit the tax imposed herein to the city on the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed. 
E.  Licensees shall purchase alcoholic beverages only from wholesalers or distributors licensed by the state. All sales must be to the establishment designated on the license. No transfers, borrowing or internal sales or transfers from one licensed retailer to another shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.280 - Distilled spirits for consumption on premises. 
A.  There is imposed a sales tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, which tax shall be three percent of the charge to the public, members or guests for the beverages. This tax does not apply to the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented beverage, nor to wines for which an excise tax has already been paid under Section 5.28.270. Each retail consumption licensee shall collect, report and remit the tax in the manner described in Sections 5.28.290 through 5.28.310. 
B.  Licensees shall purchase alcoholic beverages only from wholesalers or distributors licensed by the state. All sales must be to the establishment designated on the license. No transfers, borrowing or internal sales or transfers from one licensed retailer to another shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.290 - Distilled spirits for consumption on premises—Itemized billing by licensee—Liability for payment of tax. 
Every licensee shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverages served shall be itemized separately. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in like manner, however, the licensee shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.300 - Distilled spirits for consumption on premises—Collection of tax by licensee. 
Every licensee or its agent is authorized and directed to collect the tax herein imposed from purchasers or distilled spirits by the drink sold within its licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the license department to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.310 - Distilled spirits for consumption on premises—Tax payment and collection procedures. 
A.  Due Date of Taxes. All taxes collected by any licensee or agent hereunder shall be due and payable to the city on or before the tenth day of every month next succeeding each respective calendar month, as set forth herein. 
B.  Return-Time of filing—Persons required to file—Execution. On or before the tenth day of the month, a return for the preceding calendar month shall be filed with the license department in such form as the license department may prescribe by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
C.  Contents of Return. All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the license department. 
D.  Delivery of Return and Remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the license department. 
E.  Collection Fee Allowed Licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales tax under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951 (Georgia Laws 1951, p. 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.320 - Determinations of deficiencies or in absence of return—Overpayments—Delinquency and fraud. 
A.  Recomputation of Tax—Authority to Make—Basis of Recomputation. If the license department is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within its possession or that may be made of the amount due for one or more than one calendar month. 
B.  Estimate of Gross Receipts in Absence of Return. If any licensee fails to make a return, the license department shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the license department. Upon the basis of this estimate, the license department shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
C.  Offsetting of Overpayments. In making a determination, the license department may offset overpayments, for a period or periods, against underpayments, for another period or periods, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on overpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in Section 5.28.350. 
D.  Time Within which Notice of Deficiency Determination to be Mailed. Promptly after making its determination the license department shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notices in Section 5.28.710. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.330 - Delinquent tax collection—Duty of assignees to withhold taxes—Liability—Offsetting of erroneous collections. 
A.  Action for Tax—Time Therefor. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city may bring an action in the courts of the state, or of the United States, to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees, costs of collection and other legal fees incident thereto. 
B.  Duty of Successors or Assignees of Operator to Withhold Tax from Purchase Money. If any licensee liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the license department showing that he has been paid, or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
C.  Liability for Failure to Withhold—Certificate of Notice of Amount Due—Time to Enforce Successor's Liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the necessary amount from the purchase price as heretofore required, the purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by it to the extent of the purchase price valued in money. Within thirty days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the license department shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the city of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall begin at the time the licensee sells out his business or at the time that the determination against the licensee becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.340 - Tax credit penalty or interest paid more than once or illegally collected. 
Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has teen erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset as provided in Section 5.28.320 (C) of this chapter. If the licensee determines that it has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the license department, it will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on amounts then due and payable from the licensee by whom it was paid or its administrators or executors. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.350 - Failure to pay tax—Penalties and interest. 
A.  Delinquent Penalty. Any person who fails to pay the tax herein imposed to the city, or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the city, within the time required, shall pay a civil penalty of fifteen percent of the tax, or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or the amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Interest on Amount Found Due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
C.  Penalty—Negligence or Disregard of Rules and Regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to gross negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty of fifteen percent of the amount of such deficiency shall be added thereto in addition to the fifteen percent prescribed by subsection A of this section. 
D.  Penalty for Fraud or Intent to Evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provision of this chapter or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto in addition to the fifteen percent prescribed by subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.360 - Administration and enforcement authority—Recordkeeping—Confidentiality of reports. 
A.  Authority of the License Department. The license department shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
B.  Rules and Regulations. The license department shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the Constitution of the state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
C.  Records Required from Licensee—Form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the license department may require. 
D.  Authority to Require Reports—Contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the license department may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to sales of alcoholic beverages which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the license department and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the date or dates of sales, and such other information as the license department may require. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.370 - Examination of records—Audits. 
The license department or any person authorized in writing by the city may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. In the event a city audit discloses a deficiency of more than three percent over what has been returned and remitted, the licensee shall reimburse the city for all costs of the audit, including but not limited to, accountant's fees and out of pocket expenses, the value of time expended by city employees in the investigation, including reasonable cost of overhead, and all attorney's fees and costs of collection if action must be instituted by the city. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.380 - Violations—Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of or entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the offense of failing to pay the tax due, either in whole or in part, shall, upon conviction thereof, be assessed a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars for each such offense. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any portion of the amount due remains unpaid. Any person found guilty of or entering a plea to violating any other provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in Section 5.28.760. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
Article IV. - Operating Regulations 

5.28.390 - Commencement of business—Time limit. 
All licensees must, within a six-month period after issuance of a license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license and begin the sale of the product or products authorized by the license. Failure to open the establishment and begin the sale as referred to above within the above-prescribed periods, shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the licensee. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.400 - Discontinuation of business—License forfeiture. 
Any licensee who shall begin the operation of the business and sale of the product or products as authorized in a license, but who shall, for a period of one hundred eighty consecutive days thereafter, cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized by the license, shall upon completion of the one hundred eighty day period automatically forfeit its license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the licensee. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.410 - Sale hours. 
A.  Package sales of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited between the hours of twelve midnight Saturday and twelve-thirty p.m. Sunday and between eleven-thirty p.m. Sunday and eight a.m. Monday. Notwithstanding, the aforementioned hours set forth herein, package sales of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited on Christmas day. 
B.  Except as provided in this chapter retail consumption dealers shall be prohibited from engaging in the sale of alcoholic beverages between the hours of twelve midnight and eight a.m. Sunday through Thursday including Christmas day and one a.m. and eight a.m. Friday and Saturday. 
C.  Each retail consumption dealer shall remove from any service area accessible to the public, members and guests, any and all cans, bottles, mugs, pitchers, cups or other containers for alcoholic beverages on its premises after twelve-thirty a.m. on Sunday through Thursday including Christmas day and one-thirty a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
D.  It is lawful for all licensees to sell alcoholic beverages on an election day, except to the extent prohibited by state law. 
E.  The hours of operation for wholesalers operating within the city shall be from eight a.m. to nine p.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. 05-09-065 § 1; Ord. 01-11-05G § 1) 
(Ord. No. 11-12-068, § 1, 12-5-11) 
5.28.420 - Alcoholic beverage purchases—License restrictions. 
A.  Licensees for consumption on the premises may purchase from wholesalers, licensed by the city and/or state, distilled spirits, designated by their license, in one-fifth of a gallon, liter or larger containers unless a particular brand is not packaged in these sizes, and then the licensee may purchase the brand in the nearest size to those specified containers. 
B.  Licensees for package sales may purchase from wholesalers, licensed by the city and/or state, distilled spirits in pints and half pints, in addition to those sizes specified in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.430 - Delivery of alcoholic beverages. 
No deliveries of alcoholic beverages shall be made except on the premises for which such beverages are sold. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.440 - Premises—Sanitation requirements. 
All premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of premises used for storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.450 - Premises—Sign restrictions. 
All licensed premises shall be subject to the sign ordinance of the city in terms or the size and number of signs permitted. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.460 - Slot machines, etc., prohibited on premises. 
No licensee shall permit on its premises any slot machines or electronic games which play casino games. For purposes of this section, "casino games" means those types of games normally found in a gambling casino and shall include but not be limited to, poker, blackjack and other card games; craps and other dice games; roulette; and slots. This section shall not limit or prohibit the lawful sale of any lottery tickets as authorized by Chapter 27 of Title 50 of the Georgia Lottery for Education Act. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.470 - Disturbances, obscenities prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any licensee to permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity or public indecency on its premises. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.480 - Leaving premises without paying prohibited. 
No person shall leave the premises of the licensee without paying his or her charges for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.490 - Premises—Interior visibility requirements. 
No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any retail dealer's store; and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.500 - Signs and notices on purchase and consumption restrictions. 
A.  The licensee shall post in a conspicuous place where the actual transaction takes place within the licensed premises a sign stating that no alcoholic beverages shall be sold to or purchased by any person under twenty-one years of age and that it is unlawful for any minor to falsely misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever to a licensee. Such sign shall be printed in uniform letters not less than one inch in height. 
B.  The retail dealer licensee shall display at any entrances or exists to the licensed premises a sign which shall state that it is unlawful to consume any alcoholic beverages or to open any container of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises or any parking area adjacent thereto. Further, such sign or signs which are necessary shall also be placed in such a manner as to be visible from any parking area adjacent to the licensed premises. 
C.  It is unlawful for any retail dealer to permit, allow or acquiesce in the consumption of any alcoholic beverages or the opening of any container of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises or any parking area adjacent thereto. 
D.  All signs required by this section shall be clearly visible and lettering shall be dark and unfaded. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.510 - Alcoholic beverages with broken seals prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to carry into or have in his possession on those premises any alcoholic beverages in the original package, the seal of which has been broken or the original package opened; provided that the licensee; his manager or agent in charge of the premises may carry damaged or spoiled containers to a secure storage area pending pick-up by the wholesaler. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.520 - Minors—Unlawful activities. 
It is unlawful for any minor to purchase alcoholic beverages or to intentionally misrepresent his age in the sale of any alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.530 - Sales outside business prohibited—Exception. 
It is unlawful for any sales to be made outside of the place of business licensed for such sale except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. The use of drive-in windows by retail package dealers is specifically permitted. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.540 - Employment of certain persons prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful in any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages to employ any person in any capacity whatsoever, including performers, entertainers and musicians, who have been convicted of, or plead guilty or nolo contendere to, or been adjudicated as guilty or liable or entered a first offender plea, within the past ten years, in this or any other state or the United States, to any felony, misdemeanor or violations of regulations of the state or other state involving gambling, possession or sale of controlled substances, or the manufacture, distribution, sale, handling, dealing in or possession of alcoholic beverages. In those instances involving corporations, this prohibition shall also apply to the corporation's president, vice president, secretary and treasurer and all stockholders owning ten percent or more of the corporation's stock. In those instances involving LLC's, this prohibition shall also apply to any member. 
B.  No licensee shall allow or require a person in his employment under twenty-one years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. This section shall not prohibit persons under twenty-one years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries, or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.550 - Bottles—Misrepresentation of contents. 
It is illegal for the licensee hereunder to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.560 - Copy of regulations maintained on premises. 
It is the duty of the management of the premises licensed hereunder to maintain a copy of this chapter on such premises and to instruct each and every employee of the terms thereof. Each person employed by a licensee under this chapter shall be required at the time of employment to sign a statement verifying that the employee has read the regulations governing the use and sale of alcoholic beverages and understands and will comply with same. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.570 - Verification of age. 
A.  It is a violation of this code for any agent, officer or employee of a licensee to fail to properly check the identification of any patron, member or guest, when selling or otherwise providing any alcoholic beverages, which failure results in an underage person being sold or served, or to have in his possession while on the licensee's premises, any alcoholic beverage. 
B.  For the purpose or this section, the term "identification" means any document issued by any governmental agency containing a description of the person so identified, such person's photograph and such person' s date of birth. As used herein, the term "identification" includes without being limited to, a passport, a military identification card, a driver's license, or a statement department of public safety identification card, but not a birth certificate. 
C.  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided by Section 5.28.760 of this chapter. 
D.  Notwithstanding any criminal prosecution which may result from a violation of this section, any licensee employing any officer, agent or employee that fails to comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section, which failure results in an underage person being sold or served, or to have in his possession while on the licensee's premises an alcoholic beverage, may have its license revoked. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.580 - Brown-bagging—Defined—Prohibited. 
A.  For the purposes of this section: 
1.  "Brown-bagging" means the bringing, taking or carrying of any alcoholic beverage into a business lawfully operating within the city, but not licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, provided that bringing an alcoholic beverage into a house, apartment, room or other unit designed or private residential occupancy shall not fall within this definition. 
2.  "Brown-bagging" shall include the following prohibited acts: 
a.  Any person who brown-bags; 
b.  Any person participating in consumption of any alcoholic beverage being brown-bagged; 
c.  Any person who consumes an alcoholic beverage on any premises lawfully operating in the city, except for those premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or otherwise exempted from the definition of brown-bagging by virtue of the private residential character of the occupancy. 
d.  Any employee of the business establishment in whose presence brown-bagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs. 
B.  Brown-bagging is prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
Article V. - Additional Provisions for Retail Consumption on Premises 

5.28.590 - Fire regulations applicable—Inspection. 
Where a minimum sleeping or seating capacity is prescribed, the same shall be judged by reasonable standards. The fire department shall, upon the request of the license department, inspect such premises and report its findings. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times with the fire regulations established by the city. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.600 - Service—On trains and planes. 
Nothing herein shall prohibit the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on dining or club cars of trains or on airplanes in transit on regular schedules. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.610 - Service—By employees only. 
Drinks hereunder shall only be served by employees of the licensee. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.620 - Service—Backrooms—When prohibited. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room which is not normally open to the general use of the public, members or guests, is prohibited, except that private parties or conventions, which have been scheduled in advance may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms in restaurants, hotels, motels, private clubs and private recreational clubs, and, provided further, that this prohibition shall not apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption hereunder to the registered guests of any hotel or motel in their designated rooms. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.630 - Pricing, delivery and consumption requirements. 
A.  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the price charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day-to-day or from hour-to-hour within a single day. The schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week. 
B.  No licensee or employee or agent or a licensee shall: 
1.  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons; 
2.  Deliver more than two alcoholic beverages to one person at a time; 
3.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week, except at private functions not open to the public; 
4.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public; 
5.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons at any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public; 
6.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time; 
7.  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week; 
8.  Encourage or permit on, the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
C.  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licenses premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection B of this section. 
D.  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, provided all patrons, members and guests are allowed equal access to such free food, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room service to registered guests. Otherwise no food and alcoholic beverage package may be offered by any licensee. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.640 - Brewpubs. 
A.  Brewpubs shall be allowed to operate in the city provided they are licensed by the state and comply with all state statutes, rules and regulations. 
B.  Brewpubs which sell distilled spirits or wine must obtain retail consumption licenses for such beverages as a precondition to sales of distilled spirits or wine. 
C.  Malt beverage excise taxes shall be imposed on the licensee for all malt beverages produced by brewpubs. Such licensee shall provide such reports and remit taxes due as required by malt beverage wholesalers. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.650 - Private clubs and private recreational clubs. 
Private clubs and private recreational clubs meeting the standards of this chapter may sell alcoholic beverages at any location on premises under their control and may include multiple points of sale under one license, provided such sales are otherwise lawful under state law. In those instances where state law requires more than one license, a second or subsequent city license shall be obtained and the fee therefor paid as provided in Section 5.28.040. In any event all sales shall be reported for tax purposes and all management and sales personnel shall meet the standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.660 - Alcoholic beverage caterers. 
A.  For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
"Authorized catered function" means an event at a location not otherwise licensed for consumption of alcoholic beverages by the drink at which alcoholic beverages are furnished, for consideration, and sold, dispensed or provided free of charge to persons present at the event, by the drink, pursuant to a permit obtained under this section. 
"Food caterer" means any person who, for consideration, prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
"Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer" means any person licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the state and who possesses a license by a local government in the state authorizing such person to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink off licensed premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
B.  Licenses may be obtained for the purpose of selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages by the drink on premises at which authorized catered functions are to be held. Such licenses shall be annual licenses and may be obtained only by those persons, firms or corporations already licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail or by the drink. The procedures for securing such licenses and the terms thereof, including license fees, shall be as provided in Articles I and II of this chapter. 
C.  Before a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at any authorized catered function, such caterer shall obtain a permit. The application for permit shall include the name of the alcoholic beverage caterer, the caterer's license number, and the date, address and time of the event. No permit fee shall be charged for the alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by the city. For caterers licensed by jurisdictions other than the city, a fee of fifty dollars per event permit shall be charged. No permit shall be issued to any person under this section who does not hold an alcoholic beverage caterer's license from a local jurisdiction in the state. The permit shall be kept in the vehicle used to transport alcoholic beverage to the event at all times during which the permit is in effect. 
D.  Caterers licensed by a jurisdiction other than the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported into the city for the event, and shall pay an excise tax to the city covering all such beverages at the rates provided by Article III of this chapter. Failure to report and remit the tax within seven days of the conclusion of the event shall be grounds for denial of subsequent permits to the caterer for similar events. 
E.  Caterers licensed by the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported for each event, by event, and shall make report and remittance of such taxes with their regular monthly reports to the city. 
F.  No alcoholic beverages shall be transported, distributed, or sold to other than licensed locations in the city, except to authorized catered functions, unless otherwise authorized by this chapter or by state law. 
G.  The hours and days of sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages under this section shall be the same as provided for sale by the drink. 
H.  No licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall employ any person under twenty-one years of age to dispense, serve, sell or handle alcoholic beverages at authorized catered functions. 
I.  As a condition of permit issuance, alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by jurisdictions other than the city shall be provided a copy of the city's alcoholic beverages ordinances, and shall indicate, by signature, that they have received such ordinances and acknowledge the applicability of such ordinances to their operations. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
Article VI. - Wholesale License 

5.28.670 - License provisions applicable. 
All provisions pertaining to application for licenses as described in Article II of this chapter shall apply with equal force to wholesale licenses except as modified herein. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.680 - License—State license prerequisite. 
Any wholesaler in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and maintains a fixed location in the city, shall be granted a license to distribute such beverage at wholesale in the city upon application for a license. The application shall be accompanied by the presentation of satisfactory evidence that the wholesaler, or agent of the wholesaler, understands and agrees to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.690 - License—Fee. 
A.  The license fee for each wholesale dealer shall be one hundred dollars. 
B.  All license fees shall be paid on or before January first of each calendar year or within ten days of the grant of an application for a license. 
C.  All license fees shall be raid in full regardless of when a license is granted. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
Article VII. - Violations and Revocations 

5.28.700 - Periodic inspection for compliance. 
Certified officers of the police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed hereunder during the hours in which the premises are open for business. The inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.710 - Notice of license department's determinations—Service thereof. 
Service of any notice required to be given by this chapter may be made on any person identified as a licensee in Section 5.28.150. Notice shall be in writing. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the licensee at its address as it appears in the records of the license department. The burden shall be on the licensee to provide notice, in writing, of any change of address for service of notices and process. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.720 - Licenses—Automatic revocation conditions. 
Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license to deal in such products, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the mayor and council or any other city officer being necessary. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.730 - Emergency suspension. 
A.  The mayor, or his designee, has the authority to suspend a license for a short-term period not to exceed ten days. The mayor's decision shall be in writing, with the term of the suspension and the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee. It is not necessary that the mayor consult or obtain the approval of the council prior to said suspension. 
B.  A short-term suspension by the mayor must be for an emergency cause. 
C.  "Emergency cause" for the short-term suspension of a license shall consist of a second or subsequent violation by the same licensee on the same premises within a two year period of any state or federal laws, administrative regulations of the state or city ordinances regulating such business holding a license, including those prohibiting gambling, regulating the sale, manufacture, distribution, handling, dealing in, and possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in an unlawful manner, and the manufacture, sale, or distribution of any controlled substance which puts the city and the health and safety of its citizens at such a risk that an immediate suspension is necessary until a hearing as provided for in Section 5.28.740 can be held. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.740 - License—Suspension and revocation. 
A.  Except as provided in Sections 5.28.720 and 5.28.730 no license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued pursuant to this chapter shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing and upon the prior three day written notice to the holder of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
B.  "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the violation of any federal or state law, administrative regulation or city ordinances regulating such business (including but not limited to any violation of this chapter), or the violation of any federal or state law, state administrative regulation or city ordinance prohibiting gambling, or regulating the sale, manufacture, distribution, handling, dealing in, and possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in any unlawful manner, or the violation of any federal or state law, state administrative regulation or city ordinance relating to the manufacture, sale or distribution of any controlled substance. 
C.  The hearing will be conducted by the mayor and council or by a hearing officer appointed by the mayor. The hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the state. 
D.  At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent itself or be represented by counsel, may cross-examine all witnesses offered by the city, and may present evidence in its own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the hearing officer shall have the right to exclude evidence which carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. Both the city and the licensee shall have the right to subpoena witnesses. 
E.  For hearings conducted by a hearing officer, the hearing officer shall issue a report to the mayor and council within ten days of the completion of the hearing. The report shall contain the hearing officer's finding(s) and recommendation(s). Such recommendation(s) shall take into consideration the nature of the violation(s) , preventive efforts of the licensee, corrective action taken by the licensee, and the licensee's prior history. Such recommendation(s) may include one or more of the following: suspension of the license for no more than twelve months, revocation of the license, imposition of a probationary period not to exceed twelve months, and/or a civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars. 
F.  The hearing officer's report shall be transmitted to the mayor and council, along with a complete transcript of the hearing. A hearing will be scheduled before the mayor and council. At that hearing the hearing officer may outline the evidence heard and the basis for his or her recommendation(s) The licensee or its representative may make a statement to the mayor and council in its behalf. Neither side shall introduce any new evidence. 
G.  The mayor and council shall determine the penalty or penalties imposed by majority vote of those present and voting. Such penalty may include one or more of the following: suspension for no more than twelve months; probation for no more than twelve months, provided that a licensee currently on probation may have its probation extended for an additional twelve months to begin at the end of the current probationary period; revocation; and/or a civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars. 
H.  The decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee within ten days of the hearing date. 
I.  A total of three separate and unrelated violations within twenty-four months, whether or not within the probationary period, shall constitute grounds for permanent revocation. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.750 - No refunds following suspension or revocation. 
In the event a license issued hereunder is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the application or license fees previously remitted. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
5.28.760 - Violation—Penalty. 
In addition to the other remedies outlined in this article, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter (except failure to pay taxes due under Article III), or entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere thereto, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, by twelve months' imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 98-12.14 § 1 (part)) 
Chapter 5.36 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS, TRANSIENT SELLING, SPECIAL EVENTS[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-07-044, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed and replaced ch. 5.36 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 5.36 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 97-8.11.B. 

5.36.010 - License—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to peddle, solicit, canvass, engage in transient selling as defined in section 536.020 within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license as provided in section 5.36.050 or section 5.36.060. 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
5.36.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply and form a part of this chapter: 
"Peddler" means any person who travels from place to place by any type of conveyance, carrying his wares with him, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or any person who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from any type of vehicle or conveyance. A peddler generally offers for sale, consummates the sale, and delivers the goods at one and the same time to the ultimate consumer. Any person who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this definition, shall be deemed peddling and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. The word "peddler" shall not include any person who goes upon private property for the purpose of peddling, having been invited to do so by the owner or occupant of such property. 
"Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or legal entity. 
"Solicitor" or "canvasser" means any person who travels from place to place by any type of conveyance taking, or attempting to take orders for the sale at retail of goods, wares and merchandise, or persona; property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such sales. The term should also include any person requesting and accepting donations of any kind on public property or the public right-of-way. The word "solicitor" or "canvasser" shall not include any person who goes upon private property to solicit or canvass, having been invited to do so by the owner or occupant of such property. 
"Special event" means any organized for profit or nonprofit activity having as its purpose entertainment, fundraising, community outreach, recreation, and/or education which takes place on public property or takes place on private property but requires special public services such as the use of parks, public streets, rights-of-way, or sidewalks. Special events are temporary in nature and may include, but are not limited to, activities such as run/walk events, cycling events, street festivals, parades, grand openings, concerts, assemblies, block parties, and certain outdoor promotional events. 
"Transient selling" means any person, either as principal or agent, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise from a fixed location with the city and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases uses or occupies any building, structure, room, apartment, lot, parking lot, street, or other place, whether public or private, within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at an auction. Any person who engages in transient selling shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter by reason of associating himself with any established local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting transient selling in connection with, as a part of or in the name of any established local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. In the event that the conduct of any person falls within the definitions of both peddler and transient selling as contained herein, he shall be deemed to be transient selling for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
5.36.030 - Exemptions. 
A.  Religious, nonprofit and charitable organizations shall be exempt from the effects and prohibitions of section 536.050(D) and 5.36.060(C) but shall otherwise be required to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any fair, show, or exhibition of arts, crafts or similar handiwork, or city-wide celebrations, observances, or special events, such as an annual sidewalk or parking lot sale, which will include more than five exhibitors or merchants shall be exempt from this chapter, provided, however, that the sponsors shall apply to the city clerk for a special events license. 
C.  Yard and garage sales shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter but shall be governed by other ordinances of the city. 
D.  The sale of household goods or food products made or raised by the salesperson on his premises shall be exempt from this chapter, provided that such sales take place on the premises of the salesperson. 
E.  Vendors, merchants, exhibitors and salesmen who exhibit, demonstrate or solicit orders for goods or merchandise in conjunction with, and as a part of, the trade association meetings, seminars or other similar meetings held at hotels, motels or public or private meeting areas within the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  The sale of produce shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter except for the following requirements: 
1.  Persons selling produce within the city shall be required to purchase a business license from the city. 
2.  Prior to applying for a business license, persons selling produce shall obtain the written permission for such sale from the owner of the land where the business will be operated. 
3.  Peddlers, solicitors, canvassers, or transient sellers of produce shall be restricted to such sales between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
5.36.040 - Sales restricted during certain hours. 
It is unlawful for any religious, nonprofit, or charitable organization or any person acting on behalf thereof to peddle, solicit, or canvass as defined in section 5.36.020 at any residence, house, apartment building, or any dwelling or abode between the hours of nine p.m. and nine a.m. each day unless such person or organization has obtained the advance consent from a person residing at such residence, apartment, or other dwelling or abode. 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
5.36.050 - Peddler/solicitor/canvasser/transient dealer license—Application—Information required—Fee. 
Every peddler, solicitor or canvasser as defined in section 5.36.020 shall make application to the city clerk for a license permitting such organization to engage in any of the selling, soliciting activities referred to in this chapter. This license shall be referred to as a "transient dealer license." Upon approval of the application by the mayor and council, a transient dealer license shall be issued in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  Transient dealer licenses issued for solicitation by religious, nonprofit and charitable organizations shall be issued for a period not to exceed ninety days and shall be renewable for up to three successive ninety-day periods per calendar year. Transient dealer licenses issued for non-solicitation purposes to religious, nonprofit and charitable organizations shall be issued for a period of thirty consecutive days and shall be renewable up to three times per calendar year. Transient dealer licenses issued to persons or organizations which are not religious, nonprofit or charitable organizations shall not be renewable. Transient dealer licenses issued for transient selling not otherwise issued to religious, nonprofit and charitable organizations shall be issued for no more than a period of fourteen consecutive days and may subsequently not be renewed for another one hundred eighty days. 
B.  Applicants for a license shall file with the business license clerk, at least thirty days prior to the date upon which the applicant desires to begin his business, a sworn application, in writing, on a form to be furnished by the clerk, which shall give the following information: 
1.  Name, physical description, age, Social Security number, and driver's license number of the agent for the applicant/organization filing the application; 
2.  The permanent home address and full local address of the agent of the applicant/organization filing the application and the full name and address of such organization; 
3.  A brief description of the nature of the business of the organization filing the application and goods and services shown for sale or for future delivery, including manufacturer, producer and supplier of such goods or service; 
4.  If employed, the name, address and phone number of the employer of the agent of the organization filing the application, together with the credentials establishing the exact relationship between the employer and employee; 
5.  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
6.  The exact location in which the applicant intends to do business (if the location is to change during the license period, the applicant must so state on the application); and, if any one or more vehicles are to be used, a description of the same, together with license number and other means of identification for each vehicle; 
7.  The particular manner and means by which the applicant intends to solicit, to sell its goods or take its orders; 
8.  A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be two indies by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
9.  A completed criminal background check authorization form with the driver's license for the applicant along with each person working during the period of application and/or any other identification that may be requested; 
10.  Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery of good or service; 
11.  The last five municipalities wherein the applicant has worked before coming to this city; 
12.  Such other relevant information as may be required by the investigation of the applicant. 
C.  Solicitation by religious, nonprofit and charitable organizations that occurs in the public right-of-way must adhere to the requirements below, in addition to those requirements listed in section 5.36.050(A) and (B). 
1.  Locations for donation collections in the public right-of-way shall be limited to the following areas: 
a)  On the southbound off-ramp of Interstate 75 South at Bill Gardner Parkway. 
b)  Within one hundred feet of the intersection of Bill Gardner Parkway and Market Place Boulevard. 
c)  Within one hundred feet of the intersection of State Route 42 and Market Place Boulevard. 
d)  Within one hundred feet of the intersection Tanger Boulevard and Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard. 
2.  No one under the age of eighteen years of age shall participate in a special event in the public right-of-way without meeting the following adult supervision requirement: 
a.  Any participants between ages of thirteen and seventeen shall require one adult for every four participants in that age group. 
b.  Any participants between ages of ten and twelve shall require one adult for every two participants in that age group. 
c.  Any participants under ten years of age shall require one adult for every one participant in that age group. 
3.  All participants in the special event occurring in the public right-of-way shall be required to wear high-visibility safety apparel for the duration of the special event. 
D.  At the time of filing the application a non-refundable application fee of two hundred fifty dollars shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated in the application and administrative costs. 
E.  The mayor and council may impose conditions of the approval of the transient dealer license including, but not limited to, required sanitation and clean-up measures, security measures or bond to guarantee performance of the condition(s). 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
5.36.060 - Special events—Permit—Application—Fee. 
A.  An application shall be submitted for review prior to the issuance of any special events permit. The application must be submitted to the community development department at least thirty days prior to the start of the special event. Upon completion of the review of the request, the community development director, or designee, shall refer the application to the mayor and council for approval or denial. Upon the approval of the application by the mayor and council, the community development director shall issue the special events permit. This special events permit must be present on the site of the special event for the duration of the special event. 
1.  The application for a special events permit shall include the following information: 
a.  Applicant's name, address, phone number, and email address. 
b.  Location of the special event. 
c.  Name and phone number of onsite contact who will be onsite for the duration of the special event. 
d.  Description of the nature of the special event. 
e.  Identify sponsors and/or merchants participating in the event. 
f.  Identify types of goods to be sold, additional permits may be required for portable eating establishment or for a transient dealer license. 
g.  Duration of the special event, including set up and take down. 
h.  Description of music/entertainment. 
i.  Written permission from the property owner. 
j.  Legible copy of the applicant's driver's license. 
k.  For special events involving parades, marches, running or cycling along public streets, a copy of the proposed route. 
B.  Special events that occur in the public right-of-way must adhere to the requirements below, in addition to those requirements listed in section 5.36.060(A). 
1.  Locations for donation collections in the public right-of-way shall be limited to the following areas: 
a.  On the southbound off-ramp of Interstate 75 South at Bill Gardner Parkway. 
b.  Within one hundred feet of the intersection of Bill Gardner Parkway and Market Place Boulevard. 
c.  Within one hundred feet of the intersection of State Route 42 and Market Place Boulevard. 
d.  Within one hundred feet of the intersection Tanger Boulevard and Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard. 
2.  No one under the age of eighteen years of age shall participate in a special event in the public right-of-way without meeting the following adult supervision requirement: 
a.  Any participants between ages of thirteen and seventeen shall require one adult for every four participants in that age group. 
b.  Any participants between ages of ten and twelve shall require one adult for every two participants in that age group. 
c.  Any participants under ten years of age shall require one adult for every one participant in that age group. 
3.  All participants in the special event occurring in the public right-of-way shall be required to wear high-visibility safety apparel for the duration of the special event. 
C.  At the time of filing the application, a fee of one hundred fifty dollars shall be paid to the community development director to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated in the application. The application fee may be waived in whole or in part by the mayor and council. 
D.  Special events permits shall be valid for a period not to exceed fourteen days per calendar year. 
E.  The mayor and council may impose conditions of the approval of the special events permit including, but not limited to, required sanitation and clean-up measures, security measures or bond to guarantee performance of the condition(s). 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
5.36.070 - License—Issuance conditions. 
Upon receipt of the application described in section 5.36.050 and section 5.36.060, an investigation shall be conducted at the direction of the city clerk to determine the applicant's business and moral character. 
A.  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, the city cleric shall so endorse upon the application and set forth the reasons therefor. The application shall then be referred to the mayor and council for final disposition. If the mayor and council shall disapprove the application, no license shall be issued and the applicant shall be notified of such disapproval. 
B.  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found satisfactory, the city clerk shall approve the application, and shall endorse the same on the application and shall refer the application to the mayor and council for final approval. Upon approval by the mayor and city council and upon receipt of the necessary fees as set forth in this chapter, the city clerk shall execute and deliver to the applicant a license and permit to carry on such business within the city limits. 
C.  The license issued to a successful applicant shall contain the signature of the city clerk, the type of license issued, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance and the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
5.36.080 - License—Recordkeeping by city clerk. 
The city clerk shall maintain a record of all licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and all application fees collected, which fees shall be paid into the general fund for the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
536.090 - License—Revocation conditions. 
A.  A license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the mayor and council after notice to the licensee and a hearing at which the licensee may be heard, for any of the following causes: 
1.  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application of the license; 
2.  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as a transient dealer; 
3.  Any violation of this chapter; 
4.  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude; or 
5.  Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or to constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
B.  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice can be personally served, or served by mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his local address as set forth on the application, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
5.36.100 - License—Only one user allowed. 
No more than one peddler, solicitor, canvasser, religious, non-profit or charitable organization shall engage in business or operate under the same transient dealer license. 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
5.36.110 - Selling on streets prohibited—Exceptions. 
No person or organization to which a transient dealer license or special event permit is issued shall: 
A.  Carry on his business upon any sidewalk, park or any other public place unless his license specifies that peddling, soliciting, canvassing or transient selling in such public place or places is permitted thereunder, and in no case shall such provisions be made without approval by the mayor and council; 
B.  Sell from any established or permanent location upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place; 
C.  Park or stand his wagon, automobile, or other vehicle upon any sidewalk or sidewalk area, or upon any street, alley, highway or public thoroughfare so as to obstruct the free travel thereon; 
D.  The mayor and council may approve an application to use a public place or places; provided, however, that after considering the location or area in which the applicant proposes to carry on his business, the type of business to be carried on, and other application information, determine that the peddling, soliciting, canvassing or transient selling would constitute an obstruction of the public way or place, would constitute a health or other hazardous condition upon the public way or place, would not be in compliance with the laws of the city, or would not be compatible with the intended use, and/or traffic upon said public way or place, deny said license, or issue a license with reasonable conditions. 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
5.36.120 - Refusing to leave certain premises unlawful, 
A.  Any person or organization that has been issued a transient dealer license or special event license, who enters upon premises owned, leased, or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises, or his agent, to leave the same and not return to such premises, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation of this chapter. 
B.  Any person or organization that has been issued a transient dealer license or special event license, who enters upon the premises of another for the purpose of selling or soliciting when there has been a "no soliciting" sign or a similar sign posted in a conspicuous place, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
5.36.130 - Misrepresentation of merchandise unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person or organization who has been issued a transient dealer license or special event permit to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality of the goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purposes of inducing another to purchase the same. 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
5.36.140 - Violations—Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation or legal entity who violates any of the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person, firm, corporation or legal entity who is found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by confinement in the common jail of Henry County for a period not to exceed ninety days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 16-07-044, § 1, 8-1-16) 
Chapter 5.40 - PORTABLE EATING ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sections: 

5.40.010 - Findings and purpose. 
It is found and declared that: 
A.  The primary purpose of the public streets, sidewalks, and other public ways is for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
B.  Vending on such public ways promotes the public interest by contributing to an active and attractive pedestrian environment; 
C.  Reasonable regulation of the sale of food or food products within the city is necessary to protect the public health and safety of citizens of the city; 
D.  Reasonable regulation of vending on public ways is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; and 
E.  The regulations contained in this chapter are not intended to prohibit or hamper speech which is protected by the First Amendment, but merely to regulate specific activities which are commercial in nature. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.020 - Definitions. 
"Food, beverages, goods or merchandise" means and includes but shall not be limited to fruit, vegetables, farm products or provisions, dairy products, fish, game, poultry, meat, plants, flowers, appliances, wearing apparel, jewelry, ornaments, art work, cosmetics and beauty aides, health products, medicines, household needs or furnishings, food of any kind whether or not for immediate consumption and confections. 
"Motor vehicle" means any vehicle used for the displaying, storing, or transporting of articles for sale by a vendor which is required to be licensed and registered by the State Department of Motor Vehicles. The term is to include trailers, trucks and automobiles. 
"Person or individual" means any person including any employee or agency of any group of individuals, partnerships, corporations. 
"Portable eating establishment" means a structure which is capable of being relocated in its entirety, on wheels with axles or in any other manner and which does not sit upon a foundation designed for the establishment of a permanent structure. 
"Public space" means and includes all city owned parks and city owned property within street rights-of-way. 
"Public way" means all areas legally open to public use such as public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys, parks, as well as the interior and areas surrounding public buildings. 
"Push carts" means any wheeled vehicle designed for carrying property and for being pushed by a person without the assistance of a motor or motor vehicle. 
"Sidewalk" means all area legally open to the public used as a pedestrian public way between the curb line and the legal building line. 
"Special event" means any occasion including, but not limited to fairs, shows, exhibitions, city-wide celebrations, festivals, etc., within a specifically defined area of the city for a period of time not to exceed five days. 
"Stand" means any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, pushcart, portable eating establishments or any other fixture or device which is used for the display, storage, or transportation of articles offered for sale by a vendor. 
"Street" means all that area legally open to the public used as public streets and sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways. 
"Vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property may be transported or drawn upon a street or sidewalk, including, but not limited to, devices moved by human power. 
"Vendor" means any person traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle, vehicle or any other type of conveyance from street to street conveying or transporting food, beverages, goods or merchandise and offering or exposing them for sale or making sales and delivering articles to the purchasers; or who, without traveling from place to place, exhibits, displays, sells or offers for sale such products from a wagon, handcart, pushcart, motor vehicle, vehicle, portable eating stand, conveyance or from his person while on the public ways of the city or other places. A "vendor" also includes any street vendor, hawker, huckster, itinerant merchant or transient vendor. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.030 - License required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any vendor to sell, display or offer for sale any food, beverage, goods, or merchandise on a public way within the city without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. 
B.  It is unlawful for any vendor, person, firm, corporation or other legal entity to operate a portable eating establishment within the city without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.040 - Application. 
The application for a vendor's license shall contain all information relevant and necessary to determine whether a particular license may be issued, including but not limited to: 
A.  Full name, home address, permanent business address, telephone number, driver's license number, three copies of a current full-face photograph, and proof of identity; 
B.  A brief description of the nature, character, and quality of the food, beverages, goods, or merchandise to be sold; 
C.  The specific location, if any, in which the vendor intends to conduct business; 
D.  If vendor is employed by or is an agent of another, the name and business address of the principal/hiring person, firm, association, organization, company or corporation; 
E.  If a motor vehicle is to be used in the vending business, a description of the vehicle together with the motor vehicle registration number and the license number; 
F.  A complete listing of any other licenses or permits issued to applicant by the city within the past five years; 
G.  A description, the registration number and the license number of the portable eating establishment. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.050 - Health permits. 
The application of any vendor engaged in the sale of food or beverages shall also be referred to the local health department for approval of a health permit in addition to the regular vending license. Such vendor's equipment shall be subject to inspections by the city and the health department at the time of application and at periodic intervals thereafter. Vendors shall comply with all of the health rules and regulations of the city, Henry County and the state of Georgia. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.060 - Issuance of license. 
Not later than thirty days after the filing of a completed application for a vendor's license, the applicant shall be notified in writing by the city clerk of the decision on the issuance or denial of the license. If the vendor applicant complies with all application requirements and is found to have no non-conformities rationally related to sales on public ways in the city, the applicant shall be issued a vendor's license. If a food and beverage applicant meets the prior requirements, and receives health department approval, then such applicant shall be issued both a vending license and a health permit. Any applicant denied a vending license may seek an appeal pursuant to Section 5.40.140. A vending license is valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.070 - Special events. 
Vendors wishing to conduct business at any special event shall apply to the city for a temporary vending license. Application for such a license must be made at least five working days prior to the beginning of the event. The license is valid only for the duration of the special event. Fees for such licenses shall be as specified in Section 5.40.090. Vendors granted a temporary license are subject to the same operating regulations as other vendors, except where otherwise specified. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.080 - Exemptions. 
The following vendors are exempt from the licensing requirements of Section 5.40.030, but shall otherwise be required to comply with the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  All religious, non-profit, and charitable organizations, including school groups; however, said organizations and school groups must obtain a special events license and shall otherwise comply with the terms and provisions of this chapter; 
B.  The sale of fresh produce by the grower on the grower's property; 
C.  Vendors, merchants, exhibitors, and salesmen who exhibit, demonstrate, or solicit orders for goods in conjunction with, and as part of, the organized program of conventions, professional meetings, seminars, etc.; 
D.  Any individual selling newspapers or magazines, or distributing free samples from his or her person; 
E.  Food, beverages, goods or merchandise temporarily deposited on the sidewalk in the ordinary course of delivery, shipment or transfer; 
F.  The placing and maintenance of unattended stands or sales devices for the sale, display or offering for sale newspapers, magazines, periodicals and paperbound books. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.090 - Fees. 
A.  Each vendor seeking an annual license shall pay a non-refundable application fee of one hundred dollars to defer the cost of processing the application. 
B.  Each vendor granted a license under this chapter shall pay an annual license fee of three hundred fifty dollars. 
C.  Each vendor granted a temporary vending license for special events shall pay a fee of ten dollars per day of rending permitted. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.100 - Licenses and identification badges. 
A.  The license issued to a vendor shall be carried with the vendor at all times when he or she is engaged in the business of vending. If the vendor sells food or beverages, the health permit must also be displayed. 
B.  In addition to the license, the city shall issue an identification badge to every vendor. Vendors shall display their badges in such a way that the badges may be easily read, while doing business. If a badge becomes damaged or obscured, the vendor shall return it to the city and receive another badge. 
C.  An identification badge shall be deemed to be properly displayed when it is attached to the outer garment of the vendor and clearly visible to the public and law enforcement officials. A certificate of health inspection shall be deemed to be properly displayed when attached to the vending pushcart, vehicle, stand or other conveyance, and clearly visible to the public and law enforcement officials. 
D.  Licenses, permits, and identification badges shall be used only by the person to whom they were issued and may not be transferred to any other person. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.110 - Restrictions. 
A.  Prohibited Conduct. No person authorized to engage in the business of vending under this chapter shall do any of the following: 
1.  Unduly obstruct pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic flow, except for up to five minutes to load and unload vending stations and/or vending merchandise; 
2.  Obstruct traffic signals or regulatory signs; 
3.  Stop, stand or park any vehicle, pushcart or any other conveyance upon any street for the purpose of selling during the hours when parking, stopping and standing have been prohibited by signs or curb markings; 
4.  Leave any conveyance unattended at any time or store, park, or leave such conveyance in a public space overnight; 
5.  Interfere with the ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or tenant, create a nuisance, increase traffic congestion or delay or constitute a hazard to traffic, life or property, or obstruct adequate access to emergency and sanitary vehicles; 
B.  Noise. No vendor may sound any device which produces a loud and raucous noise, or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier, or similar device to attract public attention. 
C.  Portable Eating Establishments. 
1.  The establishment must be an accessory to an existing business; 
2.  The establishment shall be allowed only in districts zoned C-1 and C-2; 
3.  The person operating the establishment must have written permission from the owner of the property; 
4.  The establishment shall be located on a paved surface and shall be located in the front of or on the side of an existing business; 
5.  The establishments must be placed at least ten feet from any other structure; 
6.  The establishment must be placed at least sixteen feet from the public right-of-way; 
7.  The establishment shall be located so that it will not impede traffic flow or obstruct vision of oncoming or exiting vehicles; 
8.  The establishment shall provide the following off-street parking: 
a.  Food sales, five spaces, 
b.  Produce sales, three spaces, 
c.  Merchandise, five spaces, 
These parking requirements are in addition to parking requirements of existing businesses; 
9.  No outside storage will be allowed for the establishment which shall include but is not limited to picnic tables; 
10.  Portable signs shall not be allowed in connection with the establishment; 
11.  The establishment must be skirted completely to conceal the undercarriage. 
D.  Hours of Operation. 
1.  All stands, vehicles, motor vehicles, pushcarts, shall be allowed to engage in the business of vending only between six a.m. and eight p.m.. All vending stands must be removed from public property during non-vending hours. When temporary vending permits are sought for special events, the applicant may request from the city an exception to the usual hours of operation. All stands and vehicles used for vending must be removed from public property during non-operating hours. 
2.  Portable eating establishments shall be allowed to engage in their business only between the hours of six a.m. and midnight. 
E.  Removal of Trash. All trash or debris accumulating within twenty feet of any vending stand shall be collected by the vendor and deposited in a trash container. All vendors selling food or beverages must provide trash receptacles adjacent to or as a part of their stands. 
F.  Prohibited Areas. The city shall prohibit vendors from selling on specified public ways if it determines such prohibitions are necessary for the protection of public health and safety. No vendor shall be permitted to operate in the following areas of public space: 
1.  Within twenty feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk; 
2.  Within ten feet of any driveway, loading zone or bus stop; 
3.  Within ten feet of another vending location assigned to another vendor on a public sidewalk; 
4.  Within a minimum of five feet of unobstructed pedestrian space; 
5.  In any area within five feet of a building entrance or exit or, in the case of a hotel or motel, within ten feet of building entrances or exits; 
6.  On the median strip of a divided roadway unless the strip is intended for use as a pedestrian mall or plaza; 
7.  Against display windows of fixed location businesses; 
8.  Any area within thirty feet of a hospital, college, university, elementary school, middle school or high school; 
9.  Within ten feet of any fire hydrant or fire escape; 
10.  Within five feet of any parking space or access ramp designated for persons with disabilities; 
11.  Within ten feet of any driveway of a fire station or police station. 
G.  Pushcarts. Vendors utilizing pushcarts or other mobile, hon-motorized vending stands may only conduct business in each location for a period of five minutes at a time. At the end of that period, such vendors must move to a new vending location at least one hundred feet from the previous location. Pushcart vendors who do not adhere to these regulations will be considered fixed-location stand vendors, and will be assigned to a fixed location. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.120 - Suspension or revocation of license. 
A.  Any license issued under this ordinance may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the license; 
2.  Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting the business of vending; 
3.  Conducting the business of rending contrary to the conditions of the license; 
4.  Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; 
5.  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude while holding a rending license from the city; 
6.  Cancellation of health department authorization for a food or beverage vending unit due to uncorrected health or sanitation violations. 
B.  Upon suspension or revocation, the city shall deliver written notice to the license holder stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such action. The written notice shall be delivered to the license holder's place of business or mailed to the license holder's last known address. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.130 - Appeals. 
Persons who are denied licenses or whose licenses have been suspended or revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.140 - Renewals. 
Licenses may be renewed, provided an application for renewal and license fees are received by the city no later than the expiration date of the current license. Applications received after that date shall be processed as new applications. The city shall review each application for renewal to determine that the applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the city finds that the application meets the above requirements, the city shall issue a new license. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
5.40.150 - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety days, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 97-8.11.A (part)) 
Chapter 5.44 - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 
Sections: 

5.44.010 - Occupational license tax. 
A.  Each telephone company operating in the city shall pay, on or before August 31st of each year, an occupational license tax for that calendar year in the amount of three percent of recurring local service revenues received by such company from subscribers located within the city. The annual amount due may be computed by annualizing the recurring local service revenues billed during the month of June preceding the date of payment. Any amount of license tax previously paid by a telephone company, which is applicable to any period subsequent to the effective date of this section, shall be credited against the amounts imposed herein or by subsequent ordinance. 
B.  "Recurring local service revenues" means: 
1.  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users, 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semi-public pay station services, 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages, and 
d.  Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service; 
2.  Charges for Morse transmission on, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits; 
3.  All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits; 
4.  Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for audio and video program transmission services. 
(Prior code § 2-5-32) 
Chapter 5.48 - YARD SALES 
Sections: 

5.48.010 - Definition. 
"Yard sale" means and includes all sales entitled "yard sale," "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale," or any other similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale. As used in this chapter, the term "yard sale" shall include all of the above described sales. 
(Ord. 2/12/90 (part)) 
5.48.020 - Permit required—License fee required when. 
A.  Any person conducting a yard sale, garage sale or other such sale, at their residence in the city, or participating in a yard sale, garage sale or other such sale in the city, shall obtain a permit from the clerk of the city prior to holding such sale. Said permit shall not exceed two consecutive days. 
B.  Said resident is authorized to conduct five sales per year without payment of a fee. Additional sales shall be allowed during a calendar year and the person requesting permission to conduct such sale shall pay a license fee of twenty-five dollars per sale. 
C.  No permits shall be issued to any person that is not a resident of the city. 
D.  Any civic, church or nonprofit organization conducting a yard sale, garage sale or other such sale within the city shall obtain a permit from the clerk of the city prior to the holding of such sale. 
(Ord. 2/12/90 (part)) 
5.48.030 - Restrictions on use of commercial and public property. 
A.  No yard sale, garage sale or other such sale shall be conducted on commercial property. 
B.  No yard sale, garage sale or other such sale shall be conducted on public property within the city, except for civic, church or nonprofit organizations. 
(Ord. 2/12/90 (part)) 
5.48.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm, organization or corporation in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by the payment of a five hundred dollar fine or by imprisonment of not more than fourteen days or by both such payment of fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 2/12/90 (part)) 
Chapter 5.52 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sections: 

5.52.010 - Findings—Public purpose. 
A.  As a municipality located within the Atlanta Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area which is experiencing rapid growth and change due to urbanization of our county and being familiar with the experiences of other urban and suburban counties and municipalities including, but not limited to, Atlanta, DeKalb County and Fulton County, Georgia; Austin, Texas; Phoenix, Arizona; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio and Indianapolis, Indiana, which experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the city of Locust Grove, Georgia, the mayor and council take note of the well-known and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. 
B.  Moreover, it is the finding of the mayor and council that public nudity (either partial or total under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "adult entertainment," leads to an increase in the surrounding area of criminal behavior and creates undesirable community conditions, blight and diminution in property values. 
C.  Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, and live commercial nudity in general, are disorderly conduct, prostitution, solicitation, drug trafficking, drug use and corruption of public officials. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, and commercial nudity in general, are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. 
D.  Accordingly, it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to reduce the adverse impact of adult entertainment establishments by limiting the number of such uses, so as to reduce the negative impacts of adult entertainment establishments upon other business uses, neighborhood property values, residential areas and public and semi-public uses; to insure that adult entertainment establishments do not impede development, redevelopment and neighborhood revitalization efforts; and so as to avoid allowing adult entertainment establishments in heavily used public pedestrian areas. 
E.  Therefore, the limitation of adult entertainment to certain prescribed areas of the city is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to minimize the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which provide or establish adult entertainment. To that end, this chapter is adopted. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 1) 
5.52.020 - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this chapter defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below: 
"Adult bookstore" means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals or adult paraphernalia which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials, or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Adult dancing establishment" means a business that features live dancers on the premises engaged in displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
"Adult entertainment establishments" means and includes adult dancing establishments, exotic dance establishments, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult motion picture arcades and adult video stores. 
"Adult motion picture arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Adult motion picture theater" means an enclosed building used for presenting motion pictures distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
"Adult video store" means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Exotic dance establishment" means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances on the premises by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
"Specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following: pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals of either males or females, or any portion of the areola of the female breast. 
"Specified sexual activities" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
2.  Clearly depicted human genitals, in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
3.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
4.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
5.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
6.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; 
7.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. 02-08.05A § 1) 
5.52.030 - Permitted locations. 
Adult entertainment establishments shall be allowed only in commercial areas fronting on Hampton/Locust Grove Road. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 3) 
5.52.040 - Other locational requirements. 
Adult entertainment establishments shall be subject to the provisions of the zoning ordinance, this chapter and the following standards of use: 
A.  The minimum lot area for an adult entertainment establishment shall be two acres. 
B.  In addition to zoning development standards governing commercial zoning districts, buildings and structures established in connection with an adult entertainment establishment shall be separated at least forty feet from any other business establishment and the minimum rear yard shall be seventy-five feet. 
C.  In addition to zoning development standards of the zoning ordinance, adult entertainment establishments shall be separated at least two hundred feet from any parcel either used or zoned for residential purposes. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 4) 
5.52.050 - Licensing. 
A.  Any person, firm, partnership or corporation which owns or operates an adult entertainment establishment shall be required to obtain a license under this chapter. No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be permitted to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless and until such a license is obtained. 
B.  To obtain an adult entertainment establishment license, the applicant must: 
1.  Complete the application. Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material omission left out, of an original or renewal application for a license hereunder shall be cause for the denial thereof, and, if any license has been granted under these circumstances, same shall be cause for revocation; 
2.  Provide documentation to prove that the applicant meets or exceeds the conditions of zoning pertaining to the property to be licensed; and provide an "as-built" survey prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer depicting the location of the structure which will operate as the adult entertainment establishment. Prior to the issuance of such license, the "as-built" survey shall be submitted to the building inspector for a determination as to whether the proposed site meets the standards set forth in the conditions of zoning and this chapter; 
3.  Furnish a complete set of fingerprints for all owners of sole proprietorships, all officers and owners of ten percent or more shares of any corporation and all partners of any partnership; 
4.  Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by the mayor and council, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid; 
5.  The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
C.  The city shall have thirty days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the license if it finds: 
1.  The required fee has been paid; 
2.  The application, applicant and proposed operation conform in all respects to the provisions of this chapter; 
3.  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
4.  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
5.  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
6.  That on the date of the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
7.  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the city of Locust Grove, state of Georgia or the United States; 
8.  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
D.  No person, partnership, business, firm or corporation shall be granted a license if the person, or any partner, officer or owner of ten percent or more of the shares of or any interest in any such business, firm, partnership or corporation has been convicted of or has pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, lottery, gambling, illegal possession or sale of any narcotics, drugs or chemicals for which the sale thereof is controlled or prohibited by law, the control of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, prostitution, solicitation, or the possession or receiving of stolen property, within a period of fifteen years immediately prior to the filing of the application. Should any such person, partner, officer or shareholder of a corporation, after a license has been granted, be convicted of or plead guilty or nolo contendere to any such crime, said license shall be subject to suspension and revocation. Withdrawal of an owner, officer or partner or enumerated shareholder, after pleading guilty or nolo contendere to the above-enumerated crimes, shall not necessarily mitigate against the penalty imposed. 
E.  Upon payment of the full license fee, the city shall issue a license authorized as provided in this section; provided that payment of the entire license fee shall be required within fifteen days of approval of the license application. Failure to pay such fee within the fifteen day period shall result in approval being withdrawn by the city without the necessity of any further action on the part of the city. 
F.  Licenses issued under this chapter shall be renewed annually. The fee for an adult entertainment license shall be as set from time to time by the mayor and council. 
G.  Issuance of a license under this chapter shall not in any way be deemed to condone or make legal any act prohibited by state or federal law or local ordinance. 
H.  No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license thereafter issued is sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 5) 
5.52.060 - Change of location or name. 
A.  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change-of-location fee, established by resolution of the mayor and council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city building inspector. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the city code and zoning ordinance have been met. 
B.  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
C.  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 6) 
5.52.070 - Notice of appeal—Placement on council agenda. 
A.  The applicant or a licensee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
B.  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council and the name and address of the applicant. 
C.  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than thirty days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 7) 
5.52.080 - Council determines appeal procedure. 
A.  When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the mayor and council may take either of the following actions: 
1.  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
2.  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. 
B.  The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 8) 
5.52.090 - City council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the mayor and council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the applicant or licensee from interested parties and from city staff. The mayor and council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the mayor and council shall be final. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 9) 
5.52.100 - Power of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure outlined in this chapter may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence and hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 10) 
5.52.110 - Rules of evidence. 
The mayor and council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 11) 
5.12.120 - Hearing officer—Report. 
A.  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings and conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee or appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the chief of police. 
B.  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 12) 
5.52.130 - Report—Action of council. 
The mayor and council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 13) 
5.52.140 - Clearance of employees and contractors. 
A.  No person may be employed or allowed to work as an independent contractor by an establishment holding a license hereunder until such person has been fingerprinted by the police department and has been issued a letter of clearance by the police department indicating the person has not, within the preceding five years, been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any law catalogued by Section 5.52.050D. A letter of compliance shall be issued by the police department indicating the person is eligible for such employment. This letter must be kept on file at the licensed establishment where such person may be working or performing. This section shall apply to all performers, entertainers, musicians and persons engaged in temporary work or independent contracting, as well as regular employees. 
B.  The police department shall have a search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted. In the event there is a violation of laws as catalogued in Section 5.52.050D, the police department shall issue a letter to the person fingerprinted stating that the person is ineligible for employment. This determination may be appealed to the mayor and council. 
C.  Any letter of eligibility for employment issued hereunder shall expire twelve months from the date of issue. The mayor and council may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility of employment. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 14) 
5.52.150 - Regulations pertaining to adult dancing establishments and exotic dance establishments. 
A.  Any person, firm, business, partnership or corporation licensed as an adult dancing establishment or an exotic dance establishment shall comply with the following rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of their facility: 
1.  No licensee shall offer adult entertainment between the hours of two a.m. and twelve noon. 
2.  No person under the age of eighteen shall be permitted on the premises. 
3.  No patron shall be permitted to touch, fondle or caress any performer, nor shall any performer be permitted to touch, fondle or caress a patron. No employee shall be permitted to fondle or caress any patron, nor shall any patron be permitted to fondle or caress any employee. 
4.  No tips for performers or employees shall be placed by a patron on the person of the performer or employee. 
5.  All live performers shall be restricted to fixed stages, and no patron shall be permitted on such stages for any purpose. "Fixed stage" shall be defined as a raised floor area or stage at least four feet high and designed exclusively for, and used only by, performers. Tables used for seating and service to customers do not meet these standards and shall not be used for performing purposes. 
6.  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any person. 
7.  The license shall be displayed in a prominent place on the premises at all times. 
8.  No licensee shall permit any alcoholic beverages to be served, offered or consumed on the licensed premises or in any parking area dedicated to the use of the licensed premises. 
9.  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five tenths foot candles per square foot. 
10.  An adult dancing establishment and exotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
11.  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of eighteen years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
12.  No person physically present on the premises, other than a live performer performing in accordance with the standards of this section, shall publicly display, expose or permit the public display or exposure of any specified anatomical area. 
B.  No person, firm, business, partnership or corporation shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult dancing establishment or an exotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 15) 
5.52.160 - Admission of minors. 
No adult entertainment licensee shall permit the admission of persons under the age of eighteen onto the licensed premises. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 16) 
5.52.170 - Sales to minors. 
No person shall sell, display, barter or give, or offer to sell, display, barter or give to any person under the age of eighteen any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 17) 
5.52.180 - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person physically present on the premises of an adult bookstore, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater or adult video store shall publicly display, expose or permit the public display or exposure of any specified anatomical area. No person physically present on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment shall engage in any lewd or obscene behavior constituting a violation of the laws of the state of Georgia. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 18) 
5.52.190 - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 21) 
5.52.200 - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 20) 
5.52.210 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense, punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment not to exceed the limitations of the city charter. 
B.  In addition to fine or imprisonment, violation of this chapter shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
C.  Any person, firm partnership or corporation who holds an adult entertainment establishment license must also comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws or regulations otherwise pertaining to these establishments, and failure to so comply shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. 11/8/93 § 19) 
Chapter 5.56 - BILLIARD ROOMS AND POOL HALLS 
Sections: 

5.56.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meaning ascribed to them: 
"Billiard room" means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. 
"Billiards" means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and shall include all forms of games known as "pool," "carom billiards," "pocket billiards" and "English billiards." 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-1) 
5.56.020 - License—Compliance with state law. 
Every applicant for a license for operation of a billiard table or billiard room must first show proof of compliance with state requirements precedent to granting of such license by the city. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-2) 
5.56.030 - License—Required. 
No person shall operate, maintain or keep a billiard or pool table, or any other table of like character, within the city for use by the public without first having obtained a license therefor as required in this chapter. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-3) 
5.56.040 - Application for license—Contents—Execution. 
A.  Every applicant for license under the provisions of this chapter shall file written application with the city clerk, giving the full name and address, and the full names and addresses of all parties interested shall be given if more than one. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall contain the names and addresses of all officers as well as the state where organized, besides designation of manager or managers. The application shall further state the exact address where the room is to be conducted; the number of tables; the age of the applicant or manager if a corporation; whether a citizen of the United States; when, where and how long the applicant previously operated a billiard room; and the name and address of the owner of the property where the room is to be opened. The application must be signed by the applicant, or if a corporation, by the manager. 
B.  Every application for a license shall be accompanied by the affidavit of the applicant, sworn to before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths, stating that the applicant is a citizen of the United States; that he has not been convicted of a felony; that he will not permit vagrants or persons under the influence of intoxicating liquors, beer or wine to enter or play in his place; that the applicant will have personal charge in management of the business; that he will not permit gambling nor permit the billiard tables to be used in any manner other than as provided by law. 
(Amended during 5-95 supplement; Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-4) 
5.56.050 - Application for license—Investigation—Issuance conditions. 
The clerk shall provide a copy of the application and all pertinent information to the mayor and city council who shall cause a complete investigation to be made into all of the above particulars. After review of the information presented, the mayor and council shall determine whether or not the license shall be issued. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-5) 
5.56.060 - Application for license—Rejection conditions. 
Every application for a license to operate a billiard room shall be rejected where the applicant is not of good character or has suffered a revocation of a previous license, or if any other regulations have been violated. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-6) 
5.56.070 - License—Fee schedule. 
A.  The annual business license fee for each billiard room shall be two hundred fifty dollars plus twenty-five dollars per billiard table per year. 
B.  The annual business license fee for each billiard table to be used and operated in a business location not qualifying as a billiard room shall be fifty dollars per table per year. 
C.  Any subsequent fee schedule shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 97-12.08.B Art. I, 1997) 
5.56.080 - Location of billiard room. 
Billiard rooms shall be located in the properly zoned area. No billiard room or pool room may be opened in the city on any level other than the ground floor or first floor of the building. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-8) 
5.56.090 - Premises—Sanitation requirements. 
All public billiard rooms shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition and shall comply with all sanitary rules and regulations of the state of Georgia, Henry County and the city of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-9) 
5.56.100 - Premises—Clear view of interior required. 
No person who operates a billiard room shall permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions, or other obstructions to be used to prevent a clear view of the interior, which clear view must be maintained at all times. No partitions forming rooms, stalls or other enclosures shall be permitted. However, an area designated for office use will be permitted, provided it has a window which allows for a clear view of the table area and which also allows persons in the table area to see into the office area. Also, this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the maintenance of washrooms and toilet rooms for proper purposes nor the maintenance of closets for storage purposes exclusively. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-10) 
5.56.110 - Opening and closing hours. 
It is unlawful to operate any billiard room from twelve midnight to six a.m. on any day of the week, during which hours only regular employees performing necessary work shall be therein. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-11) 
5.56.120 - Admissions restrictions for persons under eighteen years of age. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to play billiards in, or for any other purpose to enter or remain in, a billiard room in which beer, wine or alcoholic beverages are offered for sale. This subsection shall not apply to persons who are under eighteen years of age who are accompanied by a parent or guardian or who possess a written permit from a parent or guardian, which permit is witnessed by a notary public with seal affixed to the permit. 
B.  In the event that the proprietor of a billiard room is of the opinion that any person desiring admission thereto is under the age of eighteen years, he shall require such person to certify his age in writing or to produce a legal permit. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-12) 
5.56.130 - Compliance with Chapter 9.08. 
All owners, operators, managers and proprietors of a billiard room and all persons holding a license for the operation of a billiard room are placed on notice that the city has enacted Ordinance 5/11/92, codified in Chapter 9.08, which sets forth a curfew for minors from the hours of eleven p.m. to five a.m. No such owner, operator, manager, proprietor or licenseholder shall take any action which would cause or otherwise encourage a minor to be in violation of Chapter 9.08. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-13) 
5.56.140 - Gambling and posting of sporting results prohibited. 
No dice, cards, dominoes or other games of chance shall be permitted, nor any form of gambling allowed, in any billiard room or in any other business place operated in connection therewith; and such games as "Kelly pool," "keno," "pigeon pool," "Parker pool," "star pool," "scrub" and similar gambling devices are prohibited. No racing or other betting pool shall be exhibited or sold in such places or businesses. The use of baseball tickers and the posting of results of sporting events is expressly prohibited in billiard rooms or in any place operated in connection therewith. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-14) 
5.56.150 - Alcoholic beverage sale and use prohibited—Exception. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or allowed to be used in or on the premises of billiard rooms or any place operated in connection therewith, except that this prohibition shall not apply if such premises or establishment is an establishment which is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages and derives at least fifty percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-15) 
5.56.160 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Every person, firm or corporation operating a billiard room within the city without having applied for a license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not less than one hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars; and each day that the billiard room is operated without a license shall be a separate offense. 
B.  Any person who has not reached the age of eighteen years who remains in a billiard room without a permit or without being accompanied by a parent or guardian, or who makes a false certificate as to his age, or who uses a forged permit, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars, nor more than five hundred dollars. 
C.  Any licensee who shall knowingly violate this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, imprisonment not to exceed one hundred eighty days, work on the public streets or public works of the city for a term not to exceed six months, or a combination thereof. Each violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. A knowing violation of this chapter by any licensee shall be grounds for license revocation. 
(Ord. 10/11/93 (part): prior code § 7-4-16) 
Chapter 5.64 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sections: 

5.64.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety, welfare, and general morals of citizens living near massage establishments and patrons of massage establishments. The city intends that massage establishments be operated and maintained in a professional and safe manner and that massages be provided by licensed massage technicians. Furthermore, the city intends for these regulations to protect the value of properties located near massage establishments as well as prohibit and deter lewdness and criminal activity sometimes associated with massage establishments. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 1) 
5.64.020 - License required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or persons, natural or corporate, to operate a massage establishment, as hereinafter defined, without having obtained a license therefor; or for any person or persons, natural or corporate, to allow a massage technician, as hereinafter defined, to administer massages, as hereinafter defined, without first having obtained the license required by this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful for any natural person to administer massages, as hereinafter defined, without having obtained a license required by this chapter. 
C.  Dual Licenses Not Required. A massage technician employed by a massage establishment under this chapter shall not be required to independently obtain a license hereunder, provided that: (i) the establishment is duly licensed by the city; (ii) the establishment formally counts the massage technician as an employee and reports income paid to the employee in the manner prescribed by law; and (iii) the employee possesses credentials sufficient to obtain a massage technician license independently under this chapter. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S §§ 2 (part), 7; Ord. 95-2-13a § 1) 
5.64.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Massage" (or "massages") means any manner of manipulation, including but not limited to, the rubbing, touching, stroking, kneading or vibrating of the superficial parts of the body, by direct or indirect physical contact with any portion of the body of a "massage technician," as defined in this section, or by any form of contact with a "massage apparatus," as defined in this section. 
"Massage apparatus" means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operating by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power, which is utilized by a massage technician, as defined in this section, for the purpose of administering a massage, as hereinbefore defined. 
"Massage establishment" means any business established for profit which employs one or more "massage technicians," as defined in this section, or owns, and operates or maintains for profit one or more "massage apparatus," as defined in this section, to include, but not be limited to, bath house equipment, and which, for a good or valuable consideration offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of massages, as hereinafter defined. 
"Massage technician," sometimes called "massage therapist," means any person, whether male or female, whether or not a masseur or masseuse by profession who, by direct or indirect physical contact with the body of another, or by use and operating of a "massage apparatus," and for any good or valuable consideration, administers a massage. 
"Sexual or genital area" means and includes the genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 2) 
5.64.040 - Qualifications of a massage technician. 
A.  No applicant may be issued a license as a massage technician unless he or she shall have filed the application required in this chapter, and shall have first possessed the following qualifications: 
1.  The applicant must be of good moral character. 
2.  The applicant must be in sound physical and mental health. 
3.  The applicant has obtained a diploma from an accredited or approved school of massage. In order to be an accredited or approved school of massage, the school must offer no less than a four-month intensive course consisting of at least six hundred hours of courses in (a) human sciences (consisting of anatomy and physiology, applied anatomy, pathology and hygiene); (b) massage and supervised practice; and (c) hydrotherapy. 
4.  The applicant has practical experience consisting of a minimum of two years' training and apprenticeship in a licensed establishment of massage or physical culture. Applicant must also establish that he/she, during his/her two-year apprenticeship, received at least six hundred hours of training and experience in massage, physical culture, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, first aid, CPR, hygiene and HIV/AIDS education. 
B.  No license shall be issued unless the application required in this chapter, and all the attached documentation and exhibits so required, shall have been filed by the applicant; and in no case shall the license be issued where it appears that the application therefor has been materially falsified, or where the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify any information contained herein. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 3) 
5.64.050 - Qualifications of a massage establishment. 
A corporate applicant must be chartered under the laws of Georgia or authorized by the Secretary of State to do business in Georgia. The applicant shall be the owner or legal agent of the establishment. Applications shall be submitted to the city manager on forms provided by the city. 
A.  No license shall be issued unless the application required in this chapter, and all the attached documentation and exhibits so required, shall have been filed by the applicant; and in no case shall the license be issued where it appears that the application therefor has been materially falsified or where the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify any information contained therein. 
B.  No license jto conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection discloses that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
1.  A sign bearing letters not less than one inch inside shall be posted at the main entrance of the premises identifying it as a massage establishment and announcing the hours of operation. All establishments licensed under this chapter shall close by nine p.m. and shall not reopen for business any earlier than seven a.m. the following day. 
2.  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the building code, and, additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than sixty watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth; 
3.  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the building code; 
4.  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing any instruments used for massage shall be provided; 
5.  Hot and cold running water shall be provided; 
6.  Closed cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen; 
7.  Adequate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for customers; 
8.  All walls, ceilings, floors, steam or vapor rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; 
9.  Clean and sanitary towels and linen shall be provided for customers receiving massage services; no common use of towels or linen shall be permitted; 
10.  The establishment, prior to the issuance of any license hereunder, must be in complete compliance with the city fire code, the city electrical code, the city plumbing code, and with all other requirements of federal, state, county and municipal laws designed to protect the health, welfare and safety of the persons who come into contact with said establishment; 
11.  No alcoholic beverage may be maintained, possessed, sold or consumed on the premises; 
12.  Dressing and toilet facilities shall be available for customers; 
13.  Two way or reversible mirrors are expressly prohibited; and 
14.  All individual rooms or booths shall have a window of such dimensions that will allow for observation of the rooms and their contents with the lowest portion of the window being no less and no more than five feet from the floor. The dimensions of said window shall be such that when looking through the window at an angle the maximum area that may be blocked from sight shall not exceed that area between the window and any given point on the side walls, floor or ceiling no more than one foot from the wall containing said window. The intended effect should allow a person to draw a hypothetical line on the side walls, floor and the ceiling parallel to and a distance of one foot away from the wall containing the window so that an observer looking through the window into the room could see the room and its contents from at least that line forward into the room. The window may be covered from the outside with a curtain, blind or unlocked sliding door. Inside the room, said window may not be covered or altered in any way to obstruct the police officer, code enforcement personnel, or persons designated by the city to inspect the massage establishment view into the room. Police officers, code enforcement personnel or designees may open the curtain, blind, or sliding door to view inside the room to ensure full compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter and all amendments thereto. Whether the view of the police officer, code enforcement personnel, or designee is obstructed or not, said person may knock once and enter the room to inspect for compliance with this chapter and all amendments hereto as well as all other applicable city, state and federal laws. The doors to rooms shall not be locked or barricaded during any sessions. All current and future license holders shall be in compliance with the requirements of this subsection 5.64.050(B)(14) prior to the renewal of a business licenses or issuance of a new business license for massage establishments as regulated by this chapter. 
C.  All massage technicians, licensed hereunder to massage, shall be completely clothed during all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this chapter, "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and said pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. The holder of the license shall have the license subject to revocation for violation of this section. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S §§ 2—6 (part); Ord. 03-11-03B §§ 1, 2; Ord. 95-2-13a § 4) 
5.64.060 - Written application required. 
Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate as a massage technician or to operate a massage establishment shall make application to the city manager for an appropriate investigation. Such application shall be in writing, addressed to the mayor and city council, and shall set forth the following information: 
A.  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names currently or heretofore used by the applicant; 
B.  The current and all previous business and residence addresses of the applicant within the two years immediately preceding the date of application; 
C.  Sworn affidavits of at least three bona fide residents of Henry County that the applicant is a person of good moral character; 
D.  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of twenty-one years; 
E.  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair; 
F.  Two current photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size; 
G.  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of application; 
H.  Any massage or similar business license history of the applicant, including whether such person, in any previous operation in any jurisdiction, has had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and any business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation; 
I.  All convictions of violations of any laws or ordinances and the grounds therefor; 
J.  The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the city and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as an exhibit to the application; 
K.  The applicant shall be examined, within thirty days prior to the date of application renewal date, by a physician duly licensed by the state of Georgia; and a certificate from said physician, certifying that the applicant is in sound mental and physical health, and free of all contagious or communicable diseases, shall be attached to the application; 
L.  Applicants must furnish a certified copy of a diploma of graduation and a certificate of graduation in good standing from an accredited school of massage; such diploma shall be received by the city directly from the school; such diploma must be representative of the fact that such applicant attended a course of study of not less than six months, or a four-month intensive course provided such course is a six-hundred-hour approved course, wherein such courses of study consisted of a curriculum of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, hygiene, health service management and other such subjects; in the event such applicant should not have such diploma, then the applicant must have had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than two years in a place of massage or physical culture studio in which the applicant has received training and experience in physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, and other such subjects; the applicant must furnish with such application his affidavit of previous employment, together with an affidavit of the persons under whom such apprenticeship or practical experience was obtained, specifying that the applicant has satisfied the above requirements; 
M.  If the applicant be a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the foregoing information and exhibits with regard to each employee, agent or partner, general or limited; and 
N.  If the applicant be a corporation, such corporation shall, in addition to the foregoing information, submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, dates of birth, current addresses and current occupations. For any holder of ten percent or more of corporate stock, all information required by this section of license applicants shall also be provided for such stockholder. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 5) 
5.64.070 - License procedures. 
If such application is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required herein, and accompanied by the correct investigative fee, an inspection and investigation shall be conducted. If all requirements of all departments concerned, as well as those qualifications specified herein are met, the license shall be issued by the city manager. In cases where the city manager recommends denial of the license, the applications shall be submitted to the mayor and council for final action. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of one year. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 6) 
5.64.080 - License not transferable—Exceptions—Display of license—Inspections. 
A.  Transferability. All licenses issued hereunder are nontransferable; however, a change of location of a massage establishment may be permitted pursuant to the provisions hereof. 
B.  Change of Location. A change of location of the massage premises shall be approved by the city manager, provided all general ordinances are complied with and the change of location fee of one hundred dollars is first paid. 
C.  Display of License. Every person to whom a license shall have been granted shall display said license in a conspicuous place. 
D.  Inspections. At least four times each year, an inspection of each massage establishment shall be made for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are met. Notice may or may not be given of such inspection, and no warrant shall be required. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 7) 
5.64.090 - Records to be kept by licensee. 
It shall be the duty of any person granted a license hereunder to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at said establishment, the type of treatment administered, and the name of the person of the establishment administering said treatment. Said records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the chief of police of the city, any police officer of the city, the mayor, any members of the city council, the city manager, the city clerk, the sheriff of Henry County or any of his lawful deputies, and the chief of police of Henry County or any of his officers. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 8) 
5.64.100 - Names of employees to be filed with city clerk. 
It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license hereunder to file with the clerk of the city the names of all employees, their home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees with the names of new employees must be filed with the city clerk within three days from the date of any such change. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 9) 
5.64.110 - Patronage of massage parlors by minors. 
A.  Restricted. It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to patronize any massage establishment unless such person carries with him at the time of such patronage a written order directing the treatment to be given signed by a regularly licensed physician or such person's parent or guardian. If consent is given by a parent or guardian, such consent must be signed in the presence of the massage technician or the massage establishment operator. 
B.  Duty of Operator. It shall be the duty of the operator of such massage establishment to determine the age of the persons patronizing such massage establishment, and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such massage establishment. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any operator of a massage establishment or his designated officer, agent or employee to fail to properly check the identification of any patron, which failure results in an underage person receiving a massage in violation of this chapter. For the purposes of this section, the term "identification" shall mean any document issued by any governmental agency, containing a description of the person so identified, such person's photograph and such person's date of birth. The term "identification" shall include, without being limited to, a passport, a military identification card, a driver's license or a State Department of Public Safety identification card. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 10) 
5.64.120 - Requirements. 
The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, clothes or undergarments when in the presence of a massage establishment operator or massage technician. It is unlawful for any person knowingly, in a massage establishment, to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital area of any other person. No massage technician or massage establishment operator shall perform, offer or agree to perform, any act which would require the touching of the patron's sexual or genital area. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 11) 
5.64.130 - Supervision. 
A massage establishment operator shall have the premises supervised at all times when open for business. Any business rendering massages shall have one person who qualifies as a massage technician on the premises at all times while the establishment is open. The massage establishment operator shall personally supervise the business, and shall not violate, or permit others to violate, any applicable provision of this chapter. No person who is not qualified as a technician and licensed shall be allowed to perform a massage or other physical services for any patron in the premises. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 12) 
5.64.140 - Revocation of license. 
A.  No license shall be revoked until after due notice and a hearing shall have been held before the mayor and council to determine just cause for such revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaints against the holder of such license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be held. 
B.  Said notice shall be served upon the license holder by delivering the same personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the license holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. In the event the license holder cannot be found and the service of notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed registered postage fully prepaid, addressed to the license holder at his or her place of business or residence at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 13) 
5.64.150 - Grounds for revocation. 
A.  The license of a massage technician may be revoked upon the following grounds: 
1.  Failure of the licensee to maintain those qualifications required for the initial issuance of the license; 
2.  A court finding that the licensee has violated a federal, state, county or municipal law designed for the maintenance of the public health and safety; 
3.  The original application for licensure or renewal contains materially false information or material omissions; 
4.  The premises are in violation of the building code, or of any of the provisions of Section 5.64.050B; 
5.  The license holder is engaged in the practice of massage under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of like or different name; 
6.  The license holder is found to have committed false, fraudulent, misleading, or deceptive advertising practices; 
7.  The holder has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under Georgia law or such person has been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
8.  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; and 
9.  There has been the occurrence of a fact which would have barred the issuance of the original permit. 
B.  The following acts are prohibited and the license of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
1.  Failure of the holder to maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the license; 
2.  The holder is guilty of employment of any person who is not a licensed massage technician and allowing or permitting such person to administer massage in said establishment; 
3.  The premises in which the massage establishment is located are in violation of any of the federal, state, county or municipal laws designed for the health, protection and safety of the occupants; 
4.  The premises are in violation of the building code, or of any of the provisions of Section 15.64.050B; 
5.  The original application, or renewal, thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
6.  The holder, or any of his employees or agents has been convicted or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or to any charge of incest, sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or the distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under Georgia law, and in connection with the operation of the massage establishment; 
7.  The holder or his employees have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this chapter; 
8.  Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the general public and the customers. 
C.  Any massage technician or massage establishment operator who has his or her or its license revoked shall be disqualified from re-applying for such a license for twelve months immediately following the revocation. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S §§ 1, 2 (part), 8 (part); Ord. 03-11-03B § 3; Ord. 95-2-13a § 14) 
5.64.160 - Disposition of inventory. 
In the event the license of an operator under this chapter is revoked for some violation of this chapter, the mayor shall provide a period of time not to exceed fifteen days for the holder of such license to dispose of his inventory. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 15) 
5.64.170 - Penalty for violations. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be, upon conviction thereof, punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than six months. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 16) 
5.64.180 - Those practicing—Date ordinance becomes effective. 
Any person who is actually engaged as a massage technician, or who operates a massage establishment upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall have ninety days from that date to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 17) 
5.64.190 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of this state, or persons working under the direction of any such persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this chapter apply to barbers, cosmetologists, physical therapists, assistant physical therapists or athletic trainers, lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate from the state, if such profession or business is subject to licensure by the state. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 18) 
5.64.200 - Reciprocity. 
Any person who has been duly licensed in another state to practice massage, which state has maintained a standard or practice substantially the same as that maintained under this chapter and who has been lawfully and continuously engaged in such practice for two or more years immediately before filing his or her application to practice hereunder, and who shall submit a duly attested certificate from the examining board of the state in which he or she is registered, certifying to the fact of his or her registration and of being a person of good moral character, may, upon application and payment of the license fee, and a reasonable investigation thereof, be granted a license to practice in the city. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 19) 
5.64.210 - Fees. 
A.  Each massage establishment shall pay the following fees: 
1.  A one-time application fee of two hundred fifty dollars; 
2.  Occupation tax as required by ordinance. 
B.  Each massage technician shall pay the following fees: 
1.  A one-time application fee of two hundred fifty dollars; 
2.  Occupation tax as required by ordinance. 
(Ord. 03-06-02S § 2 (part); Ord. 95-2-13a § 20) 
Chapter 5.68 - FORTUNETELLING 
Sections: 

5.68.010 - Practice of fortunetelling and other business of like kind prohibited without a valid license. 
It is unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to carry on within the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of the city the business of fortunetelling or carrying on the trade, business or profession of phrenology, clairvoyance, palmistry, handwriting analysis, or other kindred practices or business of like kind or nature as defined in Section 5.68.020 in which the future of any person is foretold or attempted to be foretold unless that person holds a valid unexpired and unrevoked license from the city to engage in such practices. 
(Ord. 95-2-13b § 1) 
5.68.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Clairvoyance" means the power to perceive things that are naturally beyond the range of human senses. 
"Fortunetelling" means the prediction of the future for a fee, gift or donation. 
"Handwriting analysis" means the interpretation of human experience based upon an examination of handwriting or other inscription done by hand for fee, gift or donation. 
"Palmistry" means the art or practice of telling fortunes from the lines, marks and/or patterns of the palms of the hands. 
"Phrenology" means the study of the conformation of the skull based on a belief that it is indicative of mental ability and character. 
(Ord. 95-2-13b § 2) 
5.68.030 - Application for license. 
A.  Any person desiring to practice fortunetelling or other kindred practices as defined above shall make application for a license to the Locust Grove police department on forms to be prepared and approved by the mayor or his designee. 
B.  The applicant shall meet the following requirements prior to being licensed to practice any of the above-defined practices within the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of the city: 
1.  Be over the age of eighteen years; 
2.  Shall not have been convicted of a crime of any grade or any ordinance violation involving the following categories of criminal conduct: larceny, embezzlement, fraudulent conveyancing; perjury and/or false swearing, gambling, deceitful means, artful practices, felonies or other Group I crimes, as defined in the Uniform Crime Reporting Manual, Federal Bureau of Investigation, U.S. Department of Justice, which are reasonably related to the activities regulated in this chapter, within three years of the date of the application for license; 
3.  Allow fingerprints to be made by the Locust Grove police department and a character reference check run on the applicant. Fingerprints must be made at least ten days prior to the issuance of a license to allow for investigation of the applicant; 
4.  Furnish the Locust Grove police department with two photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size two and one-half inches by two and three-fourths inches; and 
5.  Provide three letters of reference as to the good moral character of the applicant, signed by currently qualified and registered voters of good moral character of the county. The letters shall not be required for annual renewals of licenses issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. 95-2-13b § 3) 
5.68.040 - Fees and taxes. 
The business regulatory fee and occupational taxes shall be set by ordinance. 
An application fee of two hundred fifty dollars must be submitted to the city clerk along with the application which will cover the administrative costs, fingerprinting and background check on the applicant. 
(Ord. 95-2-13b § 4) 
5.68.050 - Revocation and suspension of license. 
Any person failing to comply with any provision of this chapter, or such other laws and regulations as may be passed by the council for the conduct defined in Section 5.68.020, shall be subject to having his/her license to conduct such business revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. 95-2-13b § 5) 
5.68.060 - Penalties for violation. 
Any advertising by any means of a business or service described in Section 5.68.020 shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter. 
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars for each offense or confinement in the common jail of Henry County for a period not to exceed sixty days for each offense, or any combination of both. 
(Ord. 95-2-13b § 6) 
Chapter 5.72 - HOTEL-MOTEL TAX[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-11-081, § 1, adopted Nov. 5, 2012, deleted the former Chapter 5.72, §§ 5.72.010—5.72.110, and enacted a new Chapter 5.72 as set out herein. The former Chapter 5.72 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 96-4.8C, §§ 2—12; Ord. No. 09-08-032, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Aug. 3, 2009; Ord. No. 09-089-032, adopted Aug. 3, 2009; Ord. No. 09-10-040, §§ 1—4, adopted Oct. 5, 2009; and Ord. No. 10-12-061, § 2, adopted Dec. 6, 2010. 

5.72.010 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
"City." The city of Locust Grove and, variously, the incorporated territory of Locust Grove, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-50, et seq. 
"City clerk." The duly appointed city clerk of the city or his designee. 
"Due date." The twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
"Estimated tax liability." The lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
"Folio." Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment. 
"Guest room." Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
"Hotel." Any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truck stop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest accommodations and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
"Lodging provider." Any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
"Monthly period." The calendar months of any year. 
"Occupancy." The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
"Occupant." Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
"Permanent resident." Any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than thirty continuous days next preceding such date. 
"Person." Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the state of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
"Rent." The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
"Tax." The tax on occupants imposed by this chapter, as provided for by O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-50, et seq., specifically 48-13-51(b)(2). 
(Ord. No. 12-11-081, § 1, 11-5-12) 
5.72.020 - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of five percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under Section 5.72.040. 
(Ord. No. 12-11-081, § 1, 11-5-12) 
5.72.030 - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under Section 5.72.040. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(a)  Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. 
(b)  An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this subsection. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 12-11-081, § 1, 11-5-12) 
5.72.040 - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the state of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is not subject to this tax. 
(Ord. No. 12-11-081, § 1, 11-5-12) 
5.72.050 - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than thirty days after the date that the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 12-11-081, § 1, 11-5-12) 
5.72.060 - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due Date of Taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and Interest for Failure to Pay Tax by Due Date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or five dollars, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or five dollars, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed twenty-five percent or twenty-five dollars, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of Delinquent Return and Remittance Without Imposing Penalty and Interest; Authority; Requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of Penalty and Interest; Authority. O.C.G.A. Section 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and Section 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for Fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of fifty percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; Remittance; Time of Filing; Lodging Providers Required to File; Contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed two thousand five hundred dollars for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than two thousand five hundred dollars in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than fifty percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of Time of Filing; Authority; Requirements; Remittance; Penalty and Interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than thirty days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for period longer than twelve consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than one hundred percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection Fee Allowed Lodging Providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 12-11-081, § 1, 11-5-12) 
5.72.070 - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of Tax; Authority to Make; Basis of Recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and Interest for Failure to Pay Tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by Section 5.72.060. 
(c)  Notice of Determination; Service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time Within Which Notice of Deficiency Determination to be Mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or Protest of Deficiency Determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-380. 
(Ord. No. 12-11-081, § 1, 11-5-12) 
5.72.080 - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of Gross Receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in Section 5.72.070(c). 
(b)  Penalty and Interest for Failure to Pay Tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by Section 5.72.060. 
(Ord. No. 12-11-081, § 1, 11-5-12) 
5.72.090 - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for Delinquent Tax; Time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging Provider Selling or Quitting Business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within fifteen days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of Successors or Assignees of Lodging Provider to Withhold Tax From Purchase Money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this chapter sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for Failure to Withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for Tax, Penalty or Interest Paid More Than Once or Erroneously or Illegally Collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. No. 12-11-081, § 1, 11-5-12) 
5.72.100 - Administration of ordinance; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of City Clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records Required from Lodging Providers, Etc.; Form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of Records; Audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city clerk shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to Require Reports; Contents. In administration of the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 12-11-081, § 1, 11-5-12) 
5.72.110 - Violations. 
Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by Section 5.72.030 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by Section 5.72.060, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars, nor more than three hundred dollars, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 12-11-081, § 1, 11-5-12) 
Chapter 5.76 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES 
Sections: 

5.76.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
"Alternative tower structure" means man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
"Antenna array" means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. The antenna does not include the support structure defined in this section. 
"Attached wireless communication facility (attached WCF)" means an antenna that is attached to an existing building or structure (attachment structure), which structures shall include but are not limited to utility poles, signs, and water towers, with any accompanying pole or device (attachment device) which attaches the antenna to the existing building or structure and associated connected cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside or outside of the attachment structure. 
"Collocation/site sharing" means use of: 
1.  A common WCF by two or more wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of communications technology; 
2.  A common WCF-site by two or more wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of communications technology; or 
3.  The placement of a WCF on a structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity (i.e., water tower, billboard, etc.). 
"Development standards" means those standards set forth in Section 5.76.040 and Table 5.76.040(1). 
"Equipment facility" means any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a WCF which includes cabinets, shelters, a buildout of an existing structure, pedestals and other similar structures. 
"FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Governing Authority. The city council for the city of Locust Grove, Georgia shall act as the governing authority. 
"Pre-existing towers and antenna arrays" refer to Section 5.76.030 of this chapter. 
"Height" means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
Principal or Accessory Use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an existing antenna array or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of an antenna or tower complies with district development regulation, including but not limited to set-back requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
"Planning and zoning board" means the Henry County municipal planning commission. 
"Public officer" means the Henry County community development director. 
"Review process" means those processes set forth in Section 5.76.050. 
"Setback" means the required distance from the property line of the parcel on which the WCF is located to the support structure base. 
Support Structure. (This shall also be referred to as "tower"). "Support structure" means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antenna arrays, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy tower, or monopole tower. The term shall include radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, PCS service towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
(Ord. 98-8.10 (part)) 
5.76.020 - Purpose and goals. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the siting of WCFs. 
The goals of this chapter are to: 
A.  Provide a range of locations for WCFs in a variety of zones; 
B.  Within each zone, provide clear performance standards addressing the siting of WCFs; 
C.  Encourage the location of WCFs in non-residential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
D.  Encourage the location of WCFs on existing structures, including utility poles, signs, water towers, buildings, and other WCFs where feasible; 
E.  Encourage collocation and site sharing of new and existing WCFs; 
F.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that harmonizes the visual impact of the towers and antennas with the existing natural and/or built environment; 
G.  Facilitate the use of public property and structures for WCFs. 
(Ord. 98-8.10 (part)) 
5.76.030 - Applicability. 
A.  Public property. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the governing authority. 
B.  Amateur Radio — Receive-Only Antennas. This chapter shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under thirty-five feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
C.  Pre-Existing Towers and Antennas. Any tower or antenna having a properly issued permit prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter, other than the requirements of Sections 5.76.040 J and K. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this chapter as "pre-existing towers" or "pre-existing antenna arrays." 
(Ord. 98-8.10 (part)) 
5.76.040 - Development standards. 
(See Table 5.76.040 for quick reference). 
General Guidelines and Requirements. The standards set forth in this section shall govern the location of all towers and the installation of all antennas. Should certain standards be contrary to applicable state and/or federal regulations or laws, such standards shall be subject to waiver or variance. Further, the governing authority may act to waive these standards, after an administrative review, if it determines that the goals of this chapter are better served thereby. 
A.  Height Standards. 
1.  Attached WCFs. Attached WCFs shall not add more than twenty feet in height to the existing building or structure to which it is attached (attachment structure). 
2.  WCFs with Support Structures. Residential-agricultural (RA) zoning district: In any residential-agricultural zoning district (RA), the maximum height for a WCF shall be one hundred fifty feet for two tenants, one hundred eighty feet for three or more tenants. The requirement regarding the number of tenants shall be satisfied upon proof that the tower is structurally designed to accommodate the required number of antenna arrays. 
3.  Single-family residential (R-1, R-2, R-3) zoning districts: In all single-family residential zoning districts (R-1, R-2, R-3), the maximum height for a WCF shall be seventy-five feet. 
4.  Two-family residential (RD) zoning district: In all two-family residential zoning districts (RD), the maximum height for a WCF shall be seventy-five feet. 
5.  Multiple-family residential (RN) zoning district: In all multiple-family residential zoning districts (RM), the maximum height for a WCF shall be ninety feet. 
6.  Mobile home development (RMH) zoning district: In all mobile home development districts (RMH), the maximum height of a WCF shall be ninety feet. 
7.  Office and Institutional (OI) zoning district: In any office and institutional zoning district (OI), the maximum height shall be one hundred twenty feet. 
8.  Neighborhood Commercial (C-1) zoning district: In any neighborhood commercial zoning district (C-1), the maximum height shall be ninety feet. 
9.  General Commercial (C-2) zoning district: In any general commercial zoning district (C-2), the maximum height of a WCF shall be one hundred fifty feet. 
10.  Heavy commercial (C-3) zoning district: In any heavy commercial zoning district (C-3) the maximum height of a WCF shall be one hundred eighty feet. 
11.  Light industrial (M-l) zoning district: In any light industrial zoning district (M-I), the maximum height of a WCF shall be one hundred ninety feet. 
12.  Heavy Industrial (M-2) zoning district: In any heavy industrial zoning district, the maximum height of a WCF shall be two hundred feet. 
Table 5.76.040  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR WCFs 

 
1  Attached WCFs an any zone are limited in height to twenty feet from the top of the attachment structure. 
2  The antenna array for an attached WCF is exempt from the setback requirements of this section and from the setbacks for the zone in which they are located, provided, no such antenna array shall extend more than eight feet horizontally from the attachment structure. 
3  For C-2, C-3, M-l, and M-2 zoning districts, the WCF setback shall be fifty percent of the height of tower, plus one foot per each two feet of tower height over seventy-five feet when the property abuts a property zoned residential (RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RD, RM and/or RMH). 
4.  Landscaping and buffer requirements are in addition to the underlying zone requirements. The antenna array for an attached WCF is exempt from the landscaping and buffer requirements of this section. 
5.  In the RA zoning district, a WCF with two tenants shall be maximum of one hundred fifty feet, or one hundred eighty feet with three or more tenants. The requirement regarding the number of tenants shall be satisfied upon proof that the tower is structurally designed to accommodate the required number of antenna arrays. 
B.  Setbacks 
1.  Attached WCFs. Antenna arrays for attached WCFs are exempt from the setback standards of this section and from the setbacks for the zone in which they are located. An attached WCF antenna array may extend up to eight feet horizontally beyond the edge of the attachment structure so long as the antenna array does not encroach upon an adjoining parcel. 
2.  WCFs with Support Structures. The following setbacks requirements shall apply to all WCFs with support structures: 
a.  In residential (RA, R-l, R-2, R-3, RD, RM, RMH, office and institutional (OI) and neighborhood commercial (C-1) zoning districts, towers must be set back a minimum of fifty percent of tower height, plus one additional foot for each two feet of tower height in excess of seventy-five feet. 
b.  Towers must be set back a minimum or twenty-five feet from any property line in the C-2 zoning district. Where property abuts a residentially-zoned parcel, then the setback shall be a minimum of fifty percent of tower height, plus one additional foot for each two feet of tower height in excess of seventy-five feet. 
c.  Towers must be set back a minimum of twenty feet from any property line in C-3, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts. Where property abuts a residentially-zoned parcel, then the setback shall be a minimum of fifty percent of tower height, plus one additional foot for each two feet of tower height in excess of seventy-five feet. 
C.  Landscaping and Buffer Requirements. 
1.  WCFs shall be landscaped in accordance with the landscape requirements contained in Sections 3-7-216 through 3-7-227 of the Henry County Zoning Ordinance, except for additional requirements stated herein. 
2.  Landscaping and buffer requirements can be waived where the WCF applicant makes other means of screening the support structure base and adjacent equipment-facilities (i.e., opaque fencing, etc.). The waiver shall be in writing by the community development director pending an administrative review of development plans. 
3.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the extent feasible; provided, however, that vegetation that causes interference with the antennas or inhibits access to the equipment facility may be trimmed. 
4.  Existing vegetation on site may be used in lieu of required landscaping where approved by the community development director. 
5.  Landscaping shall be confined to the leased area of the WCF wherever feasible. 
6.  Additional Landscaping and Buffer Requirements. 
a.  In single-family and two-family residential zoning districts (RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, RD, RM and/or RMH), a ten-foot perimeter buffer is required, with a minimum of one tree per twenty lineal feet of buffer, with a minimum of fifty percent being shade trees. Retention of existing trees on site in order to meet this requirement is encouraged. Grass or other ground cover species shall be planted on all areas of the buffer strip required which are not covered by other landscape material. 
b.  In the remaining office, commercial, and industrial districts (OI, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 and/or M-2), an additional ten-foot buffer shall be required, with landscaping provided according to Section 5.76.040(C)(1). 
7.  Maintenance. It will be the responsibility of the owner/tenant to keep all landscaping material (as part of the landscaped area) free from disease and properly maintained in order to fulfill the purpose for which it was established. The owners of the property, and any tenant on the property where buffers and landscaping are required, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping materials. Such maintenance shall include all actions necessary to keep the buffer and landscape areas free from litter and debris, to keep plantings healthy, and to keep planting areas neat in appearance. Any vegetation that constitutes part of the buffer or landscaping shall be replaced in the event it dies. 
D.  Aesthetics, Placement, Materials and Color. 
1.  Attached WCFs shall have both antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment that are of a neutral color identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
2.  WCFs with support structures shall consist of towers with a galvanized steel finish, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, in the C-3, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. In the remaining zoning districts (RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, RD, RM, RMH, OI, C-1, C-2), WCFs with support structures shall consist of towers with a galvanized steel finish that, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, shall be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. At a tower site, the design of the building and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. WCFs with support structures shall be of the monopole variety except when providers can document and demonstrate need for lattice-type towers. 
E.  Separation Requirement. In zoning districts other than general/heavy commercial and industrial (C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2), WCFs over one hundred and fifty feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter of a mile from any existing WCF that is over one hundred and fifty feet in height. This requirement may be waived upon evidence provided to the community development director by the applicant that the nearest tower cannot support any new antenna arrays. 
F.  Lighting. All WCFs shall be lighted consistent with FAA regulations for tower illumination regardless of height. Any objection by the applicant based on FAA restrictions shall be presented in writing to the community development director. 
G.  Noise. No equipment shall be operated at a WCF so as to produce noise which would constitute a nuisance based on local or state laws, except for in emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where the noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis, not to exceed fourteen days. No generator shall be used for regular WCF operations prior to commercial power being delivered to the site. 
H.  Security Fencing. WCFs with support structures shall be enclosed by a security fence of neutral color not less than six feet in height. The support structure shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
I.  Radio Frequency Emissions. The Federal Telecommunications Act or 1996 (FTA) gives the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) sole jurisdiction of the field of regulation of radio frequency (RF) emissions and WCFs which meet the FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of RF impacts. 
J.  Federal Requirements. All WCFs must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the WCFs governed by this chapter such antenna arrays and/or support structures into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective dates of such standards and regulations. Failure to bring WCFs into compliance with such revised standards and regulation shall constitute grounds for the removal of the WCF at the owner's expense by utilizing the bond required in Section 5.76.080. 
K.  Structural Integrity. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision F Standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures" (or equivalent), as amended from time to time. A letter stamped by an engineer certified in the state shall be required stating that the WCF and support structure meets or exceeds all applicable requirements set forth herein. If, upon inspection, the governing authority concludes a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the tower's owner, the owner shall have thirty days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty days, the governing authority may remove such tower at the owner's expense by utilizing the bond required in Section 5.76.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-8.10 (part)) 
5.76.050 - Review process. 
A.  General. The applicable development standards referred to herein are those set forth in Section 5.76.040 and Table 5.76.040 of that section. 
B.  Attached WCFs. 
1.  Attached WCFs in commercial and industrial zones (OI, C-l, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2) that meet the development standards are permitted outright; 
2.  Attached WCFs in commercial and industrial zones that fail to meet the development standards shall undergo an administrative review by the community development director; 
3.  Attached WCFs in residential zones (RA, R-1 R-2, R-3, RD, RM, RMH) shall undergo an administrative review by the community development director; 
4.  Attached WCFs in residential zones (RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, RD, RM, RMH) that fail to meet the development standards shall require a conditional use permit by a public hearing of the Henry County planning and zoning board and the governing authority. 
C.  WCFs with Support Structures. 
1.  WCFs with support structures an general/heavy commercial and industrial zones (C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2) that meet the development standards are permitted outright. 
2.  WCFs with support structures an residential zones (RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, RD, RM, RMH) and office/institutional and neighborhood commercial zones (OI, C-1) shall undergo an administrative review by the community development director. 
3.  WCFs with support structures in all zoning districts that fail to meet the development standards shall require a conditional use permit by a public hearing of the Henry County planning and zoning board and the governing authority. 
D.  WCFs on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Henry County board of commissioners, Henry County water and sewerage authority, Henry County board of education, or the governing authority pursuant to Section 5.76.030 of this chapter are permitted outright. 
E.  Temporary WCFs for a term not to exceed ninety days, with a possible ninety-day extension with approval of the community development director, are permitted outright. 
(Ord. 98-8.10 (part)) 
5.76.060 - Approval procedures. 
A.  Permitted Outright. Where a WCF is permitted outright, only a building permit is required. 
B.  Administrative Review. 
1.  Review of WCFs under this section will be conducted by the community development department upon application for a building permit for the WCF. 
2.  Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the community development director and provide the information set forth in Section 5.76.060(D)(2) of this chapter (Conditional Use Permit, Information Required) along with an administrative review fee of three hundred fifty dollars. 
3.  The community development director shall respond to each application within forty-five days after receiving it by either approving or denying the application. 
4.  In connection with any such administrative approval, the community development director may, in order to encourage site sharing, administratively waive any zoning district setback requirement or landscape requirement by up to fifty percent. 
5.  If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant may appeal said denial in accordance with the provisions of Section 3-7-271 through Section 3-7-272 of the zoning ordinance (appeals of administrative decisions). 
C.  Specific Administratively Approved Uses. The following uses may be approved by the community development director after conducting an administrative review: 
1.  Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other free standing nonresidential structure) that is less than seventy feet in height, so long as such addition does not add more than twenty feet to the height of the existing structure; 
2.  Installing an antenna array on an existing tower of any height, including a preexisting tower and further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna; 
3.  Installing an attached WCF pursuant to Section 5.76.050B of this chapter; 
4.  Installing a WCF with support structure pursuant to Section 5.76.050C of this chapter; 
5.  Modifications as stated in Section 5.76.100 of this chapter; 
D.  Conditional Use Permit. 
1.  General. The following provisions shall govern the assurance of conditional use permits: 
a.  If the WCF is not a permitted use under Section 5.76.050 B, C, and D, of this chapter; or not permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to Section 5.76.050(B)(2) and (3); Section 5.76.050(C)(2) or Section 5.76.050(E) of this chapter, then a conditional use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all specified zoning districts. 
b.  In granting a special use permit, the governing authority may impose conditions to the extent the governing authority concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
2.  Information Required. Each applicant requesting a conditional use permit under this chapter shall submit the following: 
a.  Plans. The applicant shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the governing authority to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter, provided however, that the applicant need not retain a licensed landscape architect to prepare the landscape plan, and information regarding radio frequency coverage may be submitted by a qualified, but not licensed, radio frequency engineer retained or employed by the applicant. Any information of a structural engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
b.  Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for an antenna or tower shall provide to the community development director an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the governing authority or within one-quarter mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The community development director may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or conditional use permits under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; provided, however, the community development director is not, by sharing this information, an any way representing or warranting such sites are available or suitable. 
c.  Collocation. Pursuant to goals in Section 5.76.020, each applicant shall provide a statement indicating intent to allow shared use of the tower and how others will be accommodated, if the height of the tower allows for said collocation. 
3.  Reviewing Bodies. Review of WCFs under this section will be conducted by the Henry County planning and zoning board and the governing authority. 
4.  Public Notice. Notice shall be given for this review in accordance with the procedures established in Section 3-7-314 of the zoning ordinance for notice of applications and hearings before the planning and zoning board and the governing authority. 
5.  Hearing. The governing body shall render a decision on the conditional use request in accordance with procedures established in Sections 3-7-291 through 3-7-293 of the zoning ordinance adopted by the governing authority in addition to Section 5.76.060(D)(6) of this chapter. 
6.  Factors Considered in Granting Conditional Use Permits. The planning and zoning board and the governing authority shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit, although either body may waive, or in certain instances, increase the burden on the applicant on one or more of these criteria if either body concludes that the goals of this chapter are better served thereby: 
a.  Height of the proposed tower; 
b.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
c.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Surrounding topography; 
e.  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
f.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
g.  Ability of the support structure and/or for collocation with future wireless communications providers; 
h.  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
i.  Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures as listed in subsection (D)(7) of this section. 
7.  Availability of Suitable Existing Towers or Other Structures. No conditional use permit for a new tower shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the planning and zoning board and the governing authority that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
a.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements; 
b.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements; 
c.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment; 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; 
e.  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable; 
f.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
8.  Findings (Denials). All denials rendered by either the planning and zoning board or the governing authority under a conditional use permit shall be supported by written findings of fact and conclusions of law based upon substantial evidence in the record. 
9.  Timing of Decision. The planning and zoning board and/or the governing authority shall render its decision within ninety days of application, unless either the board or the governing authority can demonstrate that more time is reasonably required due to extenuating circumstances. 
(Ord. 98-8.10 (part)) 
5.76.070 - Notice to adjacent property owners. 
The applicant is responsible for notifying all adjacent residential property owners of their pending applications for the location of WCFs and for notifying all adjacent property owners for location of WCFs requiring a conditional use permit. The provider shall notify the necessary property owners no less than fifteen days of the date of the public hearing for the conditional use permit and no less than seven days after the filing date for an administrative review by the community development director. Notice shall be given in the form of a certified letter, with return receipts provided to the community development director as evidence of notification. Other forms of notice shall be approved by the community development director in lieu of the certified letter requirement. 
(Ord. 98-8.10 (part)) 
5.76.080 - Notification and removal of abandoned WCFs. 
A.  Notification. Each wireless communications provider shall notify the community development director of their operational and nonoperational WCFs at the end of the calendar year (December thirty-first). The director shall maintain and update a list of these facilities for geographical information systems (GIS) purposes, and for use in collocation/site-sharing, and for taking necessary actions for the removal of abandoned facilities as established below. 
B.  Removal of Abandoned Facilities. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of ninety days shall be considered abandoned, and the owner or such antenna or tower shall remove same within thirty days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. The owner of the tower shall have an affirmative duty to notify the Governing Authority at any time the tower shall become unused. 
C.  Construction, Repair or Maintenance of Cables. During the construction, repair or maintenance of cables, said cables cannot be left on the ground surface for any more than a five-day period. 
D.  Bond Required. The communications service provider, or the tower facility provider shall provide a bond in the form of a letter of credit drawn on a Georgia bank with an amount of twenty thousand dollars to the community development director for the removal of such structure for the lesser of the length of the lease (if applicable), including extensions, or twenty years, whichever is greater. Said bond shall be presented at the time of application for a building permit and shall be renewable at periods not to exceed five years. 
(Ord. 98-8.10 (part)) 
5.76.090 - Nonconforming WCFs. 
WCFs in existence on the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter (nonconforming WCFs) are subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Nonconforming WCFs may continue in use for the purpose now used, but may not be expanded without complying with this chapter, except as further provided in this section. 
B.  Nonconforming WCFs may add additional antennas (belonging to the same carrier or other carriers) subject to administrative review in Section 5.76.060 of this chapter. 
C.  Nonconforming WCFs which are hereafter damaged or destroyed by less than fifty percent (of the replacement value) due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored to their former use, location, and physical dimensions subject to obtaining a building permit therefore, but without otherwise complying with this chapter. A nonconforming WCF that is damaged or destroyed by more than fifty percent of the estimated replacement value shall be made conforming with this chapter unless waived by the public officer or the governing authority. 
D.  The owner of any nonconforming WCF may replace, repair, rebuild, and/or extend such WCF in order to improve the structural integrity of the facility, to allow the facility to accommodate collocated antennas or facilities, or to upgrade the facilities to current engineering, technological, or communications standards, without having to conform to the provisions of this chapter, so long as such facilities are not increased in height by more than ten percent (cumulatively) and/or setbacks are not decreased by more than ten percent (cumulatively). 
(Ord. 98-8.10 (part)) 
5.76.100 - Modifications to existing facilities or pre-existing facilities which meet the requirements of this chapter. 
A.  Minor Modifications. Minor modifications to WCFs permitted under this chapter shall be approved under an administrative review by the community development director (see Section 5.76.060 B and 5.76.060 C of this chapter). Minor modifications are as follows: 
1.  The addition of no more than three antenna arrays to any existing WCF, so long as the cumulative effect of the addition of the R/antenna arrays adds no more than twenty-five feet in height to the WCF; 
2.  An increase in height of the support structure which is no greater than ten percent; 
3.  A decrease an setbacks by no more than ten percent. 
B.  Major Modifications. Major modifications to WCFs permitted under this chapter shall be approved under an administrative review by the community development director as stated in Section 5.76.060 B and C of this chapter. Major modifications are any modifications that exceed or differ from the definition of minor modification. 
(Ord. 98-8.10 (part)) 
5.76.110 - Violations—Penalties. 
It is unlawful to violate or fail to comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter. Any person who violates or fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, confinement in the Henry County Jail for a term not to exceed sixty days, or both, for each separate violation. 
(Ord. 98-8.10 (part)) 
Chapter 5.80 - REPORTING OF SALES AND USE TAXES* 
Sections: 

5.80.010 - Reporting of sales and use taxes. 
Commencing March 1, 1999, and upon each subsequent filing date thereafter, each person, firm, corporation, partnership, limited liability company and any other entity that holds a business license in the city, and is required to pay sales and use tax under the laws of the state, or is required to file sales and use tax reporting forms (State Form ST-3 and ST-3PD) with the state, shall file with the city a copy of each sales and use tax return or report filed with the state, together with a copy of their sales and use tax certificate. Said documents shall be filed with the city on or before the date that same as due to be filed with the Department of Revenue of the state of Georgia. 
(Ord. 99-2.8B § 1 (part)) 
5.80.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, limited liability company failing to file copy of sales and use tax return or form with the city as provided in Section 5.76.010 of this chapter shall be fined a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars for each violation. Penalties provided herein shall be in addition to any other penalties, civil or criminal, which may be applicable. 
(Ord. 99-2.8B § 1 (part)) 
Chapter 5.82 - BODY ART STUDIOS, ARTISTS, AND OPERATORS[5] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-12-062, § I, adopted Dec. 6, 2010, repealed the former Chapter 5.82, §§ 5.82.010—5.82.050, and enacted a new Chapter 5.82 as set out herein. The former Chapter 5.82 pertained to tattoo studios, artists and operators and derived from Ord. 02-8.05B, §§ 2—6. 

5.82.010 - Purpose. 
The body art studios and body artist regulations are adopted for the purpose of establishing reasonable standards for individuals performing body art procedures and the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards are designed to promote the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving body art services within the city limits of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.020 - Exemptions. 
These rules shall not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. Ch. 43-34, or a technician acting under the direct on-site supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in these rules shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless, the context clearly requires otherwise. 
A.  "Body art" means the practice of physical body alteration by permitted establishments and by licensed operators using, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. Body art does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by the Georgia State Medical Board, which shall not be performed in a body art studio. Body art does not include the painting of the skin with tempera or temporary, nonindelible inks, paints, or dyes. Body art does not include piercing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with presterilized, single-use stud and clasp ear piercing systems. 
B.  "Body art studio" means any permanent building or structure in a properly-zoned commercial or industrial property constructed on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city business permit or license (be it a limited license or unlimited license), wherein a body artist performs body art. 
C.  "Body art studio permit" means the authorization granted by the board of health to the owner to operate a body art studio as stated in Chapter 3-12, Sections 3-12-91 through 3-12-129 of the Code of Ordinances of Henry County, Georgia. Such permit is the property of the Henry County Board of Health and is a requirement for obtaining a license with the city of Locust Grove. 
D.  "Body artist" means any person who performs body art. 
E.  "Body artist license" means the license granted by the city to perform body art within the city limits of Locust Grove within either a limited or unlimited licensed body art studio. 
F.  "Body artist permit" means the authorization granted by the board of health to the person practicing body art as stated in Chapter 3-12, Sections 3-12-91 through 3-12-129 of the Code of Ordinances of Henry County, Georgia. Such permit is the property of the Henry County Board of Health. 
G.  "Body piercing" means puncturing or penetration of the skin or mucosa of a person with any sharp instrument and/or the insertion of jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening. 
H.  "Cosmetic tattooing" means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa. Cosmetic tattooing shall include permanent cosmetics, micro-pigmentation, permanent color technology, and micro-pigment implantation. 
I.  "Board of health" means the Henry County Board of Health or its duly authorized representatives. 
J.  "Currently licensed health care professional" means those professionals licensed by the state of Georgia to perform health care services and includes, but is not limited to, licensed physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
K.  "Department" means the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia. 
L.  "Limited License" means a license issued by the city to a body art studio with no more than two parlor areas where such business is collocated within a business of either a hair salon, barber shop, and/or nail salon and where such revenues from body art is no greater than fifty percent of the overall revenues of the combination all operating businesses and where said businesses are not physically separated by any wall, entrance, or other type of barrier giving the appearance of two separate businesses. 
M.  "Owner" means the person, partnership, corporation, association, or any other form of business organization that owns, maintains, or controls a body art studio and who is responsible for the operation of the studio. 
N.  "Parlor" means the actual room of the body art studio where the body artist performs procedures. 
O.  "Sanitary" means free of visible debris, residue, or contamination, and with reduced microbial contaminants. 
P.  "Tattoo" means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa and includes the definition of tattoo as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1(1) and as may hereafter be amended. The term "tattoo" also includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. 
Q.  "Unlimited License" means a license issued by the city to a body art studio whose revenues exceed fifty percent of any combination of businesses, or who has more than two parlors for the operation by body artist, or whose sole business may be physically separated from any other business for the purpose of body art. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.040 - Scope of regulations. 
A.  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the board of health, the department, and state law. 
B.  The requirements of these rules shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, regulatory provisions of local, state, or federal law and shall not authorize violations of said other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.050 - Body art studio owner. 
A.  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-40, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and with the applicable rules of the Henry County Board of Health, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes and rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
B.  Prior to application to the city for a body art studio license, the body art studio owner shall adopt and submit to the Henry County Health Department a written statement of policies and procedures of the body art studio showing compliance with the following: 
1.  No person under the age of eighteen shall perform body art procedures on individuals unless under the direct on-site supervision of a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. Ch. 43-34. 
2.  Body artist shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. 
3.  No person shall perform body art procedures on an individual who is or reasonably appears to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or other stimulants or depressants, or is of unsound mind or body. 
4.  No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art studio. 
5.  No tattoo procedure shall be performed on a person under the age of eighteen except by a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. Ch. 43-34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such physician or osteopath with the written consent of a parent or guardian. 
6.  No body-piercing procedure shall be performed on a person under the age of eighteen without written consent and proof of valid state-issued identification of a parent or guardian. A copy of the consent form and proof of identification shall be maintained in the client's record. The parent or guardian must be present when the piercing procedure is performed. 
7.  No tattoo procedure shall be performed on any person within one inch of any part of the eye socket of such person. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.060 - Type of body art licenses. 
A.  Limited licenses may be issued by the city to those body art studios meeting the requirements of this chapter that are part of another operating business consisting of a hair salon, nail salon, or barber shop where such business is limited in scope to no more than two body artists and/or parlors and where revenues from the body art business are less than or equal to fifty percent of the total revenues of the body art studio and respective hair salon, nail salon, or barber shop. Typical activities in a limited licensee would include, but not limited to, cosmetic tattooing and minor tattooing or body piercings. 
B.  Unlimited licenses may be issued by the city to those body art studios meeting the requirements of this chapter that are typically stand-alone businesses that employ more than two body artists and/or have more than two parlors for tattooing, body piercing, and other similar activities as permitted herein. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.070 - Body art studio license required. 
A.  The owner of each body art studio shall obtain a valid body art studio license from the city prior to beginning operation. Body art studios shall renew their permit annually in accordance with Sections 5.82.090 through 5.82.090 herein. 
B.  To be eligible for a new body art studio permit or a renewal permit, a body art studio must be in compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to practice body art procedures unless such procedures are performed in a body art studio operating under a valid body art studio permit issued by the Henry County Board of Health and a valid body art studio license issued by the city. 
D.  The holder of a body art studio license shall only hire, employ, or use individuals to perform body art who have complied with the applicable requirements of this chapter. 
E.  The body art studio license shall be displayed on the premises and conspicuously displayed in public view. Licenses shall not be defaced or altered in any manner. A body art studio shall not post a reproduction of a license unless the city has marked it "Duplicate." 
F.  All body art studio license issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable. 
G.  The body art studio license shall be returned to the city upon suspension or revocation by the city or upon suspension or revocation of a body art studio permit issued by the Henry County Board of Health Environmental Health Section within seven days of the date of suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.080 - Application for body art studio license. 
A.  The application for a body art studio license or for the renewal of a body art studio license shall be made on forms provided by the city at least thirty days prior to the anticipated date of opening. 
B.  Any application for a new body art studio license or for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall be sworn to by the applicant as true and correct. 
C.  The application for a body art studio shall include: 
1.  All existing body art studios shall provide a drawing of the studio, including the location of all furnishings and equipment; 
2.  All new body art studios shall provide a scaled drawing of the studio, including the location of all furnishings and equipment; 
3.  A zoning certification obtained from the community development director. The applicant shall comply with all applicable zoning, building, safety, fire, and other local codes and requirements; 
4.  A copy of the certificate of occupancy for the studio; 
5.  A complete description of all body art services which will be provided in the body art studio; 
6.  The full or legal name under which the body art studio is conducted; 
7.  The address of the body art studio; 
8.  The license type (limited license or unlimited license) being applied for by the owner of the body art studio; 
9.  If the owner leases the location, the name and current address of the landlord; 
10.  The name and home address of the owner; if the owner of the body art studio is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the owner is a corporation, the date and place of incorporation and the name and address of its registered agent in the state; or if the owner is any other type of association, the names of the principals of the association; 
11.  Two photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size two and one-half inches by two and three-quarters inches; 
12.  A list containing the full names and home addresses of all employees and staff who will be working in the body art studio; 
13.  A copy of the body art studio permit application presented to the Henry County Board of Health; 
14.  A copy of the body art studio permit as issued by the Henry County Board of Health; 
15.  An acknowledgement signed by the owner acknowledging that the owner has read and understands these rules; and 
16.  Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the city. 
D.  The applicant shall submit a nonrefundable application fee as set by the city council. The application fee shall be waived for any body art studio that is legally permitted by the city for operation prior to the adoption of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.090 - Application for renewal. 
A.  At least thirty days prior to the expiration of a body art studio license, the owner shall submit an application to the city for a renewal of the body art studio license. 
B.  The application shall include an updated drawing of the body art studio according to Henry County Board of Health regulations for renewal. 
C.  The application shall also include all information as described in subsection 5.82.070(C)(5)—(16). 
D.  For an existing limited license, the application shall also include the revenue of the body art studio portion and the overall revenues of the combined businesses (body art studio and the respective hair salon, nail salon, or barber shop). 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.100 - Issuance of body art studio permits and fees. 
A.  The city may issue a body art studio license to an owner after determining that the studio is in compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of this chapter and with all requirements prescribed by the Henry County Board of Health. 
B.  A body art studio shall submit an application for a new body art studio license when any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The studio is remodeled, renovated, or expanded; 
2.  There is a change in the legal ownership of the body art studio; or 
3.  An existing facility is moved or relocated. 
C.  Body art studio permits shall automatically expire on December 31 of each year. 
D.  Prior to the issuance of a body art studio permit, the owner must pay the applicable permit fee. Body art studio permit fees shall not be prorated. 
E.  No permit shall be issued to any owner to perform body art procedures in any area of Henry County that is zoned for any type of residential use by Henry County's zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.110 - Denial, suspension, or revocation of the body art studio license. 
A.  Upon recommendation or official action of the administration department and/or the city council, a body art studio license issued pursuant to any provision of this article may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the city, and considered null and void, if: 
1.  The application for a body art studio license contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
2.  The premises covered by the permit are found to be in violation of any applicable provision of this chapter, Henry County Board of Health, or other state or federal law; 
3.  The studio is determined to be a threat or nuisance to public health, safety, or welfare; 
4.  The owner or body artist violated the provision of this chapter; or 
5.  Violations of the conditions of the permit are committed. 
B.  After a body art studio license has been revoked, a valid license shall not be issued until all violations have ceased and all changes, alteration, additions, or improvements comply with all requirements of this code as determined by the Henry County Board of Health and the city council. 
C.  No body art studio license shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this article to any applicant if within twelve months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this article, the same applicant requesting a license has been denied a permit based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material fact in any application. 
D.  Any person materially affected by this decision may be appealed to the city council by filing with the city clerk and written notice requesting appeal within forty-five days of the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.120 - Body art studio, where permitted. 
A.  Limited license body art studios are permitted within the general commercial (C-2 or its equivalent) and/or the heavy commercial (C-3 or its equivalent) zoning districts within the city. 
B.  Unlimited license body art studios are permitted only within the light manufacturing (M-1 or its equivalent) zoning district within the city. 
C.  No body art studios are permitted within any area of the city designated for central business district, mixed use neighborhood, or mixed historic neighborhood by the current Henry County/Cities Joint Comprehensive Plan regardless of current underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.130 - Application to existing businesses. 
The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all body art studios whether the studios were established before or after the effective date of these rules. Any body art studio in business on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six months of the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.140 - Body art not allowed in mobile, transitory facilities. 
Body art shall not be allowed to occur in automobiles, mobile, transitory, or other non-fixed facilities. Such non-fixed facilities include mobile homes, tents, recreational vehicles, and trailers. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.150 - Body art studio facility requirements; minimum floor plan, front window visibility; hours of operation. 
A.  The body art studio shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained so as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers and staff. 
B.  The body art studio floor plan shall be approved by the Henry County Board of Health. 
C.  Front windows of a body art establishment may not be more than thirty percent opaque in tinting or reflectivity and shall be kept clear of signage, stickers and clutter to obscure visibility into the premises beyond what is allowed by the city's regulation on signage. 
D.  The body art studio shall operate between the hours of seven a.m. to eleven p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of seven a.m. to eleven fifty-nine p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.160 - Body art studio inspection. 
A.  The premises of any body art studio shall be available for review and examination by the board of health and properly identified representatives of the city at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with rules of the board of health and with the regulations of this chapter. 
B.  If an individual becomes aware of a licensed body art studio that is in violation of this chapter, or other state or federal law, they may contact the city and/or the Henry County Board of Health. The name, address, telephone number, and all other identifying information of the reporting individual will remain confidential, unless required to be disclosed by law. 
C.  If an individual becomes aware of an unlicensed individual or facility that performs, or has performed body art procedures, they may contact the city and/or the board of health. The name, address, telephone number, and all other identifying information of the reporting individual will remain confidential, unless required to be disclosed by law. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.170 - Body artist license. 
A.  No person may perform body art without first obtaining a body artist license. Body artists shall renew their permit annually. 
B.  A body artist permit shall not be eligible for renewal unless all requirements of these rules are met. 
C.  The body artist's license shall be displayed in the body artist's parlor. 
D.  All body artist licenses issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable. 
E.  A body artist permit shall be returned to the city if it is suspended or revoked. 
F.  Proof of current permit by the board of health shall be permanently displayed with the artist's license by the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.180 - Application for a body artist license. 
A.  Each body artist shall submit to the city section an application for a body artist license. 
B.  The application for a body artist license shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall not be considered accepted unless complete in all respects, including the payment of any fees required. Application fees shall be set by the city council. 
C.  Application for a body artist license shall include the following information concerning the body artist: 
1.  Full legal name; 
2.  All aliases; 
3.  Copy of a valid driver's license or valid state-issued photo identification; 
4.  Home address; 
5.  Gender; 
6.  Mailing address; 
7.  Home phone number; 
8.  Training and/or experience; 
9.  Evidence of current certifications; 
10.  Copy of body artist permit by the Henry County Board of Health; and 
11.  Physician report of physical examination and Hepatitis B vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.190 - Issuance of body artist permit and fees. 
A.  The city may issue a body art studio license to an owner after determining that the studio is in compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of this chapter and with all requirements prescribed by the Henry County Board of Health. 
B.  Body artist licenses shall automatically expire on December 31 of each year. 
C.  Prior to the issuance of a body artist license, the body artist must pay the applicable permit fee. Body artist license fees shall not be prorated. 
D.  At least thirty days prior to the expiration of a body artist license, the body artist shall submit an application for the renewal to the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.200 - Application to existing body artist. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all body artists, whether the body artist began performing body art before or after the effective date of these rules. Any body artist established on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six months of the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.210 - Denial, suspension, or revocation of body artist license. 
A.  Upon recommendation or official action of the board of health, a body artist permit issued pursuant to any provision of this article may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the board of health, and considered null and void, if: 
1.  The application for a body artist permit contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
2.  The body artist violated the conditions of the permit; or 
3.  The body artist committed any violation of this article. 
B.  After a body artist license has been revoked, a valid license shall not be issued until all violations have ceased and the body artist complies with all requirements of this article as determined by city and the board of health. 
C.  No body artist license shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this article to any applicant if within twelve months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this chapter, the same applicant requesting a license has been denied based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material fact in any application. 
D.  Any person materially affected by this decision may be appealed to the city council by filing with the city clerk and written notice requesting appeal within forty-five days of the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.220 - Prohibited acts. 
A.  No person shall tattoo the body of an individual who is under eighteen years of age, unless the person performing the tattoo procedure is a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. Ch. 43-34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath in compliance with O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-9. 
B.  No person shall pierce the body, with the exception of ear lobes, of any person under the age of eighteen for the purpose of allowing the insertion of earrings, jewelry, or similar objects into the body, unless the minor's legal parent, custodian, or guardian with proper identification is present and signs a written consent form provided by the body art studio. The consent form must indicate the methods and part(s) of the minor's body upon which the body art procedure is performed. 
C.  No person shall tattoo the body of any person within one inch of the nearest part of the eye socket of such person. 
D.  No person shall perform body art procedures on an individual who is, or reasonably appears to be, under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or other stimulants or depressants, or is of unsound mind or body. 
E.  No person shall obtain the services provided in a body art studio by misrepresentation of age in any place where body art procedures are performed. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any body artist to perform any acts of scarification and or acts of suspension in the body art studio. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.230 - Violations. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or entity to violate any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
B.  No person shall be allowed to perform body art procedures unless that person is employed by a body art studio and holds a current body artist license. No person shall be allowed to perform body art procedures outside the confines of a legally licensed body art studio. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for body artist to be under the influence of any alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. 
D.  Except as specified in (1) of this subsection, no animals of any kind shall be allowed inside a body art studio. 
1.  Live animals may be allowed in the following situations if the contamination of clean equipment, parlors, single-use articles, or any other items that may be used in a body art procedure cannot result; 
2.  Decorative fish in aquariums; 
3.  Patrol dogs accompanying police or security officers; 
4.  In areas that are not used for any equipment storage or equipment cleaning and preparing areas; 
5.  Service animals that are controlled by the disabled employee, person, or trainer of such animal, if a health or safety hazard will not result from the presence or activities of the service animal. 
E.  An owner of a body art studio shall be deemed responsible for any act, omission, or violation of this article committed by any body artist in said studio, working upon studio premises, or performing body art procedures for the owner as an independent contractor. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.240 - Sanitation. 
Body artists and body art studios shall maintain proper sanitation as regulated by the Henry County Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.250 - Procedures specific to body-piercing. 
A.  Before piercing the skin of a client, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede the procedure shall be removed. 
B.  The client shall then be given both written and oral instructions on how to care for the piercing during the healing process. 
C.  A facility that limits its piercing practice to the piercing of the lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp piercing systems shall be exempt from regulatory requirements of this article. Compliance with the requirements for this exemption may be verified by inspection at the option of the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.260 - Compliance. 
A.  A body art studio shall operate in compliance with these rules and with a valid body art studio permit issued by the Henry County Board of Health. 
B.  A body artist shall perform body art procedures in compliance with these rules and with a valid body artist permit issued by the Henry County Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
5.82.270 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Enforcement of the rules and regulations shall be in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  The board of health may refuse to grant a license for the operation of any body art studio which does not fulfill the minimum requirements of this chapter and may revoke a license which has been issued and invoke other sanctions if a studio violates any of these rules and regulations. Before any order is entered refusing a permit applied for or revoking a permit, the applicant or permit holder shall be offered an opportunity for a hearing before the city council. The notice of refusal or revocation shall contain directions on how a hearing may be requested. 
C.  Any person or entity violating any provision of this regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, or upon entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere thereto, shall be punished by a fine, not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for a term not more than sixty days, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
D.  Owners shall be responsible for ensuring agents and employees fully comply with the provisions of these regulations and shall be liable for any violation hereof. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-062, § II, 12-6-10) 
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-10-079, § 1, adopted October 1, 2012, deleted the former Chapter 6.04, §§ 6.04.010—6.04.980, and enacted a new Chapter 6.04 as set out herein. The former Chapter 6.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 09-07-026, § 1, adopted July 6, 2009. 

6.04.010 - Codification of Henry County Animal Control Ordinance. 
The Animal Control Ordinance of Henry County, Georgia, adopted by the Henry County Board of Commissioners on February 2, 2009 as Ordinance No. 09-01, and codified Chapter 3-4 of the Code of Henry County as Article II, entitled "In General", Sections 3-4-1 through 3-4-20; Article II, entitled "Rabies Control", Sections 3-4-21 through 3-4-30; Article III, entitled "Impoundment", Sections 3-4-31 through 3-4-40; Article IV, entitled "Disposition", Sections 3-4-41 through 3-4-50; and Article V, entitled "Dangerous Dogs and Potentially Dangerous Dogs", Sections 3-4-51 through 3-4-98 (attached hereto as Exhibit "A") is incorporated by this reference and adopted by the City of Locust Grove, Georgia. Pursuant to intergovernmental agreement and the adoption of this ordinance by reference, Henry County is authorized to implement and enforce the provisions of said ordinance within the corporate limits of the city of Locust Grove. Furthermore, city of Locust Grove code enforcement officers and police officers may exercise those powers and duties assigned to "Henry County Animal Control Officers" under said ordinance within the corporate limits of the city of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. No. 12-10-079, § 2, 10-1-12) 
6.04.020—6.04.990 - Reserved. 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters: 
Chapter 8.04 - LITTERING 
Sections: 

8.04.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this chapter are: 
A.  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
B.  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Ord. 04-03-012 § 1 (part)) 
8.04.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
"Litter" means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, organic or inorganic waste material, tin cans, refuse garbage, trash, paper, dead animals, cardboard, debris, glass, hulls, peelings, grass, weeds, ashes, metal, plastic, or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term if defined in O.C.G.A. Section 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
"Public or private property" means the right-of-way of any road, alley, street or highway: any body of water or watercourse thereof; any park, playground, building refuge or conservation or recreation area; and any residential, commercial, industrial or farm properties, timberlands, or forest. 
(Ord. 04-03-012 § 1 (part)) 
8.04.030 - Receptacles to be provided. 
The chief of police or his or her designee is authorized, empowered and instructed to establish and maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where public property is frequented by the public, and to post signs directing persons to such receptacles and serving notice of the provisions of this chapter, and to otherwise publicize the availability of litter receptacles and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-03-012 § 1 (part)) 
8.04.040 - Acts constituting littering designated—Prohibited when. 
It is unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave, or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city, or any waters in this city, unless: 
A.  Such property is designated by the city for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
B.  Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; 
C.  Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of said owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. 04-03-012 § 1 (part)) 
8.04.050 - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. 04-03-012 § 1 (part)) 
8.04.060 - Violation—Prima facie evidence. 
A.  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of such conveyance shall have violated this chapter. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection A of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-03-012 § 1 (part)) 
8.04.070 - Violations—Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating the provisions of Section 8.04.040 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine to be set by the presiding judge, of not less than two hundred dollars and not more than one thousand dollars, and/or in the sound discretion of the court, any such person may be directed by the judge of said court to pick up and remove from any public street, alley, highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or in the sound discretion of the judge of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public park or, with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it has been established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
B.  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-03-012 § 1 (part)) 
Chapter 8.08 - NOISE CONTROL 
Sections: 

8.08.010 - Creating unnecessary noise. 
A.  The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the limits of the city is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is prohibited. 
B.  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
1.  Horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound or the sounding of that device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time; 
2.  Musical Instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between twelve midnight and seven a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity, except this section shall not apply to schools of music between the hours of seven a.m. and ten p.m.; 
3.  Voices. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of twelve midnight and seven a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity; 
4.  Noisy Vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in any manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding or rattling, or other noise; 
5.  Steam Whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authority. 
6.  Exhausts. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom; 
7.  Construction Work. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. on weekdays except in cases of urgent necessity, and then only with a permit from the city, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed sixty days while the emergency continues; 
8.  On Streets of Institutions Requiring Quiet. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof; 
9.  Loudspeakers on Vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes; 
C.  None of the foregoing terms or prohibitions shall apply to or be enforced against: 
1.  Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon necessary public business; 
2.  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on behalf of the city, county or state during the night season, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform that work during the day; nor shall the same apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances, or when there is urgent necessity therefor; and 
3.  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
D.  The prohibitions shall not be applicable to any parade, celebration or performance for which a written permit has been obtained prior thereto from the city clerk. 
E.  It shall be unlawful to use, maintain or operate loudspeakers, sound trucks, amplifiers or other mechanical or electrical devices for increasing the volume of sound, upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places of the city; provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the United States of America, the state, the county nor the city, nor to public agencies. 
(Prior code § 9-1-3) 
Chapter 8.12 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 

8.12.010 - Definition. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
A.  Stagnant water on premises; 
B.  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
C.  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
D.  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
E.  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
F.  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
G.  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
H.  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
I.  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
J.  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
K.  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
L.  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
M.  All obnoxious vegetation. Obnoxious vegetation shall be defined to include: 
1.  Dead plant material piled such that it emits objectionable and foul odors or presents a haven for rodents; 
2.  Trees, shrubs, or other plant materials which, if they should fall, would present a safety hazard to adjacent public or private property; 
3.  Any vegetation which presents a sight distance safety hazard to motorists using either public or private streets or driveways; 
4.  Any vegetation which, because of its characteristics of growth, spreads onto adjacent property and cannot be controlled; and 
5.  Any grass or weeds on vacant lots in platted subdivisions or on parcels less than one acre which lie adjacent to or between other one acre or less parcels on which homes are built, whenever more than 50 percent of the lot or parcel contains vegetation which exceeds twelve inches in height. 
(Ord. 01-10-1A § 2; Prior code § 9-2-1) 
8.12.020 - Offense. 
It is declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior code § 9-2-6) 
8.12.030 - Jurisdiction to try and abate. 
The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9-2-2) 
8.12.040 - Complaint of nuisance—Hearing. 
A.  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the city police department, who shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal court after a ten-day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding that a nuisance does exist shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the municipal judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
B.  Animal control officers, license and building inspectors shall and may also receive complaints, investigate the same and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
(Prior code § 9-2-3) 
8.12.050 - Abatement by city. 
A.  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the municipal judge, that it must be immediately abated, the municipal judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police in such case shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
B.  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
(Prior code § 9-2-4) 
8.12.060 - Nuisance per se, exception—Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Prior code § 9-2-5) 
Chapter 8.16 - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sections: 

8.16.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
"Ashes" means and includes the waste products from coal, wood and other fuels used for cooking and heating from all public and private residences and establishments. 
"Building rubbish" means waste material resulting from construction, remodeling, repairs and demolition operations on houses, commercial buildings and other structures, including driveways and walks, and it comprises waste and rejected matter such as excavated earth, stones, bricks, plaster, wallpaper, sheetrock and lathes, lumber, shingles, tile, concrete and waste parts occasioned by the installation or replacement of plumbing, heating systems, electrical work and roofing. 
"Garbage" means waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used for or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
"Industrial waste" means solid waste materials from factories, processing plants, wholesale establishments, assembling food processing wastes, cinders and ashes, lumber scraps, saw dust, excelsior, shavings, floor sweepings, metal scrap and shavings, glass and other waste products. 
"Rubbish" means a variety of combustible and noncombustible waste not subject to rapid decomposition derived from places of residence, commercial areas and institutions, and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, cans, bottles, glass, crockery, excelsior, rubber, discarded clothing and similar materials. 
"Scavenge" means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
"Solid waste" means putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except human body waste, and includes garbage, rubbish, paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, tin cans, glass, crockery, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, waste materials generated in industrial operations, residue incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, construction wastes and any other wastes in a solid or semi-solid state, not otherwise defined in this section. 
"Standard container" means and includes a durable, rust-resistant, nonabsorbent, rodent-proof, watertight and weather resistant plastic, metal or other acceptable composite container with handles or bails, having a tight-fitting cover, and having a holding capacity no greater than that furnished by the city or approved contract waste hauler. 
"Waste" means unwanted or discarded material, except human body waste. 
"Yard rubbish" means tree branches, stumps, twigs, grass and shrub trimmings, bushes, weeds, leaves and general yard and garden waste materials, and includes stone and dirt rakings and any waste materials resulting from landscaping. 
(Prior code § 4-2-1) 
(Ord. No. 09-02-007, § 1, 2-2-09) 
8.16.015 - Waste to be collected by the city. 
A.  The following types of waste shall be collected curbside by the city: 
1.  Household garbage; 
2.  Yard rubbish. 
(Ord. 96-11.11.B (part)) 
8.16.016 - Waste not to be collected by the city. 
A.  The following types of waste shall not be collected curbside by the city, but shall be placed in proper containers at the public works department during specific hours as set by the city council: 
1.  Building rubbish; 
2.  All solid waste with the exception of household garbage and items unacceptable for collection as defined in Section 8.16.030. 
(Ord. 96-11.11.B (part)) 
8.16.020 - Waste acceptable for collection. 
Garbage, rubbish and industrial waste constitute waste acceptable for collection by the city. 
(Prior code § 4-2-2) 
8.16.030 - Waste unacceptable for collection. 
A.  The following items constitute waste unacceptable for collection by the city: 
1.  Dangerous materials or substances such as poisons, acids, caustics and explosives; 
2.  Yard rubbish except as hereinafter provided; 
3.  Automobile and motor vehicle tires; 
4.  Paint; and 
5.  All other solid waste not specifically authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. 96-11.11.B (part)) 
8.16.040 - Preparation and storage of acceptable waste. 
A.  The owner or occupant of each residence or business or commercial establishment shall generally store acceptable waste in the standard container furnished by the city or its designated contract waste hauler. Each owner shall prevent excessive and unsightly accumulation of waste upon the property occupied by him. 
B.  Any acceptable waste that cannot routinely be placed in standard containers will not be collected by the city or its designated contract waste hauler. Where such accumulation occurs, notice shall be given to the occupant to secure additional storage containers at an additional fee or prevent accumulation by alternative removal of acceptable waste to the solid waste drop off site in Section 8.16.090 or other acceptable means. 
(Ord. 96-11.11.B (part)) 
(Ord. No. 09-02-007, § 2, 2-2-09) 
8.16.050 - Place of collection—Grass clippings—Limbs. 
A.  All standard containers shall be placed generally within four feet of the edge of the street or road (or edge of curb where applicable) no more than twenty-four hours prior to the typical pickup day, and all standard containers must be removed from the roadway within twenty-four hours of pickup by the city or its designated contract waste hauler. 
B.  Grass clippings, pine straw and leaves shall be placed on the street edge or curb on pickup day. These items must be secured in disposable plastic bags of a type, size and material designed for solid waste storage and disposal. Disposable bags shall be unbroken and securely sealed and loaded in such a manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open and spill its contents. No bag which cannot be loaded by one person shall be collected. 
C.  Fallen limbs, trees, cut limbs, cut trees and trash of this category shall be cut by the property owner into lengths of no more than four feet. Other trash, which shall include yard wastes, weeds, grass, trimmings, leaves, brush and pine straw must be bagged. All trash and cuttings shall be placed as near as possible to the street edge or right-of-way adjacent to the property owner's property but not so as to get into the street or block the sidewalk. At no time shall trash be placed in gutters, drains, walkways or alleys or streets of the city. 
D.  In situations where extreme topography or other hardships exist, the city manager, in consultation with the servicing solid waste hauler approved by the city or public works director, may provide written approval of an alternate location for the placement of trash containers, clippings, and limbs. 
(Ord. 98-9.03 Art. I, 1998; prior code § 4-2-5) 
(Ord. No. 09-02-007, § 3, 2-2-09) 
8.16.060 - Unauthorized accumulation of solid waste—Nuisance. 
Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within a reasonable time as may be fixed by written notice from the city shall be deemed a violation of this code. 
(Prior code § 4-2-6) 
8.16.070 - Scavenging. 
No person other than the owner thereof shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste pending collection by the city or its designee, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any container from the location where the container has been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. 01-09-17 § 1) 
8.16.075 - Only authorized personnel to remove garbage, refuse, and/or trash. 
No person, except those duly authorized by the city as city collectors, shall collect, remove or empty residential garbage refuse and/or trash cans and receptacles or collect or transport residential garbage, trash or other refuse on the streets, alleys and public thoroughfares within the corporate city limits. This section shall also apply to collection of commercial garbage, refuse and/or trash containers and receptacles, to the extent such services are provided by the city or its designee. 
(Ord. 01-09-17 § 2) 
8.16.080 - Rate schedules. 
The following rate schedules are adopted for the city: 

 
(Ord. 08-02-018 § 1; Ord. 06-01-010 § 1; Ord. 96-11.11.B (part)) 
8.16.085 - Application for solid waste collection service and deposit. 
Persons or entities seeking solid waste collection service from the city or its provider after June 2, 2008 shall make application for said service and pay a sanitation service deposit as stated herein to the city. Applications for solid waste collection service through the city or its provider are available at city hall. A sanitation service deposit of fifty dollars per application is due to the city at the time application is made to establish solid waste collection service. Service shall not be provided to any person or entity who does not qualify under this chapter for said service and who has not made application and paid said deposit for service. The sanitation service deposit shall be returned in full to customer upon cancellation of service with proof of payment in full for any outstanding sanitation bills and return of collection container. Otherwise, said deposit, in part or in full, shall be forfeited to city if any of the following apply: (1) customer has an outstanding balance for solid waste collection service; (2) customer's collection container is not returned to service provider or damaged beyond reasonable wear and tear; and/or (3) customer has abandoned premises and failed to cancel sanitation service. 
(Ord. 08-06-039 § 1) 
8.16.090 - Solid waste drop-off site. 
A.  The city council of the city of Locust Grove has established a solid waste drop-off site located at 110 Mose Brown Drive, Locust Grove, Georgia. 
B.  The solid waste drop-off site shall be operated under city supervision between the hours of eight a.m. through five p.m. every Wednesday and every Saturday, unless otherwise posted. 
C.  Persons dumping solid waste at the drop-off site shall be required to pay twenty dollars per two-axle vehicle (i.e., passenger car or pickup truck) in cash before dumping solid waste. Additional charges may be assessed for solid waste towed behind said vehicle up to an additional twenty dollars. 
D.  For those persons dropping off items for recycling in the bins provided for recycled materials by the city's waste haul provider shall not be assessed a charge for use of that portion of the facility. 
E.  It shall be the responsibility of the director of public works to regulate the collection of fees and impose a system of accounting for said fees collected at the solid waste drop-off site. 
(Ord. 07-01-008 § 1) 
(Ord. No. 10-12-068, § 1, 12-6-10) 
8.16.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Ord. 07-01-008 § 2) 
Chapter 8.20 - OUT-OF-DOORS STORAGE FACILITIES 
Sections: 

8.20.010 - Definitions. 
"Person" means and includes individuals, partnerships, corporations, companies and all other legal entities. 
"Storage container" means any car, truck, bus, van, vehicle, truck trailer, commercial trailer, trailer, mobilehome, U-haul type trailer, railroad boxcar, seafaring container and metal or wood containers. 
(Ord. 95-7.10 § 1) 
8.20.020 - Prohibited uses and acts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to park, place, leave, keep, abandon or permit the placement, leaving, keeping or abandonment of any storage container for use as a storage facility, storage building, or storage container within the city. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to park, place, leave, keep, abandon or permit the placement, leaving, keeping or abandonment of any storage container for use as a facility or building from which retail or wholesale sales are made within the city. 
(Ord. 95-7.10 § 2) 
8.20.030 - Permitted uses and acts. 
A.  All transfer trucks, tractor trailers, trailers and other vehicles used for the transportation and delivery of goods through interstate or intrastate commerce which are used for the purpose of delivering merchandise within the city or which are loading merchandise within the city are permitted so long as said vehicles are removed from the premises within twelve hours after the completion of the delivery or the completion of the unloading of the vehicle; provided, however, no sales are made from said vehicles. 
B.  Garbage or refuse receptacles or containers. 
C.  Temporary buildings, construction trailers, or buildings used in connection with the development and construction of residential, commercial and industrial developments and buildings. 
D.  Storage buildings constructed in properly zoned areas. 
E.  Portable eating establishments authorized under Section 5.40.010 through 5.40.020 of this code. 
F.  Uses permitted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 95-7.10 § 3) 
8.20.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than one hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for each offense, and/or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed sixty days for each violation. Each day that a violation occurs shall be a separate offense. 
B.  A violation of this chapter shall also constitute a nuisance. The city may abate the nuisance as provided under Chapter 8.12 of this code. If the city elects to abate the nuisance, the owner of the storage container shall pay all costs to abate the nuisance including, but not limited to, cost of removal, storage, disposal, attorney's fees, court costs and all other expenses incurred by the city. 
(Ord. 95-7.10 § 4) 
Chapter 8.24 - ALARM SYSTEMS* 
Sections: 

8.24.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Alarm system" means any device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other event requiring immediate attention and to which the city of Locust Grove police department is expected to respond, but does not include alarms installed in motor vehicles or fire alarms. 
"Alarm signal" means a detectible signal, either audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to which the city of Locust Grove police department is expected to respond. 
"Alarm systems coordinator" means an employee of the city designated by the city council of Locust Grove, Georgia to administer this chapter. 
"Alarm user" means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning or leasing an alarm system or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
"Automatic dial protection device" means an automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the Henry County "911" emergency communications center a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for emergency response. 
"False alarm" means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electrical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence or improper activation by the alarm user, his employees or agents, and false signals activated to summon law enforcement or emergency personnel unless response was canceled by the alarm user or his agent before personnel are dispatched to the alarm location. A false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated for the first time by unusual conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to the control of the alarm user. In addition, an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the alarm systems coordinator to test the system. An alarm is false within the meaning of this chapter when, upon investigation or inspection by city employees, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, burglary, robbery, or such other crime was committed or attempted and no fire or other emergency existed in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. 
(Ord. 98-6.8A (part)) 
8.24.020 - Alarm installations. 
The installation and alteration of alarm systems shall be in accordance with Article 760 "Fire Protective Signaling Systems" of the National Electrical Code, NFPA number 70-1975 and the following NFPA standards: 
A.  Standard 71 — Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of central station signaling systems. 
B.  Standard 72-B — Standard for the installation, maintenance and use of auxiliary protective signaling systems for Fire Alarm Service. 
C.  Standard 72-C — Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of remote signaling system. 
D.  Standards 72-D — Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of remote station protective signaling systems for watchman, fire alarm, and supervisory service. 
E.  Standards 72-E — Standard on automatic fire detectors. 
F.  Standard 74 — Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of household fire warning equipment. 
(Ord. 98-6.8A (part)) 
8.24.030 - False alarm determinations. 
A.  Response. Whenever an alarm is activated in the incorporated area of the city and the city police department personnel respond, a city official on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area and determine whether the response was in fact necessary as indicated by the alarm system or whether the alarm was a false alarm. 
B.  Notification. If the city official at the scene of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to be false, he shall make a report of the false alarm. The alarm systems coordinator shall be supplied with a copy of each false alarm determination report. The alarm systems coordinator shall in turn, notify the alarm user of the false alarm, and any such civil penalties if appropriate. 
(Ord. 98-6.8A (part)) 
8.24.040 - Review of false alarm determinations. 
Request for Review. The alarm systems coordinator shall, when requested by an alarm user, review the determination that an alarm was false. Such review shall be conducted by the alarm systems coordinator only if the alarm user requests in writing such a review within ten days of the date the alarm user was notified of the false alarm determination. The written request for review of a false alarm determination by the alarm systems coordinator shall include the following information: 
A.  Alarm user name; 
B.  Address at which alarm is installed; 
C.  Date of false alarm that is being contested; and 
D.  Facts upon which the request for review of the false alarm determination is made. 
(Ord. 98-6.8A (part)) 
8.24.050 - Penalties. 
A.  Excessive False Alarms. It is found and determined that three or more false alarms within any fiscal year of the city are excessive and constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  Civil Penalties. 
1.  The fourth false alarm within a fiscal year will result in the alarm user being assessed a twenty-five dollars civil penalty. Each such penalty shall be paid within thirty days from date of receipt of the assessment notice. 
2.  The fifth false alarm within a fiscal year shall result in the alarm user being assessed a fifty dollars civil penalty, which shall be paid within thirty days from receipt of the assessment notice. 
3.  The sixth false alarm within a fiscal year and all future alarms thereafter within a one-year period shall result in the alarm user cited to appear before the municipal court of the city to be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars. 
C.  Remedy for Refusal to Pay Assessments or to Take Remedial Action. If an alarm user is assessed civil penalties for excessive false alarms and refuses either: (1) to pay the same; or (2) to make immediate remedial action so that excessive false alarms cease, then the city shall be authorized to bring an action in the municipal court of the city to abate the nuisance pursuant to OCGA Section 41—2—5. 
(Ord. 98-6.8A (part)) 
8.24.060 - Preexisting alarm systems. 
Alarm systems upon which substantial installation work has already begun on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be required to comply with the construction standards required by Section 8.24.020, yet such systems shall in all respects, be subject to the false alarm, penalty, and other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-6.8A (part)) 
8.24.070— 8.24.110 - Reserved. 
Chapter 8.28 - PUBLIC HEALTH 
Sections: 

8.28.010 - Public health. 
The following rules and regulations as amended, approved and adopted by the Henry County, Georgia Board of Health are by reference incorporated herein as if they fully appeared herein: 
A.  Rules and Regulations for Food Service as contained in the September 10, 1986 edition of Rules of Department of Human Resources, Public Health, approved and adopted by the Henry County, Georgia Board of Health on October 9, 1990 as hereafter may be amended; 
B.  The Tourist Accommodation Regulations, Henry County Health Department, Board of Health Regulation Number 7, as approved and adopted by the Henry County Board of Health on January 11, 1983, as hereafter may be amended; 
C.  The Public Swimming Pool Regulation, Henry County Health Department, Board of Health Regulation Number 8, as approved and adopted by the Henry County Board of Health on January 11, 1983, as hereafter may be amended; and 
D.  Rules of Henry County Board of Health Rule No. 89-1, On-Site Sewage Management Systems as approved and adopted by the Henry County Board of Health on December 12, 1989. 
(Ord. 02-07.01B § 2) 
8.28.020 - Violations—Penalties. 
A.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof or upon entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere thereto, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a term of not more than sixty days, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a new and separate offense for which the person may be punished as provided above. 
C.  Any violation of this code section shall also be considered a public nuisance and the person in violation may be prosecuted therefore under any section of this code or other law of the state. It is the intent that such remedy be cumulative in nature. 
(Ord. 02-07.01B § 3) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES GENERALLY 
Sections: 

9.04.010 - Disorderly conduct. 
It is unlawful for any person to do or engage in any of the following acts in the city: 
A.  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of or in fear of his safety, life, limb, or health; 
B.  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of another person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
C.  Any person who shall endanger or interfere with the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm; 
D.  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property; 
E.  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and cause, provoke or engage in any fight or brawl; 
F.  Any persons who shall collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities; 
G.  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and engage or attempt to engage in gaming; 
H.  Any person who shall frequent any public place and obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device or attempt to do so; 
I.  Any person who assembles with another or others and engages in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain or attempts to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person; 
J.  Any person who utters, in a public place or any place open to the public, any obscenity or epithets; 
K.  Any person who frequents any place or vehicle where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated; 
L.  Any person who shall use "fighting words" directed towards any person, causing said person to become outraged and thus create turmoil; 
M.  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and do bodily harm to another or property of another or public property; 
N.  Any person who shall, by acts of violence or threats thereof, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
O.  Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority; 
P.  Any person who damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition; 
Q.  Any person who appears in public in an intoxicated state or condition, whether said intoxication is by alcohol and/or drugs; 
R.  Any person who exposes any part of his or her body in an indecent or rude manner; 
S.  Any person, who by and in any manner, creates loud noises which disrupt, disturb, or otherwise interfere with the peace and tranquility of the public; 
T.  Any person who attempts to hinder, delay, obstruct or prevent any law enforcement officer from performing his/her duty; 
U.  Any person who keeps a disorderly household or house of ill-fame and all adults residing in the house shall be considered a keeper; 
V.  Any person who lingers or loiters along public sidewalks, streets or public ways of the city; 
W.  Any person who fails or refuses to remove himself from the private property of another when requested to do so by the owner or occupant(s) thereof; 
X.  Any person who alone or in concert with others, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or the value thereof in whole or in part by concealing or taking possession of the goods or merchandise from a retail establishment, alters the price tag or other price marking goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment, wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise of property or value thereof of one hundred dollars or less. 
(Ord. 5/1/94: prior code § 9-1-1) 
9.04.020 - Posting signs on poles without consent. 
It is unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge any sign or advertisement, or to post or display upon any telegraph, telephone or electric company's pole, or upon public property or the private property of any person, any bills, signs or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner thereof. 
(Prior code § 9-1-4) 
9.04.030 - Weapons—Discharge in city. 
A.  Except as set forth in Subsections B, C, and D of this section, it is unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm including a pistol, rifle, or shot gun, or to shoot an air gun including a BB gun and pellet gun, within the city except by law enforcement officers in the line of duty, and the military when on drill or parade or at a funeral in honor of the dead, or at a licensed firing range; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful for any person to shoot a BB gun upon private property if that person shall have first obtained the express permission of the owner of that property to do so. 
B.  In the event a persons property is being destroyed or endangered by any type of animal or rodent, he may make application to the chief of police to obtain permission to discharge a firearmwithin the city. Upon investigation by the chief of police, written permission may be granted. In granting permission, the chief of police shall designate the person having permission, the address or location, the dates for which permission is granted and what type of firearm will be used. 
C.  Upon application and approval by the chief of police, it shall not be unlawful to discharge a firearm inside undeveloped areas of the city for the purpose of hunting wildlife, so long as such activity is otherwise lawful and in compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations and subject to subsections (C)(1)—(C)(4) of this section. Notwithstanding the above, it shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm under this subsection within the confides of the city of Locust Grove: 
1.  Within fifty yards of a public roadway; 
2.  Within two-hundred yards of a dwelling house of another; 
3.  Within any zoning district zoned and developed for residential purposes (except R-A Zoning); or 
4.  In such a manner as to endanger another's life or property. 
D.  It shall not be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm within the city limits, if such is justified under Title 16, Chapter 3, Article 2 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or subsection (f) of Title 16, Chapter 12, Section 4 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Ord. 03-04.07A § 1) 
9.04.040 - Tampering with alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to wilfully, maliciously or mischievously interfere or tamper with any fire alarm box or any of the appliances or apparatus connected therewith, located within the corporate limits. 
(Prior code § 3-2-1) 
9.04.050 - Liquor in public places—Consumption by minors. 
A.  Definition. As used in this section, the following term has the following meaning: 
Alcoholic liquor means any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes or intended for beverage purposes. 
B.  Consumption. No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor while in or upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot or other public place. 
C.  Open Container. No person shall be in possession of any open glass, can or other open container containing alcoholic liquor on any thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or any other public way. 
D.  Open Container in Motor Vehicles. No person shall have in his or her possession an open containing alcoholic liquor within or on a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, while parked or standing on a public street or public parking lot in the city. 
E.  Possession, Consumption on Package Store Premises Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to consume all or any part of any type of alcoholic beverages within one hundred feet of any retail store where alcoholic beverages are sold in package form or within the boundary lines of the property on which such retail store is located, whichever constitutes the greater distance. 
F.  Possession, Consumption by Minors. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one years to knowingly possess or consume any alcoholic liquor. 
(Ord. 6/19/89; prior code § 9-1-6) 
9.04.060 - Possession of marijuana—Penalty. 
A.  For the purpose of this section, "marijuana" means all parts of the Genus Cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, but shall include samples as described in OCGA Section 16-13-25 (3)(P). 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, within the corporate limits of the city, one ounce or less of the substance known as marijuana. 
C.  Any person found guilty of possession of one ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, by sentence of imprisonment for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty days, or both. (Amended during 1994 recodification; Ord. 6/19/89: prior code § 9-1-7) 
9.04.070 - Administration of certain state offenses in municipal courts. 
The city elects to exercise jurisdiction over all those state offenses for which a grant of jurisdiction has been provided by general state law. In the exercise of that jurisdiction, officers writing tickets returnable to the municipal court, shall delineate the nature of the offense charged by name and Georgia Code number on the citation and summons. Offenses to be cited and brought before the municipal court for final adjudication include: 
A.  Possession of one ounce or less of marijuana, pursuant to OCGA §§ 16-13-30 and 16-13-2; 
B.  Operating a motor vehicle without effective insurance, pursuant to OCGA § 40-6-10; 
C.  Theft by shoplifting when the property which is the subject of this theft is valued at one hundred dollars or less, pursuant to OCGA § 16-8-14; 
D.  Furnishing alcoholic beverages to and possession and purchase of alcoholic beverages by persons under twenty-one years of age, pursuant to OCGA §§ 3-3-23 and 3-3-23.1; and 
E.  Criminal trespass, pursuant to OCGA § 16-7-21. 
F.  Possession and use of drug related objects pursuant to OCGA § 16-13-32.2. 
(Ord. 02-11.04A § 1; Ord. 11/7/94 § 1) 
9.04.080 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-05-031, § I, adopted May 3, 2010, deleted § 9.04.080, which prohbited the use of skateboards and derived from Ord. 03-03.03E, § 1. 
Chapter 9.08 - CURFEW FOR MINORS 
Sections: 

9.08.010 - Definition. 
"Minor," as used in this chapter, means any person seventeen years of age or younger. 
(Ord. 5/11/92 § 1) 
9.08.020 - Unlawful to violate curfew?Exceptions. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any minor to idle, loiter or congregate with any other persons on or in the public streets, sidewalks or other public places within the city between the hours of eleven p.m. and five a.m.; provided, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, legal guardian or other adult person having legal care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is on an emergency errand or legitimate business, such as, but not limited to, returning home from work or from school-sponsored activities, and directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the legal care and custody of the minor. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any minor to permit, allow or encourage such minor to violate this chapter. 
(Ord. 5/11/92 § 2) 
9.08.030 - Violation?Prosecution?Penalties. 
A.  A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
B.  Any minor sixteen years of age or younger who is charged with a violation of this chapter will be prosecuted in the juvenile court of Henry County. The police chief or the arresting officer shall file the appropriate documents with the juvenile court for prosecution. 
C.  The municipal court of the city shall have jurisdiction over all minors who are seventeen years of age or older and charged with a violation of this chapter. 
D.  Any minor seventeen years of age or older who is found to have violated the terms of this chapter shall be punished as follows: 
1.  Upon conviction for a first offense, a fine of up to fifty dollars may be imposed; 
2.  Upon conviction for a second offense occurring at a date and time subsequent to a prior offense, a fine of up to one hundred dollars may be imposed; 
3.  Upon conviction for a third offense occurring at a date and time subsequent to a prior offenses, a fine of up to three hundred dollars may be imposed; 
4.  Upon conviction for a fourth offense, a fine of no less than five hundred dollars and no more than one thousand dollars shall be imposed at the sole discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. 5/11/92 § 3) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters: 
Chapter 10.04 - TRAFFIC CODE 
Sections: 

10.04.010 - Uniform Rules of the Road adopted. 
Pursuant to Chapter 6 of Title 40, Code Sections 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, Sections 40-6-1 through 40-6-354 of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if cited herein. 
(Prior code § 8-1-1) 
10.04.020 - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, who shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this code. 
(Prior code § 8-1-2) 
10.04.030 - Vehicle cover required. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
(Prior code § 8-1-3) 
10.04.040 - Designation of zones—Schedule. 
A.  The police chief or a designee thereof, upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, is authorized to designate and maintain with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
1.  Speed zones; 
2.  Truck routes and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks; 
3.  One-way streets and other directional control devices; 
4.  Freight loading zones and regulations; 
5.  Parking and no parking zones and regulations thereon; 
6.  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs; and 
7.  Stop signals and other traffic signals. 
B.  The police chief or a designee thereof is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
1.  Pedestrian crosswalks; 
2.  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
3.  Traffic lanes; and 
4.  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
C.  The police chief shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this section, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. For items listed in subsection A of this section, this schedule, and any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval thereof by ordinance of the mayor and council, and this schedule is incorporated in this chapter and copies thereof shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
D.  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
E.  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this code. 
(Prior code § 8-1-4) 
10.04.050 - Obstruction of view and use by trees and shrubs—Notice. 
A.  No person owning, occupying or in anywise controlling property in this city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of this city so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city, to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of this city after ten days' notice by the city to do so. 
(Prior code § 8-1-5) 
10.04.060 - Free flow of traffic—Obstruction prohibited. 
All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways and other public ways of the city. Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver, or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic or to needlessly "circle the block" or dawdle or make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
(Prior code § 8-2-1) 
10.04.070 - Speed limits established. 
A.  No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any of the streets and highways of the city at a greater speed than is reasonable and proper having regard to the width, traffic and use thereof, or so as to endanger the property or life or limb of any person. 
B.  Thirty-five miles per hour shall be the maximum speed on all streets or portions of streets within the city unless otherwise indicated by officially posted signs designating the maximum vehicular speed upon those streets as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 8-2-2) 
10.04.080 - Traffic signs, signals and markings. 
All traffic shall obey and be directed by official traffic control signals, signs and markings erected at street intersections and other locations now or hereafter approved by the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 8-2-3) 
10.04.090 - Tracked vehicles prohibited on streets. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate any tracked or other vehicle having metal tracks or wheels upon the city streets. 
(Prior code § 8-2-4) 
10.04.100 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Prior code § 8-2-5) 
Chapter 10.08 - PARKING 
Sections: 

10.08.010 - General provisions. 
A.  The city of Locust Grove owns and/or maintains a system of streets, alleys, and public right-of-ways within its municipal boundaries. The primary object of streets is to ensure safe public passage; however, the right to use municipal streets is not absolute or unrestricted. With increases in population and traffic experienced throughout the city, the mayor and council find unregulated on-street parking creates a safety hazard for the law enforcement offices, emergency personnel, and the general public using streets in the city. Therefore, the mayor and council enact these provisions to regulate on-street parking in the city. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. 04-10-072 § 1; Ord. 96-10.24.A § 1) 
10.08.015 - Definitions. 
The following terms expressed herein shall apply to the interpretation of this chapter: 
"Major Arterial Street" is a street, highway or road that handles a large volume of traffic and provides connection through the city to the surrounding region. The following are considered major arterial streets: Highway 42/US 23, Bill Gardner Parkway, LG-Griffin Road, Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard, and Peeksville Road. Interstate 75 is a specialized type of major arterial due to its control of access and is therefore considered a principal arterial. 
"Minor Arterial Street" is a street, highway or road that handles a relatively large volume of traffic and provides connection either within city of Locust Grove or between the city to surrounding areas. The following are considered minor arterial streets: Jackson Street, Lester Mill Road, Locust Road, Bowden Street, Davis Road, South Ola Road, South Unity Grove Road, Tanger Boulevard, and Market Place Boulevard. 
"Collector Street" is a street or road that handles moderate volumes of traffic and provides access to adjoining residential properties and developments. The following are considered collector streets: Davis Lake Road, Club Drive, Frances Ward Drive, Grove Road, Hosanna Road, Indian Creek Road, Roberts Road, Shoal Creek Road, Price Drive, Bethlehem Road, and Pine Grove Road. 
"Inoperative Vehicle" is a vehicle that is (1) not currently registered with a government jurisdiction as evidenced on the license plate or other current documentation; (2) not currently insured as required by law; or, (3) in a mechanical condition not capable of movement under its own power, such as flat tires, inoperable motor, or chassis damage. 
"Local Street" is a street, lane, or road that handles relatively low volumes of traffic and provides access to local homes and/or businesses. For the purposes of this chapter, all streets not classified as either an arterial or collector street shall be considered a local street. 
"Width (of street)" is the horizontal distance between the back of curbs for those streets with raised curbs and/or gutters or the distance between the edge of pavement (also referred to as "cart way") for those streets without curbs and/or gutter. 
(Ord. No. 11-04-0616, §§ 1, 2, 4-4-11; Ord. No. 16-12-059, § 1, 12-5-16) 
10.08.020 - Enforcement. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the city police department to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and the department may use tire markings and other devices and procedures to determine violations. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to remove, erase or alter any tire markings, chalk or otherwise, placed by the city police department on any vehicle parked in the city with the intent to prevent the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 96-10.24.A § 2) 
10.08.030 - Designation of on-street parking areas; where permitted; parking time limits; regulations. 
A.  Downtown Business District. Within the Downtown Business District, individual parking spaces shall be marked off and maintained along Highway 42 between Cleveland Street to Smith Street. Such parking spaces shall be designated by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb and/or the surface of the street. 
1.  At each space so marked it is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in such a way that the vehicle shall not be entirely parked within the limits of the space. 
2.  No vehicle shall be parked for a continuous period of over two hours at or in the same parking space in any designated two-hour parking space along Highway 42 from the intersection of Highway 42 and Cleveland Street to Smith Street. 
B.  Conservation Subdivisions, Planned Development, and Mixed Uses. Throughout the rest of the corporate limits of the city there may exist certain on-street parking areas constructed and marked for parking, including properties designated for conservation subdivisions, for certain planned developments and for areas zoned now or in the future for mixed uses. Such parking spaces shall be designated by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb and/or the surface of the street. 
C.  Local Streets. Within local streets comprising the corporate limits of the city, parking is permitted under the following: 
1.  Streets must be greater than twenty feet in width; 
2.  Parking is allowed only on one side of the street for streets greater than twenty feet but less than thirty feet in width, which shall be the odd-numbered address side of such streets; 
3.  For streets greater than thirty feet in width, parking is allowed on both sides of such streets; 
4.  No parking shall be permitted within a cul-de-sac or other closed-ended street or alleyway; 
5.  All parking must be in the primary direction of travel within said streets; 
6.  No parking is permitted either within twenty feet of a street intersection or in a manner that blocks view within a sight triangle of an intersection; 
7.  Parking shall not block driveway entrances; 
8.  Parking shall not be within ten feet on either side of a fire hydrant; 
9.  Parking shall not generally interfere with mail delivery. 
D.  It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city, at any time on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs limiting parking time in certain locations on certain days and hours. 
E.  The chief of police shall be responsible for making recommendations to the city council for designation of parking areas within the city, posting parking areas, and designating the hours allowed for parking. From time to time, the city council may find it necessary to alter the designation for parking areas and/or the duration for which parking will be permitted. 
(Ord. 04-10-072 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 96-10.24.A § 3) 
(Ord. No. 11-04-016, § 3, 4-4-11; Ord. No. 16-12-059, § 2, 12-5-16) 
10.08.040 - Parking prohibited, handicapped parking. 
A.  It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle described in the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A.) section 40-1-1 or any other type vehicle described in the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A.) Section 40-1-1 to park vehicle or to allow vehicle to remain parked on the city streets, alleys and rights-of-way not otherwise permitted in Section 10.08.030 unless the specific area has been posted by the city indicating that parking is authorized in that specific area. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in a handicapped parking place unless there is displayed on the dashboard or hung from the rear view mirror of the parked vehicle a valid unexpired handicapped parking permit or unless there is attached to the vehicle a specially designed license plat for disabled persons. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in a handicapped parking place except for the purpose of allowing a handicapped person to enter or get out of such vehicle while in such parking place. However, nothing in this section shall prevent an ambulance or emergency vehicle from stopping in a handicapped parking place (in the charge of official duties). 
D.  No person shall park a vehicle so as to block any entrance or exit ramp used by handicapped persons on public or private property. 
E.  Authorities of the city shall honor visitors' out-of-state handicapped license tags or similar special parking permits or placards on the same basis as handicapped license tags, special parking permits or placards issued within the state. 
F.  It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon a street for the purpose of displaying it for sale. 
G.  It is unlawful for any person to park any inoperative vehicle upon a street or alleyway. 
H.  Double parking shall not be permitted on any street. 
I.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following exceptions are authorized: 
1.  Vehicles associated with providing immediate medical services; 
2.  Vehicles being used to provide fire, police and emergency services; 
3.  Vehicles owned and operated by the city when being used for official or emergency duties; 
4.  Vehicles being used to provide delivery of goods or other services as part of their regular duties; 
J.  Where parking is allowed or exempted under this section, the vehicle shall not block or interfere with the passageways of other vehicles using such street, alley or right-of-way. When a vehicle is deemed by city law enforcement personnel to block or interfere with the safe passageway of other vehicles or a public safety hazard the vehicle may be towed at owner's expense. 
K.  Any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of this section may be subject to immobilization through wheel locks or similar mechanisms, or towed. The owner or operator shall be responsible for all fees assessed in connection with the immobilization, impoundment, removal, storage, and release of the vehicle, as well as all administrative and court charges. 
L.  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the municipal court of the city shall impose the following penalties after it finds the cited person or persons guilty or such person or persons enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for any violation of this chapter: 
1.  For the first time violators of this chapter, a warning ticket will be issued; 
2.  For second time violators of this chapter, the vehicle will be immobilized or towed with all expenses thereof being paid by the owner prior to the release of the vehicle; 
3.  For third time violators of this chapter, the vehicle will be immobilized or towed with all expenses thereof being paid by the owner prior to the release of the vehicle and the municipal court shall impose a fine not less than fifty dollars and not more than one hundred dollars per violation; 
4.  For fourth time violators of this chapter, the vehicle will be immobilized or towed with all expenses thereof being paid by the owner prior to the release of the vehicle and the municipal court shall impose a fine not less than one hundred and fifty dollars and not more than three hundred dollars per violation; 
5.  For fifth time violators of this chapter, the vehicle will be immobilized or towed with all expenses thereof being paid by the owner prior to the release of the vehicle and the municipal court shall impose a fine not less than three hundred dollars and not more than five hundred dollars per violation; 
6.  For sixth time violators of this chapter, the vehicle will be immobilized or towed with all expenses thereof being paid by the owner prior to the release of the vehicle and the municipal court shall impose a fine not less than five hundred dollars and not more than one thousand dollars per violation. 
(Ord. 08-08-049 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 08-05-032 § 1) 
(Ord. No. 11-04-016, § 4, 4-4-11) 
10.08.050 - Penalty. 
Except where otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined and/or imprisoned pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of the city code of ordinances. 
(Ord. 04-10-072 § 5) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 12.04 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

12.04.010 - Sidewalk construction—Permit required. 
No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual, firm or corporation, of any brick, wood or other material without a written permit from the city. 
(Prior code § 4-1-6) 
12.04.020 - Streets and sidewalks not to be damaged. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drag or run, or cause to be dragged or run, any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon any asphalt, bithulitic, warrenite or other type of permanently paved street or sidewalk of the city which shall be liable in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. 
(Prior code § 4-1-7) 
12.04.025 - Streets and sidewalks—Prohibited uses. 
A.  Use of public streets, alleyways, sidewalks, and roads of the city which blocks or impedes vehicular, bicycle, and/or pedestrian movement within the public right-of-way for extended periods of time shall not be permitted; unless permission has been granted by the mayor and city council as part of a special events permit. 
B.  The placement of an object which blocks or impedes vehicular, bicycle, and/or pedestrian movement within the public right-of-way for extended periods of time in any portion of a public street, alleyway, sidewalk or road of the city shall be prohibited unless the mayor and city council specifically approve the use of such object as part of a special events permit. 
C.  For use in this section, the phrase "block or impede" means to occupy the public right-of-way used for vehicular, bicycle, and/or pedestrian movement in such a manner as to endanger the safety of the traveling public or result in damage to personal or real property of another person or entity. 
D.  For use in this section, the phrase "extended periods of time" means more than thirty consecutive minutes where not part of an official action of government or utility or emergency operation. 
E.  For use in this section, the term "object" under this section includes but is not limited to recreational equipment such as basketball goals, skateboard or bicycle ramps, soccer and hockey goals, and the like. 
F.  For use in this section, the term "special events permit" means an event or activity approval by the mayor and city council such as a street party, parade, cultural or arts festival, a sporting event, street fair or similar activity. Applications for special events permits shall be filed with the city clerk at least forty-five days prior to the date of the event, unless waived by the mayor and city council at an intervening meeting date. 
G.  Notwithstanding this section or the grant of a special events permit, the mayor and council may identify and prohibit entirely any and all uses which block or impede vehicular, bicycle, and/or pedestrian movement within certain designated public rights-of-way (or portions thereof) of the city for any period of time. 
(Ord. No. 09-05-022, § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 09-10-058, § 1, 10-5-09) 
12.04.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
All persons found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Prior code § 4-1-8) 
Chapter 12.08 - EXCAVATIONS 
Sections: 

12.08.010 - Permit required—Exception. 
No person, firm or corporation shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. A permit shall not be required where the work is performed under a contract with the city, but in the event that work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city clerk and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Prior code § 4-1-1) 
12.08.020 - Application for permit. 
All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in Section 12.08.010, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
(Prior code § 4-1-2) 
12.08.030 - City indemnified. 
Any person, firm or corporation obtaining a permit as provided for in Sections 12.08.010 and 12.08.020 agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
(Prior code § 4-1-3) 
12.08.040 - Street repair. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person, firm or corporation making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. Any person, firm or corporation neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the city clerk, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Prior code § 4-1-4) 
12.08.050 - Leaving unprotected. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who obtains a permit under the sections of this chapter to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of work. 
(Prior code § 4-1-5) 
12.08.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
All persons found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Prior code § 4-1-8) 
Chapter 12.12 - STREET TREES 
Sections: 

12.12.010 - Intent. 
The intent of this chapter is to establish protective regulations for trees in the public areas of the city in order to better control problems with flooding, soil conservation, air pollution and noise in the city, and to regulate trees on private property, where necessary, to make the city a healthier and safer place in which to live. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 1) 
12.12.020 - Creation and establishment of a city tree board. 
There is created and established a city tree board for the city which shall consist of five members, being citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 2) 
12.12.030 - Term of office. 
The term of the five persons to be appointed by the mayor and city council shall be three years, except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 3) 
12.12.040 - Compensation. 
Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 4) 
12.12.050 - Duties, responsibilities, and operation. 
It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate and counsel for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. The board, when requested by the mayor and city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 5) 
12.12.060 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Crown spread" means the distance measured across the greatest diameter of a plant. 
"Park trees" means either evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs on land designated as public park land, owned by the city, or land to which the public has free access as a park. 
"Shade trees" means any self-supporting woody plant of a species that is well shaped, well branched and well foliated which normally grows to an overall height of at least thirty-five feet and normally develops an average mature crown spread greater than thirty feet in Locust Grove, Georgia. 
"Small trees" means either evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs which do not normally exceed twelve feet in height at maturity. No small tree shall be permitted to exceed twelve feet in height. 
"Street trees" means either evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs growing on land lying within the public right-of-way on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within the city. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 6 (part)) 
12.12.070 - List of approved trees. 
A listing of street, park, shade and small trees approved by the tree board shall be maintained by the city tree board of the city. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 6 (part)) 
12.12.080 - Distance from street corners and fireplugs. 
No tree (whether street tree, park tree, shade tree or small tree) shall be planted closer than thirty-five feet to any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. However, shrubs maintained less than three feet in height are permitted. No tree shall be planted closer than ten feet to any fire hydrant. This section shall apply only to the planting of new trees and shall not be interpreted to require the removal of trees in the ground on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 7) 
12.12.090 - Utilities. 
No street trees other than those species meeting the definition of small trees as set forth in Section 12.12.060 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, power line or other utility. 
This section shall apply only to the planting of new trees and shall not be interpreted to require the removal of trees in the ground on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 8) 
12.12.100 - Public tree care. 
A.  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety and to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
B.  The city shall have the right to remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof within a public area or right-of-way which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electrical power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 9) 
12.12.110 - Tree topping. 
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. "Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires where other pruning practices are impractical, shall be exempted from this chapter. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 10) 
12.12.120 - Pruning, corner clearance of trees on private property. 
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic-control device or sign. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 11) 
12.12.130 - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city shall have the authority to take such action whenever necessary in cases of emergencies presenting a clear and immediate danger of irreparable harm to persons or property. Otherwise, the city tree board shall initiate action to have the tree removed by following the provisions of Chapter 8.12. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 12) 
12.12.140 - Removal of stumps. 
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 13) 
12.12.150 - Interference with city tree board. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, small trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 14) 
12.12.160 - Arborist's license and bond. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing street trees, park trees and/or small trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall be twenty-five dollars annually in advance; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any public utility company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of one hundred thousand dollars for bodily injury and fifty thousand dollars for property damage, which coverage shall indemnify the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 15) 
12.12.170 - Review by mayor and city council. 
The mayor and city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the city tree board. Any person may appeal any ruling or order of the city tree board to the mayor and city council, who may hear the matter and make final decision. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 16) 
12.12.180 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person violating the terms of this chapter or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be punished in municipal court by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars and/or sixty days in jail for each separate violation. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. 10/8/90 § 17) 
Chapter 12.16 - CITY PARK REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

12.16.010 - Driving motor vehicles in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon or across any part of any public park of the city except upon roadways laid out and maintained for vehicular travel. This section shall not apply to park employees whose duties require them to drive park maintenance equipment over parks. 
(Prior code § 4-3-1) 
12.16.020 - Closing hours. 
Every public park in the city shall be closed to all persons at twelve midnight and shall not be reopened until six a.m. of the following day. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in any public park between the hours of twelve midnight and six a.m., except with the express authorization of the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 4-3-2) 
12.16.030 - Throwing missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any park to throw bottles, cans, stones, sticks or other missiles. 
(Prior code § 4-3-3) 
Chapter 12.20 - ONE-WAY STREETS 
Sections: 

12.20.010 - Smith Street. 
Traffic along Smith Street shall be permitted to travel only one way, east to west, at all times for the day, between Cleveland Street and Highway 42. The appropriate and necessary traffic signs shall be placed in accordance with state law and the rules, regulations or guidelines of the governmental entity which exercises control over said one-way street, and any street or road which intersects said one-way street. 
(Ord. 08-08-053 § 1) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 13.04 - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

13.04.010 - Access of city agents to premises. 
Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with either the water service and its facilities or the sewer service and its facilities. 
(Prior code § 5-1-1) 
13.04.020 - Extensions to the water and sewer systems; easement required. 
Extensions to the water and sewer system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Prior code § 5-1-2) 
13.04.030 - Self-inspection of water and sewer lines. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 3 of Act 1046 Georgia Laws, 1996, subsection (d) of Code Section 8-2-26 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the city. 
(Ord. 96-7.8.B § 1) 
Chapter 13.08 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 

13.08.010 - Digging, drilling or boring well for water without consent of mayor and council prohibited. 
No property owner, occupant, tenant or lessee will be allowed to dig, bore or drill within the city limits for the purpose of obtaining water for residential, commercial or industrial purposes without first filing an application with the city, paying an inspection fee, as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council, and obtaining a written consent from the mayor and council. Any person, firm or corporation installing a private well shall execute an agreement with the city stating that, should facilities become available to the subject property, said person, firm or corporation, his/its heirs, administrators, executors, transferees, successors and assigns, shall agree to connect onto said city water facilities and pay the required tap on fees and deposits at the time said facilities are made available to said property owner. 
(Prior code § 5-1-11) 
13.08.020 - Application for water service. 
The city shall have thirty working days to make taps where there is no existing service and three working days to connect where service is already available. 
(Prior code § 5-1-12) 
13.08.030 - City's responsibilities and liabilities. 
A.  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and run immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in Section 13.16.010, will be made for a meter. 
B.  The city has the following additional responsibilities and duties: 
1.  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of such reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
2.  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
3.  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or backflow. 
4.  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
5.  The city shall install the water taps and devices necessary to prevent backflow ("backflow prevention system") prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the structure that will use public water. 
(Ord. 05-02-009 § 1; prior code § 5-1-14) 
13.08.040 - Consumer's responsibilities and liabilities. 
A.  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use such water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard of this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
B.  The consumer has the following additional responsibilities and duties: 
1.  Where meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, which is unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
2.  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter, but no farther than two feet from the meter. 
3.  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense with the sanitary regulations of the State Health Department. 
4.  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system; and all applicants, by becoming consumers of the city covenant, agree that, so long as they continue to be consumers of the city, they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
C.  The consumer shall pay to the city the cost of installation of a backflow prevention system as provided for in Exhibit "C" of Chapter 13.16 of this title. 
D.  Connection of any water meter to the city water system becomes the property of the city regardless of who originally purchased or installed the meter. 
(Ord. 05-02-009 §§ 2—4; prior code § 5-1-15) 
13.08.050 - Turning on of city water by persons other than city personnel prohibited—Violation—Penalty. 
A.  The city shall tag each water meter for the purpose of controlling the use of city water. It is unlawful for any person other than the authorized city water personnel to turn on, turn off or otherwise tamper with meters or connection facilities of the water system of the city. 
B.  Any person who shall violate the provisions of subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be tried in the municipal court. If such person is convicted, he shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. 
(Prior code §§ 5-1-16, 5-1-17) 
13.08.060 - Damage to water works prohibited—Violation—Penalty. 
A.  No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover or tamper with any meters, connections or equipment which are a part of the city water system. 
B.  Any person violating subsection A of this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct, malicious mischief or criminal damage to property. Said person shall be tried in the municipal court and if convicted shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, together with the full costs of repairing or correcting any damage caused to the water system of the city, or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. 
(Prior code § 5-1-18) 
13.08.070 - Water conservation. 
A.  From time to time it may become necessary to restrict or curtail water consumption due to drought conditions and to meet the requirements of the Environmental Protection Division, State Department of Natural Resources. 
B.  When it becomes necessary to impose bans, restrictions or curtailment of water usage, the mayor and council of the city shall have the authority to do so and to name those restrictions and the time and duration of said restrictions as defined by the mayor and council. 
C.  Therefore, any consumer, person, firm or corporation who uses water in violation of the restrictions imposed by mayor and council will be issued a warning citation for the first offense. Any consumer, person, firm or corporation who is issued a second citation and is found guilty shall be subject to minimum fine of twenty-five dollars to a maximum fine of one hundred dollars. Any consumer, person, firm or corporation who is issued a third citation and is found guilty shall be subject to a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars to a maximum fine of five hundred dollars and/or imprisonment in the county jail of Henry County for a minimum of thirty days to a maximum of sixty days. 
D.  1.  Restriction on Outdoor Watering of Landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of four p.m. and ten a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(a)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(b)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with any applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(c)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(d)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(e)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(f)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty days immediately following the date of installation; 
(g)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(h)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(i)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(j)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(k)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(l)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(m)  Hydroseeding. 
2.  Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(b)  The director of community development or his designee shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The city manager may authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this code. 
E.  Therefore, any consumer, person, firm or corporation who uses water in violation of these restrictions imposed by the mayor and council will be issued a warning citation for the first offense. Any consumer, person, firm or corporation who is issued a second citation and is found guilty shall be subject to a minimum of one hundred dollars to a maximum fine of two hundred fifty dollars. Any consumer, person, firm or corporation who is issued a third citation and is found guilty shall be subject to a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars to a maximum fine of five hundred dollars and/or imprisonment in the county jail of Henry County for a minimum of thirty days to a maximum of sixty days. 
(Ord. 7/14/86: prior code § 5-1-19) 
(Ord. No. 11-01-001, § 1, 1-3-11) 
13.08.080 - Unauthorized water release—Violations, penalties and costs. 
A.  Any customer, person, firm, corporation or legal entity who, without authorization from the city, draws or releases water from any fire hydrant, designated fire line, metered line or other unmetered line, shall be issued a citation and, if found guilty, shall be subject to a minimum fine of five hundred dollars, to a maximum fine of one thousand dollars, and/or imprisonment in the county jail of Henry County for a minimum of thirty days and a maximum of ninety days. 
B.  Any customer, person, firm, corporation, or legal entity who, without authorization from the city, draws or releases water from a fire hydrant, designated fire line, metered line or other unmetered line, shall pay to the city the value of any water used, a hydrant use fee of two thousand five hundred dollars, as well as any consequential damages suffered by the city. 
C.  Any customer, person, firm, corporation, or legal entity which the city has to take legal action against for violation of any part of this section shall reimburse the city all costs, legal expenses, attorney's fees, and expenses associated with the collection thereof that are incurred by the city as a result of the collection or the enforcement of this section. 
D.  Any customer, person, firm, corporation or legal entity who is charged with having violated this section shall be issued a citation by the city police department, Henry County police department, Henry County sheriff's department, or a representative of the city. Said citation shall require the appearance of the violator in the municipal court of the city of Locust Grove to answer said charges. 
E.  The municipal court of Locust Grove shall have jurisdiction to hear, try, and dispose of citations that are issued for said violations. 
F.  Any customer, person, firm, corporation, or legal entity who violates the terms of this section and does not pay the fees or the fines assessed above within thirty days of the unauthorized use of the water or facilities of the city, shall have said fee or fine added to their water bill if a billing account exists. Also, a fi. fa. shall be issued by the clerk of the city and filed upon the public records of Henry County and the county of the residence of the customer, person, firm, corporation, or legal entity who violated this section, with the same being collected as other fi. fa.'s are authorized to be collected under the terms of this section. 
(Ord. 03-12-01E § 1) 
Chapter 13.12 - SEWER SYSTEM SERVICE 
Sections: 

13.12.010 - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
"BOD (biochemical oxygen demand)" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
"Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
"Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
"City" means the city of Locust Grove, its mayor and councilmen, and any authorized agent. It also means the area inside the city limits and any area outside the city limits where the city has jurisdiction over the sewer lines. 
"Combined sewer" means a sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm sewer, or as an industrial sewer and a storm sewer. 
"Garbage" means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
"Industrial wastes" means the liquid wastes from industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
"Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
"pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in grams per liter. 
"Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
"Public sewer" means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
"Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
"Sewage" means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. 
"Sewage treatment plant" means any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treatment of sewage presently owned or afterward acquired by said city. 
"Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
"Sewerage works" means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
"Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
"Slug" means either or all of the following: 
1.  Any discharge of wastewater from whatever source which is more than three times the quantity of the average eight-hour flow discharged during the normal operational mode of said source and lasting longer than ten minutes; 
2.  Any discharge of waste water from whatever source which contains over two times the average eight-hour concentration of any toxic substance whatsoever found in normal flows during normal operation mode; or 
3.  Any discharge of wastewater from whatever source which contains more than two times the average eight-hour concentration of BOD or suspended solids. 
"Storm sewer" or "storm drain" means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
"Superintendent" means the superintendent or manager of the sewerage works of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative, as designated by the governing authority. 
"Suspended solids" means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
"Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Prior code § 5-1-31) 
13.12.020 - Damage to sewerage works prohibited—Violation—Penalty. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct, malicious mischief or criminal damage to property. Said person shall be tried in the municipal court and if convicted, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, together with the full costs of repairing or correcting any damage caused to the sewer system of the city, or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. 
(Prior code § 5-1-33) 
13.12.030 - Power and authority of inspectors. 
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The superintendent and all city employees will observe all company safety rules while on private properties. 
(Prior code § 5-1-34) 
13.12.040 - Prohibited methods of disposal. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner, upon public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Prior code § 5-1-35) 
13.12.050 - Application for sewer service. 
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service in person at the city hall and at the same time shall make a cash security deposit as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council for sewer service. 
(Prior code § 5-1-36) 
13.12.060 - Connection to public sewer required. 
The owner of any houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose within the corporate limits of said city and located within two hundred fifty feet of a line of public sanitary sewer, now in existence or afterwards constructed, to which such house, building or property may be connected, so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewerage line by gravity, is required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities directly with said line of public sanitary sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within sixty days after the date of official notice to do so. 
(Prior code § 5-1-37) 
13.12.070 - Building sewers and connections—Permit required—Application and fees. 
A.  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
B.  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
1.  For residential and commercial service; and 
2.  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
C.  In either case in subsection B of this section, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. 
(Ord. 2/14/94 (part); prior code § 5-1-38) 
13.12.090 - Separate connections for every building—Exception. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another or on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Prior code § 5-1-40) 
13.12.100 - Use of old building sewers with new buildings. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-1-41) 
13.12.110 - Construction specifications and requirements. 
A.  Pipe Material Specifications. The building sewer shall be cast-iron pipe; ASTM concrete sewer pipe, ASTM Specification C14; or polyvinyl plastic sewer pipe, ASTM Specification D2241. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast-iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast-iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the superintendent where the building sewer is subject to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast-iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
B.  Pipe Size and Slope. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
C.  Elevation—Placement—Grade. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to and within three feet of any bearing wall. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings. 
D.  Use of Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewerage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
E.  Excavation—Pipelaying and Backfill. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trenchwork unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipelaying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
F.  Joints and Connections Generally. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Joint materials and workmanship shall in all cases comply with the pipe manufacturer's recommendations. 
G.  Connection of Building Sewer to Public Sanitary Sewer. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is twelve inches in diameter or less and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the superintendent. Where the public sewer is greater than twelve inches in diameter and no properly located "Y" is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, which shall enter in the downstream direction at an angle of about forty-five degrees. A forty-five-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
H.  Connection of Sources of Surface Water Runoff To Public Sanitary Sewer. No person shall cause the connection of downspouts, exterior foundation drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer which is in turn connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
I.  Protection of Public from Hazard During Work—Restoration of Public Property After Completion of Work. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
J.  Work Safety Standards. All applicable provisions, rules, regulations and statutes of the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) shall be met by persons, firms or corporations constructing any building sewer or appurtenances within the jurisdiction of the city. 
K.  Inspection. The applicant of the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
L.  Sanitary Sewer Lift Station (Lift Station(s)). No lift station shall be privately owned or maintained. All lift stations constructed or installed by a private individual or entity shall be dedicated to, and accepted by, the city of Locust Grove (city) for maintenance. The following shall be required before a lift station can be put in operation and the same accepted by the city: 
1.  Gravity flow sanitary sewer systems that flow into the lift station shall be designed and installed in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and design, installation, and construction specifications of the city regarding gravity flow sewer systems. 
2.  The lift station and the associated force main line that runs from the lift station shall be designed and installed in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and design, installation, and construction specifications of the city regarding lift stations and associated force main sewer systems. 
3.  The design of the gravity flow sewer line flowing into the lift station, the lift station, and the associated force main system shall be submitted to the city in such form as the city manager may require. Prior to construction and/or installation, the design of the gravity flow sewer line flowing into the lift station, and the associated force main, shall be approved by the city and a "Notice to Commence Installation/Construction" shall be issued by said city. 
4.  Prior to installation/construction of either the gravity flow sewer line flowing into the lift station, or the associated force main system, the person or entity seeking to construct the lift station shall pay to the city a nonrefundable fee in the amount of fifty thousand dollars for operation and maintenance of the lift station. 
5.  Prior to acceptance of any lift station, or any gravity flow sewer line and sewer force main system associated therewith, the city shall inspect the same to ensure that all applicable rules, regulations, and installation, design, and construction standards have been complied with. 
M.  Construction of Sewer Trunk Lines and Interceptor Sewer Lines That Are Associated with Sanitary Sewer Lift Stations. 
1.  If the city of Locust Grove (city) allows the construction of a sanitary sewer lift station (lift station) and the property using the lift station abuts a stream, creek, or tributary upon which the city has planned the construction of an interceptor sewer line, the property owner shall be required to pay the estimated cost of construction of the interceptor sewer line for the total distance that the property owner's property abuts said stream. Said funds shall be held by the city and used in the subsequent construction of the interceptor sewer line. 
2.  If the property to be served by the sewer lift station does not fall within the provisions of subsection (M)(1) above, then the property owner shall be required to pay to the city the estimated cost of running a sewer trunk line of a sufficient size from the lift station to the nearest tributary upon which the city contemplates the construction of an interceptor sewer line. 
3.  The cost to be assessed for each of the sewer lines described in subsection (M)(l) and (2) above shall be computed by the city upon the estimated cost of the construction of an eight inch sewer line, taking into consideration the cost of labor, materials, depths of cut required to install the sewer line, rock, wetland mitigation, permitting, and any other costs associated with the construction of a sewer line. 
N.  Pumping of Sewage from One Drainage District to Another Drainage District. 
1.  The city of Locust Grove is divided into certain sewage drainage areas. Pumping of sewage from one drainage area to another drainage area is allowed only as hereinafter provided. 
2.  Sewage may be pumped from one drainage area to another drainage area under the following conditions: 
a.  Sewage is generated by a public entity for a facility that is being used for a public purpose. 
b.  The drainage area in which a wastewater treatment facility is located has capacity in excess of the amount calculated by the city that will be needed for the development of the drainage area in which the sewage treatment facility is located. 
c.  If an insufficient capacity in wastewater treatment plants located within one or more of the city's drainage areas results, sewage may not be pumped into those drainage basins except as set forth in subsection (N)(2)(a) above. 
(Ord. 03-05-05F §§ 1—3; prior code § 5-1-42) 
13.12.120 - Discharge of stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
A.  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
B.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Prior code § 5-1-51) 
13.12.130 - Discharge of objectionable and harmful items. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
A.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit; 
B.  Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred milligrams per liter of fat, oil or greases or any other substance which may solidify between thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees Celsius and sixty-five degrees Celsius); 
C.  Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
D.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded; 
E.  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage works; 
F.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage works; 
G.  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewerage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewerage treatment plant; 
H.  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids or dissolved solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewerage treatment plant; 
I.  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. Concentrations of hydrogen sulfide, sulphur dioxide and nitrous dioxide are limited to a maximum of 1.0 milligrams per liter; 
J.  Any waters containing strong acid, iron-pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
K.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with state and federal regulations; 
L.  Any materials which exert or cause excessive discoloration; 
M.  Any unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs as defined in this chapter; 
N.  Any waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other receiving waters. 
(Prior code § 5-1-52) 
13.12.140 - Discharge of sewage. 
No sewage, as defined in this chapter, shall be discharged directly or indirectly onto any street or other surface, nor into any storm sewer, stream or body of water. 
(Prior code § 5-1-53) 
13.12.150 - Discharge of liquid wastes containing grease, oil and sand—Construction and maintenance of interceptors. 
A.  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 
B.  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, and shall be watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
C.  When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Prior code 5-1-54) 
13.12.160 - Certain discharges into public sewers conditioned on review and approval of superintendent—Preliminary treatment. 
A.  The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes with the following characteristics shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent: 
1.  Having a five-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand greater than three hundred milligrams per liter; 
2.  Containing more than three-hundred fifty milligrams per liter of suspended solids; 
3.  Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in Section 13.12.130; or 
4.  Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city. 
B.  Where necessary, in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to do the following: 
1.  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to three hundred fifty milligrams per liter; 
2.  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in Section 13.12.130; or 
3.  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or wastes. 
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing. 
C.  Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Prior code § 5-1-55) 
13.12.170 - Discharge of industrial wastes containing incompatible or toxic pollutants—Pretreatment standards. 
Any industrial user who purposes to discharge incompatible or toxic pollutants into the sewer system shall meet pretreatment requirements of best practical treatment. 
(Amended during 1994 recodification; prior code § 5-1-56) 
13.12.180 - Special agreements to accept industrial wastes of unusual strength. 
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Prior code § 5-1-57) 
13.12.190 - Installation of control manhole for sampling and measuring discharges. 
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and the owner at his expense shall maintain the same so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Prior code 5-1-58) 
13.12.200 - Standards for testing discharges. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in Sections 13.12.130 and 13.12.160 shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and shall be determined at the control manhole provided in Section 13.12.190, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no such special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Prior code § 5-1-59) 
13.12.210 - Violation—Penalties. 
A.  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except Section 13.12.020, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
B.  Any person who shall violate the provisions of Section 13.12.020, or who shall continue any violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in Section 13.12.160, or who shall continue any other violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in subsection A of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each day in which such a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and violation. 
(Prior code § 5-1-32) 
Chapter 13.16 - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES 
Sections: 

13.16.010 - Charges for initial water service. 
A.  Water Connection Fee. The water tap-on fee shall be a nonrefundable connection fee which shall consist of the total of a water system impact fee plus the cost to the city of connecting the building to the water system. The water system impact fee shall be determined from the impact fee schedule shown on exhibit B, set out at the end of this chapter and incorporated by reference herein. For uses not listed on exhibit B, the water system impact fee shall be determined by multiplying the per-gallon-per-day fee shown on exhibit B times the average daily water consumption of the proposed use in gallons per day. The cost of water connection shall be the actual cost of the connection to the city, including all direct and indirect costs of materials, labor and equipment, as determined by the mayor from time to time. 
B.  Collection of Connection Fees. All fees for connection to the water system shall be paid as a prerequisite for approval of said connection to the water system. The following shall control the collection of said fees: 
1.  The city may accept a deposit reflecting the estimated cost to the city of connecting the use to water, pending final determination of actual costs after the work has been completed. 
2.  Impact Fee Schedule. Fees paid on the basis of the impact fee schedule shown on exhibit B, set out at the end of this chapter and incorporated by reference herein, to which the direct cost of connection has been added, shall be nonrefundable and constitute full and complete payment unless the city determines that the average daily usage exceeds the amount of usage contemplated under the fees set forth in exhibit B. If the city determines that the average daily usage exceeds said amount, the city shall bill the owner of the property an additional impact fee, which fee shall be due within thirty days of receipt of said bill. 
3.  Fees Calculated on Average Daily Usage Basis. 
a.  For water impact fees proposed to be calculated on the basis of average gallon-per-day usage instead of the impact fee schedule, the applicant shall present credible evidence prepared, certified and sealed by a knowledgeable professional engineer (P.E.) registered in the state of Georgia acceptable to the city, or other person acceptable to the city, regarding the projected water usage of the proposed use. Such evidence shall be based on other similar uses, historical water usage by the same type of use, engineering calculations based on accepted standards and practices, or other data or procedures acceptable to the city. 
b.  The payment of an impact fee calculated on the basis of average daily usage may be accepted by the city as a conditional payment, pending actual water usage experienced by the use over a twelve-month period of full operation or occupancy. 
c.  Impact fees paid under the above-stated calculation are nonrefundable. If there is any expansion or increase in the average daily usage, additional impact fees shall be collected by the city based upon the amount of the impact fee that is in existence as of the date of the determination of the expansion or the increased daily usage. The additional fee shall be due within thirty days of receipt of said bill. 
4.  Appeals. The mayor or his designee shall have the authority to interpret this section and the calculation of appropriate connection fees, including both impact fees and direct connection costs to the city. Any aggrieved applicant for connection to the water system may appeal the decision of the mayor to the city council, whose determination shall be final. 
(Ord. 96-11.11.C; Ord. 2/14/94 (part): Ord. 9/11/89 (part): prior code § 5-1-13 (part)) 
13.16.015 - Connection of building sewer—Fees and expense. 
All cost and expense incident to connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the city property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. Any connection from the city property line into public sewer shall be made by the city, for which the owner shall pay the city a connection fee determined as follows: 
A.  Sewer Connection Fee. The sewer tap-on fee shall be a nonrefundable connection fee which shall consist of the total of a sewer system impact fee plus the cost to the city of connecting the building to the sewer system (if any). The sewer system impact fee shall be determined from the Impact Fee Schedule shown on Exhibit B, set out at the end of this chapter and incorporated by reference herein. For uses not listed on Exhibit B, the sewer system impact fee shall be determined by multiplying the per-gallon-per-day fee shown on Exhibit B times the average daily water consumption of the proposed use in gallons per day. The cost of sewer connection shall be the actual cost of the connection to the city, including all direct and indirect costs of materials, labor and equipment, as determined by the mayor from time to time. 
B.  Collection of Connection Fees. All fees for connection to the sewer system shall be paid as a prerequisite for approval of said connection to the sewer system. The following shall control the collection of said fees: 
1.  The city may accept a deposit reflecting the estimated cost to the city of connecting the use to sewer (if any), pending final determination of actual costs after the work has been completed. 
2.  Impact Fee Schedule. Fees paid on the basis of the Impact Fee Schedule shown on Exhibit B, set out at the end of this chapter and incorporated by reference herein, to which the direct cost of connection has been added, shall be non-refundable and constitute full and complete payment unless the city determines that the average daily usage exceeds the amount of usage contemplated under the fees set forth in Exhibit B. If the city determines that the average daily usage exceeds said amount, the city shall bill the owner of the property an additional impact fee, which fee shall be due within thirty days of receipt of said bill. 
3.  Fees Calculated on Average Daily Usage Basis. 
a.  For sewer impact fees proposed to be calculated on the basis of average gallons-per-day usage instead of the Impact Fee Schedule, the applicant shall present credible evidence prepared, certified and sealed by a knowledgeable professional engineer (P.E.) registered in the state of Georgia acceptable to the city, or other person acceptable to the city, regarding the projected water usage of the proposed use. Such evidence shall be based on other similar uses, historical water usage by the same type of use, engineering calculations based on accepted standards and practices, or other data or procedures acceptable to the city. 
b.  The payment of an impact fee calculated on the basis of average daily usage may be accepted by the city as a conditional payment, pending actual water usage experienced by the use over a twelve-month period of full operation or occupancy. 
c.  Impact fees paid under the above-stated calculation are non-refundable. If there is any expansion or increase in the average daily usage, additional impact fees shall be collected by the city based upon the amount of the impact fee that is in existence as of the date of the determination of the expansion or the increased daily usage. The additional fee shall be due within thirty days of receipt of said bill. 
4.  Appeals. The mayor or his designee shall have the authority to interpret this section and the calculation of appropriate connection fees, including both impact fees and direct connection costs to the city. Any aggrieved applicant for connection to the water or sewer system may appeal the decision of the mayor to the city council, whose determination shall be final. 
(Ord. 2/14/94 (part): Ord. 9/11/89 (part): prior code §§ 5-1-13 (part), 5-1-39) 
13.16.016 - Irrigation water meters. 
The city water sewerage department (the "department") may issue, upon proper application, a meter for the use of water which will not be returned directly to a public sewer system (hereinafter "irrigation water meter"). Water used through irrigation water meters shall be charged in accordance with the rate schedule for irrigation water meters set forth in Exhibit "A" to this chapter. Irrigation water meters shall be subject to the same requirements for water meters, in general, as set forth in Title 13. 
(Ord. 07-04-037 § 1) 
13.16.017 - Prepayments and credits for water and/or sewer impact fees. 
When eligible, feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. 
A.  Credits; Restrictions. 
1.  Except as provided in subparagraph (A)(2) below or in a private agreement meeting the definition established in Section 13.16.19, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 10-02-0008]. 
2.  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his or her predecessor in title or interest) for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the City of Locust Grove Comprehensive Plan, prior to the effective date of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 10-02-0008], is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this ordinance [Ordinance No. 10-02-0008], any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of the city of Locust Grove, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
3.  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements, or for system improvements not included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Granting of Credits. 
1.  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a water and/or sewer impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
a.  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the City of Locust Grove Comprehensive Plan; 
b.  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the capital improvements element; and, 
c.  The mayor and council shall have explicitly approved said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
2.  The credit allowed pursuant to this section shall not exceed the impact fee due for such system improvement unless a greater credit is allowed under a private agreement executed under the provisions of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 10-02-0008]. In the event that a developer enters into such a private agreement with the City of Locust Grove, Georgia to construct, fund, or contribute system improvements such that the amount of the credit created is in excess of the impact fee which would otherwise have been paid for the development project, the developer shall be reimbursed for such excess construction, funding, or contribution from impact fees paid by other development located in the service area which is benefited by such improvements. 
C.  Guidelines for Credit Valuation. Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
1.  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the administrator of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
2.  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
3.  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that the City of Locust Grove, Georgia would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
4.  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest accepted by the city, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
5.  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned on a state of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the mayor and council in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
D.  Credits; Application. 
1.  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the administrator. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the administrator at or before the time of impact fee assessment. 
2.  The administrator, in his or her sole discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
3.  Any credit approved by the administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
E.  Credits; Abandoned Building Permits. In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the city, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
F.  Credits; Transfer/Collateralization—Generally. 
1.  Credit or a portion of credit assigned to a person or entity for paid impact fees, including water and/or sewer impact fees, may be transferred or collateralized only upon strict compliance with the terms of this section and the terms of an applicable development agreement as referenced in Section 13.16.19. To the extent the terms of such development agreement conflict with this section, the terms of this section shall control. Credit for water and/or sewer impact fees may be transferred only within a water/sewer basin served by the City of Locust Grove Indian Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant within the jurisdiction of the city of Locust Grove. No transfer or collateralization of credit is permitted without first obtaining a certification in accordance with this section, and no transfer or collateralization is valid without filing an affidavit of transfer or collateralization in accordance with this section. 
2.  The administrator shall maintain and update a record of all credits held, transferred and collateralized. 
3.  Prior to the transfer or collateralization of credit, an application shall be filed with administrator, providing information requested pursuant to the forms used by that department. Such information shall include at a minimum the following: 
a.  The value of the credit to be transferred or collateralized based upon the value at the time the credit was approved by action of the mayor and city council, or at the time of payment of the impact fee, if no value was assigned by the mayor and city council. 
b.  The name, address, telephone number, electronic mail address and tax identification number of the current holder of the credit affected by the application and the person or entity to whom such credit will be transferred or for whom such credit will serve as collateral. (The applicant shall be the holder of the credit.) 
c.  A signed and sealed survey by a Georgia registered land surveyor and legal description of the property to which the credit applied at the time of application. 
d.  In the case of a transfer of credit to be used for a particular parcel, a signed and sealed survey by a Georgia registered land surveyor and legal description of the property to which the credits are intended to be applied. 
e.  An affirmation by the applicant that the credit stated in the application is not a duplication or misrepresentation of the value of credit actually held by the applicant to be transferred or collateralized. 
f.  Authorization by both the applicant and recipient/creditor that the city may record such information as necessary to reflect the transfer or collateralization in the Henry County property records. 
g.  The signatures of the applicant and recipient/creditor. 
h.  Payment of an administrative fee established pursuant to this section. 
i.  Any additional information requested by the administrator regarding the credits or the transaction involving said credits. 
4.  The administrator shall review the application and the credit records to verify the value of credits to be affected by an application. After verification, the administrator shall certify in writing the value of credits held by the applicant and transmit or mail said certification to both the applicant and recipient/creditor. 
5.  Within ten calendar days after the transfer or collateralization of the credit, the applicant shall file with the administrator an affidavit executed by the applicant specifying the value of credit actually transferred or collateralized, to whom and when the credit was transferred or collateralized; and any other information required by the administrator consistent with this code section. The transfer or collateralization shall not exceed the value certified by the administrator. 
6.  To administer this section, the administrator may collect a minimum application fee of twenty-five dollars plus any amount in excess of said fee for recording notice of the transaction in the Henry County property records. 
7.  Failure to strictly follow any of the procedures set forth in this section renders the transfer or collateralization of credits automatically null and void, without effect against the city. 
G.  Credits—Abandoned Building Permits. In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the city, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 10-02-008, § 1, 2-1-10) 
13.16.018 - Refunds. 
A.  Eligibility for a Refund. 
1.  Upon the request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a water and/or sewer impact fee has been paid, the water and/or sewer impact fee shall be refunded if: 
a.  Capacity is available in the public facility for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or, 
b.  The water and/or sewer impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
2.  In determining whether water and/or sewer impact fees have been encumbered, water and/or sewer impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
B.  Notice of Entitlement to a Refund. When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the water and/or sewer impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the water and/or sewer impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in the city of Locust Grove within thirty days after the expiration of the six-year period after the date that the water and/or sewer impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "Notice of Entitlement to Water and/or sewer Impact Fee Refund." No refund shall be made for a period of thirty days from the date of said publication. 
C.  Filing a Request for a Refund. All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. Such funds together with the accrued interest thereon shall be transferred to the general revenue account of the City of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
D.  Payment of Refunds. 
1.  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within sixty days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than thirty days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
2.  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
3.  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 10-02-008, § 1, 2-1-10) 
13.16.019 - Private contractual agreements. 
A.  Private Agreements; Authorized. Nothing in this ordinance [Ordinance No. 10-02-008) shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the city and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project, provided that: 
1.  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the City of Locust Grove Comprehensive Plan; and, 
2.  The amount of any credit granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
B.  Private Agreements; Provisions. A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
1.  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the city to assess additional water and/or sewer impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this ordinance. 
2.  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which water and/or sewer impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable water and/or sewer impact fees. 
3.  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this ordinance [Ordinance No. 10-02-0008], provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the water and/or sewer impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do business within the state of Georgia, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
C.  Private Agreements; Procedure. 
1.  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the mayor and council. 
2.  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the mayor and council of the city prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
3.  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording. 
(Ord. No. 10-02-008, § 1, 2-1-10) 
13.16.020 - Minimum charges. 
The minimum charge provided in the rate schedule shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Prior code § 5-1-91) 
(Ord. No. 15-03-019, § 1, 3-2-15) 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 15-03-019, adopted Mar. 2, 2015, amended Ch. 3.16 by striking §§ 13.16.020 through 13.16.060 and inserting new provisions to be designated as set out. Where possible, history pertaining to like-titled provisions, were maintained. 
13.16.022 - Rate schedule. 
A.  Rates for water and sewer use shall be determined from time to time by the mayor and council, a current schedule of which shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk and is set out at the end of this chapter as exhibit A. 
B.  Extraordinary circumstances, such as multiple dwelling units, industrial users and fire protection shall be governed by special contract agreements made by the mayor and council on recommendation of the city's engineer. 
C.  At any time the consumer requests his service be turned on or off by the city, except for termination of service, there will be a fee of twenty-five dollars. This fee shall be billed with monthly water bills and collected as provided in Section 13.16.050 of this chapter. 
D.  At any time the customer requests that his service meter be re-read, there will be a fifteen dollar service charge; provided, however, that if the meter was read in error by the city there will be no charge. 
(Ord. 08-11-073 § 1; Ord. 07-04-037 § 2; Ord. 05-02-010 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-08.05E § 1; Ord. 00-4-24A Art. I; Ord. 97-12.08E Art. II, 1997; Ord. 96-12.9; Ord. 9/13/93; Ord. 11/12/90; prior code § 5-1-92) 
(Ord. No. 15-03-019, § 1, 3-2-15) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 13.16.020. 
13.16.025 - Application for water and/or sewer service, deposit required, return of deposit, turn-on inspection and re-inspection fee. 
A.  Persons or entities seeking water and/or sewer service from the city after March 1, 2015, shall make application for said service and pay a deposit as stated herein to the city. Applications for water and/or sewer service through the city are available at city hall and on the city's website. 
B.  Deposit required. A deposit is due to the city at the time application is made to establish water and/or sewer service. The amount of the deposit shall be as follows: 
1.  Owner-occupied residence with proof of ownership and an approved letter of credit. Persons or entities can provide evidence by a reference letter of credit from a utility company (i.e., water, gas, electric, cable, internet, phone, or cellular/mobile phone) the deposit shall be seventy-five dollars, provided that the letters of credit show that the customer had at least six months of continuous utility service in the last twelve months and had no more than one late payment, no collection charges, no temporary termination of service (cut-offs), and no returned (NSF) checks/payments within the applicable period. Without said approved letter of credit, or, if applicant had a former account that was not in good standing with the city, the amount of the deposit shall be one hundred fifty dollars. 
2.  Renter-occupied residence and all commercial, institutional, or industrial customers, the amount of the deposit shall be one hundred fifty dollars. 
3.  Service shall not be provided to any person or entity who does not qualify under this chapter for said service and who has not made application and paid said deposit for service. Any deposit made by returned (NSF) check shall result in automatic termination of service, returned check fee of thirty-five dollars and a twenty-five dollar reconnection fee. Deposit amount will be increased to one hundred fifty dollars regardless of any prior approved letter of credit. 
4.  Return of deposit. In all cases the deposit shall be returned in full to customer upon cancellation of service with proof of payment in full for any outstanding water and/or sewer bills. After twelve months of continuous service with the city with not more than one late payment, no service disconnections due to failure to pay, nor any returned (NSF) checks, a person or entity can file application with the city for partial return of not more than one half of the original deposit, or fifty dollars, whichever is greater, to be applied over a six-month period to the current account as a form of payment. Otherwise, said deposit, in part or in full, shall be forfeited to city if any of the following apply: 
a.  Customer has an outstanding balance for water and/or sewer service; and/or 
b.  Customer has abandoned premises and failed to cancel water or sewer service. 
C.  An initial inspection shall be conducted for each turn-on for water service to determine if there may be a leak on the property-side of the respective water service location. If at that time, it is discovered that a leak is depicted on the city's service meter, water shall be immediately disconnected and the person or entity who made application for said service shall be contacted. Upon notice by the person or entity seeking water service that repairs have been made to the leak on the property-side of the respective water service location, water service shall be reconnected upon payment of a twenty-dollar re-inspection fee. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-067, §§ 1, 2, 12-6-10; Ord. No. 15-03-019, § 1, 3-2-15) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 13.16.020. 
13.16.030 - Water and sanitary sewer meter inspections and fees. 
A.  The city water and sewerage department (the "department") shall perform a water and/or sewer installation visit for all new construction in the city. The department shall also perform a water and/or sewer meter inspection prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for the connected structure. The cost of said meter installation visit(s) and the initial meter inspection shall be included in the water and/or sewer tap-on fee. 
B.  In the event any water and/or sewer meter inspection results in a failed inspection, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the connected structure utilizing the failed water and/or sewer meter connection. Upon failed inspection, corrective action shall be required before re-inspection. It is unlawful for any person or entity to transfer any interest in a structure for which the department has not issued a passing water and/or sewer meter inspection letter. 
C.  Once the department has issued a passing water and/or sewer meter inspection letter, it is unlawful for any person or entity to tamper with, alter or change in any way the same water and/or sewer meter without the department performing a re-inspection of the same meter. 
D.  Any person or entity requesting a re-inspection for either a failed inspection or altered water and/or sewer meter, shall pay to the city a re-inspection fee of fifty dollars per re-inspection. 
(Ord. 07-01-009, § 2) 
(Ord. No. 15-03-019, § 1, 3-2-15) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 13.16.020. 
13.16.040 - Meter reading—Billing—Collecting. 
Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at the city hall in the manner as provided for in Section 13.16.045, and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
A.  All bills shall be due on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the issuance thereof. 
B.  Nonpayment of all sums due the city after the due date shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. The late fee shall be applied on the morning of the next business day. Should the fifteenth day of the month follow on a weekend or a city-observed holiday, the late fee will be applied the morning of the next business day. Morning as defined herein shall be construed as being the start of regular business hours of the city. 
C.  Failure to pay all sums due to the city by the morning of the twentieth day of the month shall cause the termination of water as provided in Section 13.16.050. Morning as defined herein shall be construed as being the start of regular business hours of the city. If the twentieth day of the month falls on a weekend or a city-observed holiday, then termination date shall be the morning of the following business day. 
(Ord. 96-10.24B, § 1; prior code § 5-1-93) 
(Ord. No. 10-12-067, § 3, 12-6-10; Ord. No. 15-03-019, § 1, 3-2-15) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 13.16.020. 
13.16.045 - Method of payment—Online bill management—Fee for pay by phone. 
The city shall accept cash in U.S. currency, checks drawn on U.S. banks in U.S. currency, money orders in U.S. currency, and credit cards as authorized by the city for payment of charges and fees. 
A.  The city shall provide a location within the corporate limits to accept payment in person by the approved methods of payment during regular business hours. No additional fees shall be required for payments made in person. 
B.  The city shall make available a receptacle for payment during times and days not during regular business hours. This receptacle shall be checked for payments by the morning of the next regular business day. The only acceptable forms of payment in this receptacle shall be check or money order. Any other forms of payment placed in the receptacle shall be rejected and kept in said receptacle until claimed by the respective party, and the city shall not be held liable for any losses of those rejected forms of payment. 
C.  The city shall make available payment and bill management through an online service provider as authorized by the city subject to payment fees as stated by the service provider to cover the fees for the additional flexibility. 
D.  Effective April 1, 2015, the city shall be authorized to take payments by accepted credit cards over the telephone subject to a fee of two dollars and fifty cents per payment. 
(Ord. No. 15-03-019, § 1, 3-2-15) 
13.16.050 - Termination of service for nonpayment. 
A.  Persons or entities who have failed to pay all sums due to the city for water and/or sewer services by the morning of the fifth day after the due date (as stated in Section 13.16.040(C)) shall have their water and sewer service discontinued with the following notice provided at the location of water and/or sewer service: 
"Notice is hereby given that you are in arrears in the payment of your monthly water and/or sewer bills and that your water service has been discontinued. In order to have service restored, you must make arrangement to pay all sums due to the city for water and/or sewer service and pay a reconnection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) as provided by Chapter 13.16 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Locust Grove, regardless if actual service has been physically discontinued." 
B.  Persons seeking to restore service shall follow the procedure as provided in Section 13.16.060(B) of this chapter. 
C.  The city manager is empowered to resolve any dispute that may arise under the provisions of this section and, after hearing such dispute, order that service be continued or restored. 
(Ord. 05-02-010, § 3; prior code § 5-1-94) 
(Ord. No. 10-12-067, § 4, 12-6-10; Ord. No. 15-03-019, § 1, 3-2-15) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 13.16.020. 
13.16.060 - Suspension of service. 
A.  When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance as provided in Section 13.16.080. 
B.  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only if the bills are paid in full and a security deposit has been paid, together with a reconnection service charge of fifty dollars for each meter reconnected. 
C.  The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
1.  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
2.  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules; 
3.  Emergency repairs; 
4.  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control; 
5.  Legal processes; 
6.  Direction of public authorities; 
7.  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Ord. 05-02-010, § 4; Ord. 97-12.08.E Art. I, 1997; prior code § 5-1-95) 
(Ord. No. 15-03-019, § 1, 3-2-15) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 13.16.020. 
13.16.070 - Complaints—Adjustments. 
A.  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill shall become delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
B.  Settlement of claims and adjustments of bills are subject to the following additional provisions: 
1.  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of the consumer for a fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was over read, no charge will be made. 
2.  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer, upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
3.  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Prior code § 5-1-96) 
(Ord. No. 15-03-019, § 1, 3-2-15) 
13.16.080 - Liability of property owner. 
A.  Each owner of property shall be liable and responsible for the full payment of all water and/or sewer services furnished to their property. The charges to be made for services rendered shall be made against the owners, occupants, tenants or lessees of the buildings or premises receiving the services from the city. If the tenant or lessee is in default, the owner of the property shall be liable and responsible for full payment of all water and/or sewer services furnished to the property. 
B.  In addition to the right of termination of water and/or sewer services as provided in this chapter, if enforcement of payment is necessary, the costs of such enforcement, including attorney's fees, shall be the expense of the firm, corporation, owner or lessee liable for the payment of water and/or sewer services, and collection may be made by process or procedures of law now available or which may hereafter be available, expressly including the right to cause a fi. fa. to be issued, levied and collected against the person, firm or corporation who incurred the charges (excluding the property owner where required by O.C.G.A. Section 36-60-17). 
(Ord. 05-02-010 § 5; Ord. 95-6.12 § 1) 
13.16.090 - Separate water meter. 
If any city resident wishes to purchase and install a separate water meter for outside watering, said meter must be in compliance with the type meter being used by the city water department at the time. Such meter and installation must be approved by the director of the city public works department. 
(Ord. 00-03.04 § 1) 
Exhibit A  RATE SCHEDULES 
A.  WATER RATE SCHEDULE: 
1.  Water Meters (effective April 1, 2015). 

 
2.  Irrigation Water Meters (effective April 1, 2015). 

 
*  Amounts represent the minimum monthly charge, regardless of the amount of water used. 
**  Amounts represent charges in addition to the minimum monthly charge based on the amount of water used. 
B.  SEWER RATE SCHEDULE: 
1.  Sewer Meters (based on the amount of water used, effective April 1, 2015). 

 
*  Amounts represent the minimum monthly charge, regardless of the amount of water used. 
**  Amounts represent charges in addition to the minimum monthly charge based on the amount of water used. 
2.  Minimum Monthly Charge for Meters 2 Inches or Larger: 
No additional charges will be assessed based on meter size for sewer. 
C.  HYDRANT METER AND VALVE SCHEDULE: 
If anyone wishes to rent the city hydrant meter, the following fees shall apply: 

 
D.  AUTOMATIC INCREASE TO RATE SCHEDULE: 
Rates as established in Items A—C above shall increase two percent (2%) each January 1st and each July 1st of every calendar year beginning July 1, 2015, which shall be reflected in a current rate schedule to be retained in City Hall by the City Clerk. 
Exhibit B  NET IMPACT COSTS BY LAND USE TYPE  LOCUST GROVE WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS 

 
* Not including costs to set water meter or connect to sewer. 
Exhibit C  TAP FEES 

 
*  Water and sewer tap fees do not include street repair or bore charges, if necessary. All tap fees and estimated costs must be paid prior to initiating installation. 
Chapter 13.20 - PRIVATE SEWERAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 
Sections: 

13.20.010 - Applicability—Connection requirement. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 13.12.060, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewerage disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-1-71) 
13.20.020 - Permit required. 
No property owner, occupant, tenant or lessee will be allowed to construct a privately owned sewage disposal system without first filing an application with the city, paying an inspection fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council, and obtaining a written consent from the mayor and council. Any person, firm or corporation installing a private sewage disposal system shall execute an agreement with the city stating that should sewage facilities become available to the subject property that said person, firm or corporation, his/its heirs, administrators, executors, transferees, successors and assigns shall agree to connect onto said city sewage disposal facilities and pay the required tap-on fees and deposit at the time said facilities are made available to said property owner. 
(Prior code 5-1-72) 
13.20.030 - Inspection required. 
A permit for the private sewerage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-eight hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(Prior code § 5-1-73) 
13.20.040 - Construction specifications. 
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewerage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Natural Resources of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private sewerage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than fifteen thousand square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Prior code § 5-1-74) 
13.20.050 - Operation and maintenance at expense of owner. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewerage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(Prior code § 5-1-75) 
13.20.060 - Compliance with requirements of health officer. 
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements, that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Prior code § 5-1-76) 
13.20.070 - Abandonment when public sewer becomes available. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewerage disposal system, as provided in Section 13.12.060, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewerage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Prior code § 5-1-77) 
Chapter 13.24 - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 
Sections: 

13.24.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. 02-03.04 § 1) 
13.24.020 - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section: 
A.  "Hazardous waste" or "material" means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
1.  Cause of significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
2.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
B.  "Sanitary landfill" means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
C.  "Wellhead" means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. 02-03.04 § 2) 
13.24.030 - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and radius of which is two hundred fifty feet. In a situation where the two hundred fifty feet radius from the wellhead extends into the jurisdiction of another government entity, the city will request that government to respect the protective features of this chapter. 
(Ord. 02-03.04 § 3) 
13.24.040 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
A.  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single family residential districts; and 
B.  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. 02-03.04 § 4) 
13.24.050 - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under Section 13.24.040: 
A.  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
B.  Any new septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
C.  Any new impervious surfaces other than roofs or buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under Section 13.24.040; 
D.  Sanitary landfills; 
E.  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
F.  Any new stormwater infiltration basins; 
G.  Any new underground storage tanks; 
H.  Any new sanitary sewer lines within two hundred fifty feet of a wellhead. 
(Ord. 02-03.04 § 5) 
13.24.060 - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under the ordinance codified in this chapter, including without limitation those applicable to non-conforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city of Locust Grove, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. 02-03.04 § 6) 
Chapter 13.25 - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
Sections: 

13.25.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 1, 3-2-09) 
13.25.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 1, 3-2-09) 
13.25.030 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
"City" means the city of Locust Grove. 
"Covered account" means: 
(a)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(b)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
"Credit" means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payments therefore. 
"Creditor" means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
"Customer" means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
"Identity theft" means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
"Person" means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
"Personal identifying information" means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information, and driver's license information, and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
"Red flag" means a pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
"Service provider" means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 1, 3-2-09) 
13.25.040 - Findings. 
(1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(2)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water and sewer services. 
(3)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(4)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's records and is not otherwise distributed. 
(5)  The city determines that there is a low to moderate risk of identify theft occurring in the following way: 
i.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
ii.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
iii.  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
iv.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 1, 3-2-09) 
13.25.050 - Process of establishing a covered account. 
A.  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, and in addition to all other application and security deposit requirements of this chapter, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer, to wit: a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent operating the account. 
B.  If the covered account services real property titled in more than one person, then personal identifying information must be presented by each property owner of record. If the customer opening the covered account is a tenant, personal identifying information must be presented for each tenant and each property owner of record. 
C.  Should the city choose to utilize an on-line or web-based payment method, the city must then ensure that each covered account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 1, 3-2-09) 
13.25.060 - Access to covered account information. 
A.  Access to covered accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
B.  Such password(s) shall be changed by the city clerk, or his/her designee on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
C.  All city computers on which customer information is stored and/or accessible must have screen savers and additional "time out" devices to deter unauthorized users. 
D.  Printed customer information shall not be left unattended at any employee desk or workstation and must instead be secured in a limited access area, locked cabinet or similar secure place when said information is not actively in use. 
E.  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city clerk and the password changed immediately. 
F.  Personal identifying information included in customer covered accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city clerk and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 1, 3-2-09) 
13.25.070 - Credit card payments. 
A.  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
B.  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the city computer database. 
C.  Account statement and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 1, 3-2-09) 
13.25.080 - Sources and types of red flags. 
A.  All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
B.  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
i.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
ii.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
iii.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
iv.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
(a)  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
(b)  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
(c)  A material change in the volume or frequency in credit used; 
(d)  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
C.  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
i.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
ii.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
iii.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
iv.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily available information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or recent check; or 
v.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
D.  Suspicious personal identifying identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious personal identifying information include: 
i.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
(a)  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
(b)  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File; 
ii.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth, gender, race, or age; 
iii.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institutions or creditor; 
iv.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers; 
v.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the address or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers; 
vi.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete; 
vii.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor; 
viii.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
E.  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
i.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
ii.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
(a)  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
iii.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
(a)  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments. 
(b)  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
iv.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
v.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
vi.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
vii.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
viii.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
F.  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing related to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 1, 3-2-09) 
13.25.090 - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
A.  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city clerk, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, the city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk: 
i.  Contact the customer; 
ii.  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
(a)  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
(b)  Close the account; 
iii.  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
iv.  Notify a debt collector within forty-eight hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
v.  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; and 
vi.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
B.  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city clerk, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk: 
i.  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
ii.  Deny the application for the new account and notify the applicant as to the reason(s) for denial; 
iii.  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
iv.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 1, 3-2-09) 
13.25.100 - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
A.  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
B.  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
C.  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
D.  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
E.  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 1, 3-2-09) 
13.25.110 - Program administration. 
The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city council is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by the city clerk and his or her staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with making material changes to the program, as may be recommended by the city clerk to address changing identity theft risks and to identity new or discontinued types of covered accounts. 
A.  The city clerk will report to the city council at least annually, on compliance with red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
i.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
ii.  Service provider arrangements; 
iii.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; 
iv.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
B.  The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 1, 3-2-09) 
13.25.120 - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the city council shall exercise their discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of the council's ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
The city shall provide existing service providers with a copy of this chapter and shall specifically notify said provider of its duty to comply with this chapter. The city and said service suppliers shall review the terms of any existing contract and amend all contractual documents to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 1, 3-2-09) 
13.25.130 through 13.25.250 - Reserved. 
Chapter 13.26 - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 
Sections: 

13.26.010 - Short title. 
[This chapter shall be known as the] treatment of address discrepancies [ordinance]. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 2, 3-2-09) 
13.26.020 - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this chapter is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 2, 3-2-09) 
13.26.030 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Notice of address discrepancy" means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
"City" means city of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 2, 3-2-09) 
13.26.040 - Policy. 
A.  In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
i.  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
(a)  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Consumer Information Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
(b)  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as application for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
(c)  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
B.  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 2, 3-2-09) 
13.26.050 - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
A.  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
i.  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
ii.  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
iii.  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
B.  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 2, 3-2-09) 
13.26.060 - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
A.  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
B.  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
C.  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
D.  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-013, § 2, 3-2-09) 
Chapter 13.30 - PUBLIC USE OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY 
Sections: 

13.30.010 - Application and fees for use of municipal property. 
Any person wishing to use municipal property shall be required to complete an application form and pay a use fee and/or security deposit, as set by the mayor and council of the city of Locust Grove for certain property owned by the city. The properties to which this section is applicable and the associated application and deposit/fee schedule shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 08-11-067 § 2) 
Title 14 - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
Chapters: 
Division I. - In General 
Chapter 14.01 - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD 
Sections: 

14.01.010 - Architectural review board. 
The city of Locust Grove has created an architectural review. Refer to Title 15, Chapter 15.44 of the code of ordinances of the city of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. 04-09-060 § 2) 
14.01.020 through 14.01.050 - Reserved. 
Division II. - Downtown Development Authority 
Chapter 14.02 - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Sections: 

14.02.010 - Statement of findings. 
It has been determined by the mayor and council of the city that: 
A.  There exists an urgent need to provide incentives for the investment of funds for the revitalization and redevelopment of the central business district of the city. 
B.  Adequate financing for the revitalization and redevelopment of the central business district of the city cannot be provided through the ordinary operation of private enterprise, and the involvement of a public agency as herein contemplated in such an undertaking would not be competitive with private enterprise. 
C.  The Downtown Development Authorities Law (Georgia Laws 1981, p. 1744 et seq., codified as Chapter 42 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "act"), which was enacted by the General Assembly of the state of Georgia, creates for every municipal corporation in the state of Georgia a public body corporate and politic to be known as the downtown development authority of such municipal corporation, which shall consist of a board of seven directors to be appointed by the governing body of such municipal corporation for initial terms of two, four and six years, and thereafter the terms of all directors shall be for six years. 
D.  The mayor and council have determined that there is a need for a downtown development authority to function in the city to aid in the financing of projects for the revitalization and redevelopment of the central business district of the city which will develop and promote for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities within the city and the state of Georgia. 
E.  The mayor and council, after a thorough study and investigation, have determined that it is desirable and necessary that a downtown development authority be activated immediately to function in the city with all the powers granted to such authorities under such act to issue revenue bonds, notes and other obligations for the purpose of providing funds to finance the cost of revitalization and redevelopment of the central business district of the city, all as more fully set forth in such act. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 8, 9 (part); prior code § 6-1-1) 
14.02.020 - Declaration of need. 
There is determined and declared to be a pressing and existing need for a downtown development authority to function in the city in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Downtown Development Authorities Law for the purpose of providing a means of financing of projects for the revitalization and redevelopment of the central business district of the city, thereby promoting the public good and general welfare of the residents of the city and the state of Georgia. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 8, 9 (part); prior code § 6-1-2) 
14.02.030 - Activation of authority. 
There is activated the public body corporate and politic to be known as the "Downtown Development Authority of the City of Locust Grove" (hereinafter referred to as the "authority"), which authority was created pursuant to the Downtown Development Authorities Law, Georgia Laws 1981, p. 1744 et seq. A true and correct copy of the act shall be attached to the resolution codified in this chapter and by this reference thereto same is incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 8, 9 (part); prior code § 6-1-3) 
14.02.040 - District designated. 
The central business district of the city is designated as the downtown development district of the city as required by Section 3 of the act, and such area and district are geographically constituted as shown in Exhibit A, attached to the resolution codified in this chapter and available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk, and expressly incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 8, 9 (part); prior code § 6-1-4) 
14.02.050 - Appointment of members. 
A.  There are elected as the initial members of the board of directors of the authority the following named persons, each of whom is a taxpayer residing in the city, as follows: 

 
B.  Upon expiration of such terms, each member thereafter shall serve a six-year term. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 8, 9 (part); prior code § 6-1-5) 
14.02.060 - Term of members. 
Effective with the date of the adoption of the resolution codified in this chapter (February 10, 1981), each of such persons named as directors above shall serve in such capacity for the number of years set forth opposite their respective names; and if, at the end of any term of office of any director, a successor thereto shall not have been elected as hereinafter provided, then the director whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until his successor shall be so elected. No person shall receive any compensation for serving as a director, but a director may be reimbursed for his actual expenses incurred in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 8, 9 (part); prior code § 6-1-6) 
14.02.070 - Residency requirement of directors. 
In the event a director at any time ceases to be a taxpayer residing in the city, his eligibility to serve as a director shall cease and his term of office shall end. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 8, 9 (part); prior code § 6-1-7) 
14.02.080 - Organization—Powers—Duties. 
The board of directors hereinbefore elected shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the act as it now exists and as same may hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 8, 9 (part); prior code § 6-1-8) 
14.02.085 - Training requirements. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 36-62A-21 any member of the downtown development authority, except for a director who is also a member of the governing body of a municipal corporation, shall attend and complete at least eight hours of training on development and redevelopment programs within the first twelve months of the member's appointment to the development authority. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 8, 9 (part); Ord. 04-02-009 § 1) 
14.02.090 - Copy furnished to state. 
The city clerk is directed to furnish to the Secretary of State of the state of Georgia a certified copy of this resolution in compliance with the mandate set forth in Section 3 of the act. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 8, 9 (part); prior code § 6-1-9) 
14.02.100 - Effective date. 
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon its adoption by the mayor and council and from and after such adoption, the authority shall be deemed to be duly created and activated and shall have perpetual existence. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 8, 9 (part); prior code § 6-1-10) 
14.02.110 through 14.02.150 - Reserved. 
Division III. - Historic Preservation Commission 
Chapter 14.03 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
Sections: 

14.03.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The mayor and council of the city of Locust Grove intend for this chapter to protect the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city and believe the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people. 
The mayor and council intend for this chapter to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business, as well as to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law. 
Further, the mayor and council intend for the ordinance codified in this chapter to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and enable the city to participate in federal or state programs to do the same. 
The mayor and council believe this chapter to be a reasonable method of regulation for the purpose of satisfying the legitimate purposes stated above. Therefore, the mayor and council hereby adopt the ordinance codified in this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 13, 14 (part)) 
14.03.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Building" means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
"Certificate of appropriateness" means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
"Exterior architectural features" mean the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the forgoing. 
"Exterior environmental features" mean all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
"Historic district" means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the city council or the city council and county board of commissioners, jointly, as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in Section 14.03.040 of this chapter. 
"Historic property" means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in Section 14.03.040(C) of this chapter. 
"Material change in appearance" means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
1.  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
2.  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
3.  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
4.  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
5.  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
"Object" means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
"Site" means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
"Structure" means a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 13, 14 (part)) 
14.03.030 - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
A.  Creation of the Commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION FOR THE CITY OF LOCUST GROVE" (hereinafter "Commission"). 
B.  Commission Position Within the City of Locust Grove, Georgia Government. The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
C.  Commission Members. Number, appointment, terms and compensation: 
1.  The commission shall consist of five regular voting members and two ex-officio (non-voting) members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All regular voting members shall reside in the corporate limits of the city of Locust Grove and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. Ex-officio members shall reside either inside of or within five miles of the corporate limits of the city of Locust Grove; 
2.  To the extent available in the city, at least three of the regular voting members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions; 
3.  Regular voting members shall serve three-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years; 
4.  Ex-officio members shall serve three-year terms. 
5.  Ex-officio members may only serve as an advisory role to the general voting members of the commission although they may serve on any subcommittee as deemed fit by the commission. 
6.  Neither regular voting members nor ex-officio members shall receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses; 
7.  Both regular voting members and ex-officio members are authorized to serve on more than one authority, board, or commission. 
D.  Statement of Commission's Power. The historic preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
1.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
2.  Recommend to the city council, specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
3.  Review application for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
4.  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
5.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
6.  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A., Section 44-10.1 through 5); 
7.  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
8.  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, the city council or commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
9.  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
10.  Submit to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties of historic districts designated; 
11.  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city's historic preservation program; 
12.  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
13.  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate county/city without prior consent; 
14.  Review and make comments to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
15.  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
E.  Commission's Power to Adopt Rules and Standards. The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this chapter. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the regular voting members. 
F.  Conflict of Interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statutes and in the city charters. 
G.  Commission's Authority to Receive Funding from Various Sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
H.  Records of Commission Meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission resolution, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. 06-03-023 § 1; Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 13, 14 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 10-06-036, §§ I, II, 6-7-10) 
14.03.040 - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
A.  Preliminary Research by the Commission. 
1.  Commission's Mandate to Conduct a Survey of Local Historical Resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
2.  Commission's Power to Recommend Districts and Buildings to the City Council for Designation. The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
3.  Commission's Documentation of Proposed Designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, noncontributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
B.  Designation of a Historic District. 
1.  Criteria for Selection of Historic Districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character of special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
2.  Boundaries of a Historic District. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of city. 
3.  Evaluation of Properties Within Historic Districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Noncontributing (does not contribute to the district as provided for in subsection (B)(1) of this section). 
C.  Designation of a Historic Property. 
1.  Criteria for Selection of Historic Properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, county or the city, or the state of Georgia for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to county, city, state of Georgia, or the region; or 
d.  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, or region. 
D.  Requirements for Adopting an Ordinance for the Designation of Historic Districts and Historic Properties. 
1.  Application for Designation of Historic Districts of Property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts - a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties - a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
2.  Required Components of a Designation Ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district and describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning maps of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
3.  Require Public Hearings. The commission and the city council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property in which all property owners are afforded the opportunity to be heard. 
Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principle newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties stating their property is likely to be materially affected by possible inclusion in the historic district. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than twenty days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention to the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
a.  Notification of Historic Preservation Division. No less than thirty days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report required in subsection (A)(3) of this section to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
b.  Recommendations on Proposed Designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within fifteen days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
c.  City Council Actions on the Commission's Recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance codified in this chapter as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
d.  Notification of Adoption of Ordinance for Designation. Within thirty days following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the commission/city council, which notice shall apprize such owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States mail shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
e.  Notification of Other Agencies Regarding Designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
f.  Moratorium on Applications for Alteration or Demolition While Ordinance for Designation is Pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to suspend the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 13, 14 (part)) 
14.03.050 - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
A.  Approval of Material Change in Appearance in Historic Districts or Involving Historic Properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property of a historic district, or of a contributing or noncontributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
B.  Exemptions. The department of transportation and any contractors, including cities and counties, performing work funded by the department of transportation are exempt from this chapter. The city and county are exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness; provided, however, that the city or county shall notify the commission forty-five days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the commission an opportunity to comment. 
C.  Submission of Plans to Commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the commission. 
D.  Interior Alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
E.  Technical Advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
F.  Public Hearings on Applications for Certificates of Appropriateness, Notices, and Right to Be Heard. The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are for before a public hearing for rezoning. The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
G.  Acceptable Commission Reaction to Applications for Certificate of Appropriateness. 
1.  Commission Action. The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
2.  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, Alteration, New Construction or Renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features, and to the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
b.  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
i.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting; 
ii.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be; 
iii.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; 
iv.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, trees judged to be fifty years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
i.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree or object; 
ii.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district; 
iii.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location; 
iv.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city; 
v.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; 
vi.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse; 
vii.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
H.  Undue Hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications and interpretations which shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
I.  Deadline for Approval or Rejection of Application for Certificate of Appropriateness. 
1.  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within forty-five days after the receipt of a complete and conforming application filed by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
2.  Failure of the commission to act within such forty-five days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
J.  Necessary Action to Be Taken by Commission Upon Rejection of Application for Certificate of Appropriateness. 
1.  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he/she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
2.  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
K.  Requirement of Conformance with Certificate of Appropriateness. 
1.  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and stoppage order of all work. 
2.  The commission and the city council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
L.  Certificate of Appropriateness Void if Construction not Commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen months and are renewable. 
M.  Recording an Application for Certificate of Appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with such application. 
N.  Acquisition of Property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
O.  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city manager/city planning director within fifteen days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection (I)(1) of this section or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within fifteen days of the expiration of the forty-five day period allowed for the commission action under subsection (I)(2) of this section. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the city of ordinance violations. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 13, 14 (part)) 
14.03.060 - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
A.  Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
B.  Failure to Provide Ordinary Maintenance or Repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect. 
1.  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a buildings structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
2.  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have thirty days in which to do this. 
3.  In the event that the condition is not remedied in thirty days, the owner shall be punished as provided in Section 14.03.070 of this chapter. At the direction of the city council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
C.  Affirmation of Existing Building and Zoning Costs. Nothing in this chapter shall be constructed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city/county building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 13, 14 (part)) 
14.03.070 - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 04-09-059 §§ 13, 14 (part)) 
14.03.080 through 14.03.150 - Reserved. 
Division IV. - The Locust Grove Events Committee 
Chapter 14.04 - THE LOCUST GROVE EVENTS COMMITTEE 
Sections: 

14.04.010 - Creation of the committee. 
There is created "The Locust Grove events committee" (hereinafter "committee"). 
(Ord. 06-02-019 § 1 (part)) 
14.04.020 - Purpose of the committee. 
The purpose of the committee shall be to plan, prepare, host, coordinate and hold special city events as directed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. 06-02-019 § 1 (part)) 
14.04.030 - Powers of the committee. 
The committee shall have the authority to establish a budget, receive and disburse funds and open a bank account for city events. 
(Ord. 06-02-019 § 1 (part)) 
14.04.040 - Membership of the committee. 
The mayor shall recommend persons to serve as members of the committee. The appointments shall be approved by resolution of the city council at the second regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. The appointments shall be for one-year terms. The committee shall have no less than five members and no more than fifteen members. The mayor, city council members and city employees may serve on the committee. A majority of the members shall be citizens of the city of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. 06-02-019 § 1 (part)) 
14.04.060 - Offices of the committee. 
The committee shall elect a chairperson, vice-chair, secretary, and treasurer. The chair and the treasurer shall be authorized to open and disburse funds from an established bank account in accordance with the purpose of the committee. The chairperson and treasurer shall be co-signers on any expenditures from said account. 
(Ord. 06-02-019 § 1 (part)) 
Division V. - Urban Redevelopment Agency 
Chapter 14.05 - URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
Sections: 

14.05.010 - Activation of urban redevelopment agency. 
The city council of the city determines that it is in the public interest to elect to activate its urban redevelopment agency, as created by O.C.G.A. Section 36-61-18 of the Urban Redevelopment Law, and to have such agency exercise the city's "urban redevelopment project powers" as defined in O.C.G.A. Section 36-61-17(b) of the Urban Redevelopment Law. 1 
(Ord. 05-05-035 § 2, (part)) 
1  Urban Redevelopment Law is found at O.C.G.A. Sections 36-61-1 et seq. 
14.05.020 - Establishment of board of commissioners. 
A.  The board of commissioners of the urban redevelopment agency shall consist of three members who shall serve for terms of office of three years, except for the initial commissioners, who shall serve for the terms of office specified below. Terms of office shall expire on the second Monday of February. 
B.  The mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, hereby appoints as members of the initial board of commissioners of the urban redevelopment agency the following named persons for terms of office expiring as indicated below: 

 
C.  If one or more of the above named persons declines to accept appointment, then the mayor shall recommend to the council and the council shall consider the name or names of persons identified by the mayor as a potential qualified appointee or appointees. 
D.  Three commissioners will constitute a quorum. A majority vote of a quorum can take all actions. 
E.  The vice-chairperson shall keep the records of the meetings of the urban redevelopment agency. 
F.  Should a commissioner resign, die or be removed from office, the mayor shall recommend a person to replace such commissioner with the advise and consent of council to serve the remaining term of the vacated office. 
(Ord. 05-05-035 § 2, (part)) 
14.05.030 - Duties of the urban redevelopment agency. 
The board of commissioners hereinafter appointed shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities, and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Urban Redevelopment Law as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Ord. 05-05-035 § 2, (part)) 
14.05.040 - First meeting of the urban redevelopment agency. 
The board of commissioners shall convene and hold its first meeting within ten calendar days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. At such meeting, the board of commissioners shall consider an urban redevelopment plan for the redevelopment area of the city as designated by the mayor and council. All meetings and the business of such meetings thereafter shall be scheduled by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. 05-05-035 § 2, (part)) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters: 
Chapter 15.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

15.04.010 - Administration and enforcement of technical codes. 
All permitting, enforcement and compliance activities with regard to the various technical codes adopted in this title shall be performed by the Henry County planning and zoning department. 
(Prior code § 6-2-1) 
15.04.020 - Mayor and council to hear appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision or action of the county planning and zoning department with regard to the technical codes adopted in this title may file an appeal of such decision or action with the mayor and council, which body shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of the boards of adjustments and appeals established by such codes. 
(Prior code § 6-2-2) 
Chapter 15.08 - TECHNICAL CODES 
Sections: 

15.08.010 - Adopted. 
The following codes are adopted as codes of the city, being particularly the listed editions thereof, together with all subsequent editions and revisions thereto, and are adopted as codes of the city and incorporated into this code by reference as fully as though set out at length herein. A copy of each adopted code shall be maintained on file with the city clerk where it shall be available for public inspection. In the event of any conflict with the provisions of any of the codes adopted in this chapter and any state law, ordinance, rule or regulation, the provision of state law, ordinance, rule or regulation shall prevail and be controlling. The adopted codes are: 
A.  Standard Building Code, 2000 Edition, including Chapter 1; 
B.  Standard Mechanical Code, 2000 Edition; 
C.  Standard Fuel Gas Code, 2000 Edition; 
D.  Standard Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition; 
E.  Standard Fire Prevention Code, 2000 Edition; 
F.  Standard Residential Code, 2000 Edition; 
G.  Standard Swimming Pool Code, 1991 Edition; 
H.  Standard Unsafe Housing Abatement Code, 1985 Edition; 
I.  Standard Housing Code, 1991 Edition; 
J.  National Electrical Code, 1999 Edition. 
(Ord. 02-12.02E; Ord. 95-2-13C § 10) 
Chapter 15.12 - BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM 
Sections: 

15.12.010 - Numbers to be assigned by building department. 
Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public streets, and street numbers and/or building numbers for dwelling units and places of business within apartment projects and nonresidential developments located on private streets, shall be assigned by the building department in accordance with administrative procedures. 
(Prior code § 6-6-2 (part)) 
15.12.020 - Posting of numbers. 
Each dwelling unit and place of business shall have light-reflective numbers posted and maintained in a prominent place on the property, visible from the street providing public access, the address of the dwelling unit or place of business. 
A.  For residences using mailboxes: Two-inch-high light-reflective numbers with contrasting background; 
B.  For residences which do not use mailboxes and within one hundred feet of roadway: Three-inch-high light-reflective numbers with contrasting background; 
C.  For residences which do not use mailboxes and are more than one hundred feet from roadway: Three-inch-high light-reflective numbers visible from the roadway with contrasting background; and 
D.  For all commercial establishments: Three-inch-high light-reflective numbers with contrasting backgrounds. 
(Prior code § 6-6-2 (a)) 
15.12.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating the terms of this chapter or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be punished in recorders court for the city by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars and/or sixty days in jail for each separate violation. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Prior code § 6-6-2 (part)) 
Chapter 15.16 - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 
Sections: 

15.16.010 - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
A.  The governing authority of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia find and declare that within the city limits of the city of Locust Grove there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city of Locust Grove or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
B.  It is further found and declared that in the city of Locust Grove where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe-human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
C.  It is the intention of the governing authority that the ordinance codified in this chapter shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
(Ord. 02-06.03H § 1) 
15.16.020 - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. 02-06.03I § 1) 
15.16.030 - Definitions. 
"Applicable codes" means: (a) Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (b) Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and (c) Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 of Title 8 after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
"Closing" means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
"Drug crime" means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
"Dwellings, buildings, or structures" means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term 'dwellings, buildings, or structures' shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
"Governing authority" means the mayor and council of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
"Municipality" means any incorporated city within this state. 
"Owner" means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
"Parties in interest" means: 
1.  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
2.  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a fifty year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
3.  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
4.  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
"Public authority" means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings; or structures in the county or municipality. 
"Public officer" means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. Section 41-2-7, Section 41-2-8 and Sections 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this chapter adopted under Section 41-2-7, Section 41-2-8, and Sections 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter or any agent of such officer or officers. 
"Repair" means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
"Resident" means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. 02-06.03I § 1) 
15.16.040 - Duties of owners—Appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
A.  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
B.  The mayor and council of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia appoint or designate the city code enforcement officer, city fire marshall, city fire chief, city police chief and his/her designees, and the director of code enforcement department of Henry County and his/her designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter. 
C.  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance, with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner of the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. Section 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less that fifteen days nor more than forty-five days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place offered for hearing. 
D.  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
1.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of crimes; or 
2.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this chapter, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 41, of the O.C.G.A. qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
E.  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful. 
F.  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; 
G.  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
1.  The lien provided for in subsection G of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in Henry County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (g) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Fulton County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collection real property ad valorem tax, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A; provided, however that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires twelve months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes: 
2.  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of Henry County. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
3.  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
4.  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. Section 5-3-29. 
5.  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in any court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rum as provided in this chapter. 
6.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. 02-06.03I § 1) 
15.16.050 - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances, dwellings, buildings or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
A.  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
B.  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
C.  Dilapidation; 
D.  Disrepair; 
E.  Structural defects; 
F.  Uncleanliness; and 
G.  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. 02-06.03I § 1) 
15.16.060 - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this chapter shall have the following powers: 
A.  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
B.  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
C.  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
D.  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the chapter; and 
E.  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this chapter to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. 02-06.03I § 1) 
15.16.070 - Service of complaints. 
A.  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
1.  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the city or county; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
2.  Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5 Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; or 
3.  Statutory overnight delivery. 
B.  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings and mailed at least fourteen days prior to the date of the hearing. 
C.  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least fourteen days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriffs advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
D.  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection F of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least thirty days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
E.  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remainder-men who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least thirty days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of the protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindered. 
F.  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this chapter, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection C of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
G.  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
H.  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this chapter on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. 02-06.03I § 1) 
Chapter 15.20 - PLUMBING FIXTURES 
Sections: 

15.20.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to require the use of ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction, or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings, and to require the labeling of plumbing fixtures with information regarding flow rates for the purpose of conserving water to maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies and reduce wastewater flows. 
(Ord. 6/10/91 § 1) 
15.20.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Commercial building" means any type of building other than residential. 
"Construction" means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation, or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
"Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership or legal entity. 
"Plumbing fixtures" means any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators. 
"Residential building" means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
"Toilet" means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
"Urinal" means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
(Ord. 6/10/91 § 2) 
15.20.030 - Standards. 
A.  No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in subsection B of this section. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in Section 15.20.050. The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be July 1, 1991, and for commercial buildings shall be July 1, 1992. 
B.  All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to in subsection A of this section should not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 
1.  Toilets: 1.6 gallons per flush; 
2.  Urinals: 1.0 gallons per flush; 
3.  Showerheads: 2.5 gallons per minute; 
4.  Kitchen faucets: 2.5 gallons per minute; 
5.  Bathroom and lavatory faucets: 2.0 gallons per minute. 
C.  The flow-restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and an integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection B of this section. 
D.  Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 6/10/91 § 3) 
15.20.040 - Product labeling. 
Effective July 1, 1991, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled by the manufacturer to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture. The water use rate of the fixture shall be certified by the manufacturer based on independent test results and using sixty psi for showerheads. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the product packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail sale. 
(Ord. 6/10/91 § 4) 
15.20.050 - Exceptions. 
The following fixture uses or applications shall be exempt from the standards established in Section 15.20.030: 
A.  Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc.; 
B.  Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for use by the physically handicapped; 
C.  Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in correctional institutions which may require more water for proper operation; 
D.  Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes which cannot be accommodated by existing technology. Permission for the exceptions listed here must be obtained from the director of the appropriate governmental department administering these rules. 
(Ord. 6/10/91 § 5) 
15.20.060 - Compliance and enforcement. 
A.  The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to hear all cases involving an alleged violation of this chapter. 
B.  In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 15.20.070, the mayor may take such other action as described below to compel compliance and may maintain an action or proceeding in the municipal court or any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this chapter. 
C.  Compliance with the requirements for installation and labeling at the time of installation in Section 15.20.030 shall be determined by the Henry County director of building inspection or his agent in cases of new or replacement plumbing fixture installations, and compliance shall be a condition for receipt of any occupancy permit. 
D.  Compliance with the requirements in Section 15.20.040, regarding the labeling of plumbing fixtures offered for retail sale, shall be determined by the Henry County director of building inspection or his/her agent. The agency shall have access to all establishments which offer for retail sale or sell plumbing fixtures at retail for purposes of determining compliance with Section 15.20.040. 
(Amended during 5-95 supplement; Ord. 6/10/91 § 7) 
15.20.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars for each violation. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter and holds a business license which authorizes the construction, installation, repair, distribution, sale or maintenance of such plumbing fixtures may have their license suspended for a definite period or cancelled. The time of suspension or cancellation will be determined by the judge of the city court. 
C.  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter may be denied water and sewer services or have their water and sewer services terminated. Such water and sewer services can be terminated by an order from the judge of the city court. 
(Ord. 6/10/91 § 6) 
Chapter 15.24 - SIGN REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

15.24.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is set out as follows herein. 
A.  A comprehensive regulation is necessary because of the current burgeoning growth in Locust Grove and Henry County in general and because a major interstate highway runs through the city and attracts a multitude of signs, thereby leading to poor aesthetics and dropping property values. 
B.  To prevent the further deterioration of the city and to ensure that it remains an attractive residential area as well as a viable commercial area, it is necessary to maintain a visually satisfying environment. A plethora of signs of a certain size and nature, no matter how tasteful, can have an undesirable effect upon traffic safety and the well-being of the entire community. The city is more likely to attract commercial enterprises and permanent residents if it improves and maintains the city's appearance. City residents will ultimately benefit from enhanced retail and commercial environments and improvements in the quality of life as a result of these regulations. It is a rational desire of the community, and most specifically of those who live therein from day to day, to plan their physical surroundings in such a way that unsightliness is minimized. 
C.  Further, the city has an obligation and a right to protect the rights of adjoining landowners to adequate light and air, to promote desirable living conditions and sustain stability of neighborhoods, to protect property against blight and deprivation, and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings and other structures throughout the city. 
D.  Accordingly, in consideration of the city's rights and obligations to promote traffic safety, to preserve property values, to provide for the convenience and enjoyment of public travel, to eliminate annoyance to travelers, to attract tourists, residents and industry, to serve the public health, safety and morals, to advance the general prosperity of the community, and to serve the general welfare, the city council imposes the regulations contained in this chapter. 
E.  The city council finds that signs provide an important medium through which individuals and entities may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as well as a traffic hazard. Such signs may also constitute an aesthetic nuisance and be a detriment to property values and the city's public welfare. The city council intends by enacting the ordinance codified in this chapter to: 
1.  Balance the rights of individuals and entities to convey their message through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
2.  Protect the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the city; 
3.  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
4.  Maintain the historical image of the city; 
5.  Protect property values by minimizing the potentially adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
6.  Promote economic development; and 
7.  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
(Ord. of 9-21-15, § 1) 
15.24.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in this section shall control. In addition, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below, unless the context clearly indicates a contrary meaning: 
"Aerial view sign" means any sign which is designed primarily to be viewed from the sky from an airplane, helicopter, etc. This includes, but is not limited to, any sign horizontally affixed to a roof or attached to a roof such that the sign is not readily viewable from the surrounding ground. 
"Aggregate signable area" means the sum total of the signable area of any and all signs, for a given lot. This applies to all types of signs on the properties, including, but not limited to, window signs, wall signs, flashing signs, ground signs and temporary signs; provided that street numbers assigned by the United States Postal Service shall not be considered in calculating the aggregate signable area. 
"Animated sign." See Flashing sign. 
"Awning sign" means a permanent sign that is painted, screen printed, or appliqued on an awning. Awning signs are considered a form of wall signs. 
"Back to back sign" means a sign with two parallel sign faces oriented in opposite directions. 
"Banner" means a temporary sign, with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations, applied to cloth, paper, plastic or fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. Flags as defined in this chapter are excluded from the definition of banner. 
"Beacon." See Temporary sign. 
"Bench sign" means a sign attached to or forming an integral part of a bench placed out of doors and readable from public right-of-way. 
"Blade sign." See Projecting sign or Swinging sign. 
"Bracket sign." See Projecting sign or Swinging sign. 
"Building frontage" means the linear feet of the exterior wall of a building that faces any road or street that provides a means of direct ingress and egress to the lot. 
"Business entity" means, for purposes of this chapter only, a particular business, work place, office, retail establishment, service use, nonprofit use, service organization, institutional use or other nonresidential use. 
"Business subdivision" means a single parcel on which multiple businesses are located, or multiple connected parcels on which businesses are located and where the owners of the parcels share any common property. 
"Canopy sign" means a permanent sign attached to a permanently roofed architectural projection extending horizontally and supported entirely from an exterior wall of the building. Canopy signs are considered a type of wall sign. 
"Changeable copy sign" means a permanent sign that is capable of changing the position or format of word messages or other displays on the sign face or of changing the visible display of words, numbers, symbols and graphics either manually or by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods. Changeable copy signs are a form of flashing sign. 
"City sponsored event" means an event open to the public and which is paid for entirely with public funding. 
"Decal" means a picture, design or label made to be transferred (as to glass, wood, metal or any other hard object) from specially prepared paper. 
"Decision date" means the date upon which a decision to issue or deny a sign permit is made by the city's community development director following both his review and review by the building official. 
"Detached sign." See Ground sign. 
"Directional sign" means a sign consisting of a single or double sign pole that serves the purpose of guiding safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic movements onto, from, or on property, and without which there is an increased risk of incompatible traffic movements, conflict, or confusion. Such signs shall be used for the direction of traffic movement, and shall not be used for the purpose of advertisement. Examples include, but are not limited to, "stop," "no parking," "entrance," "exit," "drive thru," etc. 
"Door sign." See Wall sign or Window sign. 
"Eave" means the projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
"Electronic sign" means a type of sign that utilizes light emitting diodes (LED) or similar technology, including, but not limited to, Super Amoled, OLED, or plasma, to form part of the sign face or message. It does not include signs that utilize LED or similar technology as a lighting source internal to the sign, so long as the lighting source is not directly visible on the face of the sign. Electronic signs are considered a form of flashing signs. 
"Entrance sign" means any sign placed at the intersection of a public street and a public or private entryway into an apartment complex, condominium complex, office complex, industrial complex or other building or buildings with multifamily residential dwelling units or multiple commercial units. 
"Erect" means to build, paint, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, assemble or affix. 
"Externally illuminated signs" means any sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
"Fascia sign." See Wall sign. 
"Flag" means a sign consisting of any fabric containing distinctive colors, patterns, logos or symbols, used as a symbol of a government or any other entity or organization. 
"Flashing sign" means any sign whose message or appearance scrolls, flashes, rotates or changes, or whose illumination changes in intensity, including, but not limited to, reader boards, animated signs, changeable copy signs, electronic signs, marquee signs, moving signs, multiple message signs, revolving signs, rotating signs and tri-vision signs. 
"Flat sign." See Wall sign. 
"Ground sign" means any sign supported by uprights or braces which are permanently placed into the ground, and not supported by or suspended from any building. 
"Hand held signs" means any sign larger than six inches by six inches carried by a human appendage or prosthesis including but not limited to picket signs, shields or sandwich boards. 
"Height" means the vertical distance measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the highest point of the sign or sign structure. 
"Internally illuminated signs" means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes located within the interior parts of the sign. 
"Interstate sign" means a ground sign exceeding the dimensional standards for ground signs contained in Section 15.24.080 of this chapter and erected in such a manner as to be visible from Interstate 75. Such signs are commonly known as "billboards" or "outdoor advertising" signs. 
"LED sign." See Electronic sign. 
"Lot" means a unit of land as defined in a deed or plat recorded in the superior court deed records of Henry County Georgia. The description as specified in each recorded deed or plat shall constitute a lot for the purpose of this article. Provided further, that two or more adjoining lots in common ownership and which are physically unified by the existence of a common structure or development located thereon shall constitute and be considered as one lot for the purpose of this chapter. 
"Mansard sign." See Roof sign or Wall sign. 
"Marquee sign." See Flashing sign. 
"Memorial displays" are defined as flowers, small signs, flags, banners and solar powered light devices no more than three feet in height and eighteen inches wide are permitted without prior authorization from the city. No other memorial decorations shall be allowed anywhere in the public cemetery. 
"Mobile sign." See Temporary sign. 
"Monument sign" means a permanent ground sign that forms a solid structure from the ground to the top of the sign and is of a consistent width for its entire height. 
"Moving sign." See Flashing sign. 
"Multiple message sign." See Flashing sign. 
"Non-combustible material" means any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
"Nonconforming sign" means a sign that was legal at the time of its erection but which does not meet the standards of this current chapter. 
"Painted wall sign." See Wall sign. 
"Parapet sign." See Wall sign. 
"Pennant" means a temporary sign composed of a series of small, generally triangular, pieces of cloth or plastic, strung together, with or without lettering, symbols or other ornamentation. 
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, entity or organization of any kind. 
"Pitched roof sign." See Roof sign. 
"Pole sign" means a permanent ground sign for which the sign face is supported by one or two poles and which, with the exception of the supporting polls, provides a visual clearance between the base of the sign face and the ground. 
"Portable sign." See Temporary sign. 
"Primary facade" means the exterior wall of the building that faces the main parking area or street and includes the primary entrance into the building. If the building faces more than one parking area or street, the largest exterior wall of the building with a primary entrance which is most nearly parallel to the widest street or largest parking area to which the building faces. 
"Projecting sign" means any sign which is attached perpendicular to a building or other structure and extends more than twelve inches horizontally from the plane of the building wall. 
"Pylon sign." See Pole sign. 
"Reader board." See Changeable copy sign; Flashing sign. 
"Reflectors" means any device created for the purpose of reflecting light directed at the device so as to render the device especially visible. 
"Residence" means a home, abode, or place where an individual is actually living on a non-temporary basis. 
"Revolving sign." See Flashing sign. 
"Roof sign" means a sign which is attached to a building or structure and is displayed above the lowest horizontal line of a building's roof. 
"Rotating sign." See Flashing sign. 
"Sandwich board" means a portable sign, the support structure of which is not embedded in the ground, but that is constructed as two panels, hinged at the top, with the bottom edge of both panels spread so that the overall sign forms an "A" shape. 
"Searchlight." See Temporary sign. 
"Secondary facade" means any exterior wall of a building, other than the primary facade. 
"Shingle sign." See Projecting sign or Swinging sign. 
"Sidewalk sign." See Sandwich board. 
"Sign" means every device, item, product, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, stroke, stripe, trademark, or reading matter, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information when the same is placed in view of the general public. For the purpose of determining number of signs, a single display surface or a single display device containing different elements that are organized, related, and composed to form a unit shall be considered to be one sign. Where different elements are displayed in a random manner without an organized relationship to each other, or where there is reasonable doubt as to the relationship of different elements to each other, each element shall be considered to be a single separate sign. 
"Sign face." See Signable area. 
"Signable area" means the total area upon which a message is displayed on any sign. For double-face signs, the side with the largest signable area shall be used in computing signable area. If the two faces of a double-face sign are of unequal area, the signable area shall be the area of the larger face. For wall signs consisting entirely of products shaped in the form of letters or other figures attached directly to a wall or roof, the signable area shall consist of the net geometric area measured by the smallest possible single square or rectangle enclosing the display surface of the sign including the outer extremities of all letters, characters and delineations. 
"Stake sign." See Standard informational sign. 
"Standard informational sign" means a temporary sign with an area not greater than five square feet with a sign face for short-term use, containing no reflective elements, flags or projections. Such signs stand at a height of not greater than three feet and are mounted on a wooden stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than one and one-half inches. 
"Store front" means the primary facade of a single, undivided unit containing an area larger than seven hundred and fifty square feet. 
"Streamer." See Temporary sign. 
"Subdivision sign" means any sign placed at the intersection of two public roads where one of the roads is the main thoroughfare into and out of a single-family residential subdivision. 
"Subdivision internal sign" means any sign placed at the intersection of two public roads inside a residential subdivision. 
"Submission date" means the date stamped on a sign application indicating the date the application was actually received by the Henry County department of planning and zoning and by the city clerk. 
Suspended sign. See Projecting sign or Swinging sign. 
"Swinging sign" means any sign which is mounted such that the sign may freely move back and forth. 
"Temporary sign" means any sign or device which is not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, which is designed to be mobile or is designed to remain in place for a limited time. This includes, but is not limited to, signs which are designed to be transported regularly from one location to another, signs which are designed with wheels, regardless of whether the wheels remain attached to the sign, or signs tethered to an existing structure. These signs include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Sky lights; 
(2)  Balloons; 
(3)  Streamers; 
(4)  Flag strings; 
(5)  Inflatable displays; 
(6)  Banners; 
(7)  Beacons; 
(8)  Searchlights; 
(9)  Pennants; and 
(10)  Mechanical or animated figures. 
"Tri-vision sign" means a sign designed with a series of triangular slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three different sign messages in rotation. A tri-vision sign is a form of flashing sign. 
"V Formation sign" means a sign with two sign faces, forming the shape of the letter "V" when viewed from above, with an angle between the two faces of not more than sixty degrees. 
"Wall sign" means any sign which is attached parallel to or painted on an exterior building wall, which may include a door. 
"Wayfinding sign" means a sign that is part of the city's wayfinding signage program or as approved through a PD master sign plan or planned center common signage plan. 
"Window sign" means any sign displayed to an outside observer on or through a window or covering a window, which may include a door. 
"Zoning district" means the use classification of parcels of land as defined under the city's zoning map generally. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
(Ord. No. 15-09-037, § 5, 9-8-15; Ord. of 9-21-15, §§ 2, 3) 
15.24.030 - Applications and permits. 
A.  Application Requirements. All applications for sign permits must be complete and contain all required information. If either the director of the Henry County department of planning and zoning or his designated representative, the city clerk or her designated representative, or the city council or its designated representative shall determine that the application does not contain all required information as set forth in this chapter, or if such information is not sufficient to determine whether the permit should be issued or denied, or if such information is inaccurate or untrue, the application shall be denied by the city council or its designated representative. 
B.  Permit Application. Application for permits to erect signs shall be made upon forms provided by the Henry County department of planning and zoning, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
2.  Address of building, structure, or lot to where the sign is to be attached or erected; 
3.  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, property lines and other signs located on the lot showing compliance with all setback lines required by the city; 
4.  Three sets of accurately scaled color drawings of the plans, contents, specifications, and method of construction and attachment to the building or the ground for the sign as well as a scaled drawing of the site showing drives, structures, and any other limiting site features; 
5.  Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the sign (i.e. contractor or builder); 
6.  Written consent of the owner of the building or lot upon which the sign is to be erected; 
7.  A written list describing all other signs located on the lot indicating the sign type, size and placement; 
8.  Such other information as the director of the Henry County department of planning and zoning or his designated representative, and/or the director of the Henry County building department or his designated representative, and/or the city clerk or her designated representative, and/or the city council or its designated representative may reasonably require for the permitting process relating to the sign to be permitted, the lot upon which the sign is to be placed, and/or the placement of the sign and the effects thereof on traffic patterns, pedestrians, and/or general aesthetics. 
C.  Submission of Sign Permit Applications. 
1.  Sign permit applications must be delivered to the Henry County department of planning and zoning and simultaneously to the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the applicant to ensure that both the director of the Henry County department of planning and zoning and the city clerk receive a copy of the permit application with all attachments as required by the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
2.  All permit applications submitted to the Henry County department of planning and zoning must be stamped by the director thereof or his designated representative indicating the submission date. 
3.  All permit applications submitted to the city clerk must be stamped by the city clerk or her designated representative indicating the submission date. 
D.  Approval of Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning. Approval of the director of the Henry County department of planning and zoning or his designated representative is required for all sign permit applications. Such officer shall examine the plans and specifications to determine if the same complies with the city's zoning regulations. 
E.  Approval of Director of the Building Department. Approval of the director of the Henry County building department or his designated representative is required for all sign permit applications. Such officer shall examine the plans and specifications to determine if the same comply with the city's building code requirements. 
F.  Permit Fequired. Except for those signs exempt from permitting under Section 15.24.120, a permit is required to erect, repair, alter, relocate or maintain any sign that will be visible from public or private right-of-way or public or private property. 
G.  Approval of City Council. Approval of the city council or its designated representative is required for all signs that require a permit. Such officer, after the application is approved by the director of the Henry County department of planning and zoning or his designated representative and by the director of the Henry County building department or his designated representative, shall examine the plans and specifications to determine if the same comply with the city's code of ordinances, and shall then mark his approval or denial on the application. 
H.  Application Fees. Each application for a sign permit must be accompanied by a payment of the application fee to the Henry County planning and zoning department. The fee for sign permit applications shall be fifty dollars. 
I.  City Application Fees. Before a sign permit may be issued the applicant shall pay to the city a fifty dollar permit fee or such other fee as may be set by the city council. 
J.  Issuance and Denial of Applications and Permits. 
1.  All sign applications shall receive a final decision by the community development director within forty-five days of submission, subject to extensions for additional information to be provided by the applicant in paragraphs 2 and 4 below. If no decision is communicated to the applicant in writing as required by this section within forty-six days of the permit application being filed with the community development director, or within the extended period described by paragraphs 2 and 4 below, the application shall be deemed approved; provided that no such constructive approval shall create a vested right in a sign that does not conform in all respects to the requirements of this chapter and other city ordinances. 
2.  The community development director shall have twenty days in which to complete his review of the application for compliance with the sign ordinance and zoning ordinance. In the event that the community development director determines that the applicant has not properly completed the application for the proposed sign or that the application does not meet all requirements of this chapter and the zoning ordinance, he shall promptly notify the applicant of that fact. The applicant shall have five days from the date of such notification to submit a revised application correcting all deficiencies. Upon submission of a revised application, an additional five days shall be added to the community development director's initial twenty-day review period. In the event an applicant fails to correct all deficiencies in the application within the five-day grace period following notification of deficiencies, the community development director shall provide notice in writing of disapproval of the sign application, with the grounds for such action stated in the notice, to the applicant as provided in paragraph 6 below. Any submission by an applicant of corrective or additional information beyond the initial five-day period shall be treated as a new application requiring payment of new fees for review, and resetting the review clock to the original forty-five days. 
3.  Provided that the sign application is complete, all fees have been paid and the proposed sign and the lot upon which the sign is to be placed are within all requirements of this chapter and the zoning ordinance, the community development director shall mark the application as meeting the sign ordinance and zoning ordinance and forward the application to the building official for consideration. 
4.  The building official shall have twenty days in which to complete his review of the application for compliance with the building and electrical codes. In the event that the building official determines that the applicant has not properly completed the application for the proposed sign or that the application does not meet all requirements of the building and/or electrical codes, he shall promptly notify the applicant of that fact. The applicant shall have five days from the date of such notification to submit a revised application correcting all deficiencies. Upon submission of a revised application, an additional five days shall be added to the building official's initial twenty-day review period. In the event an applicant fails to correct all deficiencies in the application within the five-day grace period following notification of deficiencies, the building official shall provide notice in writing of disapproval of the sign application, with the grounds therefore noted, to the applicant as provided in paragraph 6 below. Any submission by an applicant of corrective or additional information beyond the initial five-day period shall be treated as a new application requiring payment of new fees for review, and resetting the review clock to the original forty-five days. 
5.  Provided that the sign application is complete and the proposed sign meets all requirements of the building code and/or electrical code, the building official shall mark the application as approved for technical code compliance and return the application to the community development director for communication of the final decision to the applicant. 
6.  The community development director shall notify the applicant in writing of the final decision on the application no more than forty-five days after the submission of the application to the city. In the event the application is denied, the notice shall provide the specific grounds upon which denial is based. 
7.  Any applicant for whom a permit is denied may appeal to the city council as provided in subsection N. 
K.  Time Period. If the work authorized under a permit has not been completed to the satisfaction of the city council or its designated representative using common industry standards within six months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
L.  Display of Identification Number. Every sign constructed, erected, or maintained for which a permit is required by this chapter shall be plainly marked with the identification number issued by the Henry County building department for the structure firmly affixed to the sign in such manner that the identification number shall be readily visible, accessible for inspection and durable. 
M.  Altering Identification Number. Displaying an identification number that has been tampered with, altered, or mutilated, or displaying a sign without an identification number shall be a misdemeanor offense punishable in municipal court. The penalties for such a violation are provided in Section 15.24.130. 
N.  Appeals. An appeal of denial of a sign permit or sign permit extension shall be made within ten calendar days of the denial decision. The appeal must be in writing and filed with the city clerk. The city council shall hold a hearing on any such appeal no more than thirty days after receipt of the notice of appeal. At the hearing, the applicant is entitled to present evidence, cross examine witnesses, and may be represented by counsel. If the applicant wishes to have a record of the proceedings other than the city's recording, the applicant must arrange for and pay for a court reporter. The city council shall make its final determination on the appeal no more than thirty days after date of hearing. The decision must be supported by evidence in the record of the hearing and shall be based on whether the application conforms in all respects to the requirements of this chapter and other city ordinances governing the sign, such as the zoning ordinance and technical codes. The city clerk shall notify the applicant of the council's decision in writing, delivered to the address contained in the sign permit application, within five business days of the council's decision. Denial of a permit by the city council may be appealed to Superior Court of Henry County by writ of certiorari or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
(Ord. of 9-21-15, §§ 4—7) 
15.24.040 - Construction standards—All signs. 
A.  Building Code Compliance. All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the city's building code. 
B.  Materials Required. All signs for which a permit is required by this chapter, except for temporary signs, shall be constructed of non-combustible material. 
C.  Reflectors. Reflectors and lights shall be permitted on ground signs, roof signs, and wall signs; provided, however, that the reflectors and lights shall be provided with proper glass lenses so that no light therefrom creates a hazardous or dangerous condition. 
D.  Internal Illumination. The illumination of internally illuminated signs shall not exceed twenty foot candles of incandescent light measured at a distance of ten feet from such structure. 
E.  External Illumination. Externally illuminated signs shall be lighted so that no lights are positioned in such a manner that light glares or shines into the eyes of motorists or pedestrians so as to create a hazardous or dangerous condition. 
F.  Other Code Compliance. All building, construction, setback, zoning or other relevant codes excluding permitting (other than that provided elsewhere herein) shall be applicable to the location, construction and siting of signs and shall be read in harmony with this chapter. 
G.  Construction Near or On a Lot Containing an Existing Billboard, Pylon, or Off Premises Sign. 
1.  Construction of any structure, building, or appurtenance adjacent to, or on a lot containing an interstate sign or ground sign greater than thirty-five feet in height shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  No buildings, structures, or appurtenances may be constructed within the fall zone of such sign. A "fall zone" is defined as an area equal to one hundred ten percent of the height of the sign in every direction. 
b.  No subdivision of a parcel containing a billboard shall be permitted unless the subdivided lot containing the billboard is large enough to encompass the fall zone of such billboard. 
2.  Construction of any interstate sign or ground sign greater than thirty-five feet in height on a lot containing any existing structure, building or appurtenance shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  No sign may be constructed where a building, structure or appurtenance will be located within the fall zone of the sign. A "fall zone" is defined as an area equal to one hundred thirty-three percent of the height of the sign in every direction; 
b.  No subdivision of a parcel containing an interstate sign or ground sign greater than thirty-five feet in height shall be permitted unless the subdivided lot containing the sign is large enough to encompass the fall zone of such sign. 
(Ord. 03-03-02Z § 1; Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
(Ord. of 9-21-15, §§ 8—12) 
15.24.050 - Special limitations. 
In addition to the limitations set forth in the other sections of this chapter, the following limitations shall apply to these specific types of signs: 
A.  Wall Signs. No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. 
B.  Roof Signs. 
1.  Set-back from Roof Edge. No roof sign shall be erected or maintained within five feet of the outside wall toward which the sign faces. 
2.  Prohibited Obstructions. No roof sign shall be placed on the roof of any building or structure in such manner as to prevent free passage from one part of the roof to any other part thereof or interfere with openings in the roof. 
C.  Projecting Signs. 
1.  No projecting sign may be placed over streets, alleys, or ways available for vehicular traffic. 
2.  Night Illumination. Every projecting sign located at a commercial business shall be illuminated between sunset and eleven p.m. every night Monday through Saturday, on each side thereof, by at least five watts per square foot of sign surface, but in no case less than sixty watts for each sign surface. 
3.  All projecting signs must be installed at a ninety degree angle to the building facade. 
4.  Architectural standards. Within the CBDSO and MHNSO, projecting signs shall be comprised of the respective architectural style of the building (Queen Anne Style, Folk Victorian Style, Craftsman Style, or International Style) and shall not be internally illuminated unless approved by the city council based on safety considerations. 
D.  Temporary Signs. 
1.  Temporary signs are permitted for each business entity for a maximum period of ninety calendar days per year, with a maximum consecutive period of forty-five days. After said time periods, all temporary signs shall be removed from the premises. Each business entity erecting temporary signage shall keep detailed records of the date of erection and removal of all temporary signage, which records shall be open to inspection by employees of the city during regular business hours. No temporary sign shall utilize a form prohibited by Section 15.24.110. 
2.  On lots zoned for single-family residential use and occupied as a personal residence, the primary method of signage shall be standard informational signs. The aggregate sign area of all signs on any such lot shall not exceed twelve square feet at any one point in time, subject to the following two exceptions: 
i.  During the period of time commencing with opening of qualifying for elections and concluding with the final determination of all contests and issues resolved by that election, an unlimited number of standard informational signs may be erected on such lots. 
ii.  One banner not exceeding twenty-four square feet in sign area may be erected on such residential lots one time per year, up to a maximum of sixty consecutive days. 
3.  All temporary signage shall be located on private property. 
4.  All temporary signage shall be securely installed and shall meet all applicable safety standards as prescribed by the building code, electrical code or as promulgated by the city council. 
5.  In the event any temporary sign is erected or maintained in such a manner as to be in violation of this chapter or other ordinances of the city, the community development director or his or her designated representative shall give written notice to the owner thereof and may proceed with enforcement efforts as provided by Section 15.24.090. Any temporary sign erected on public property may be removed by the city without prior notice. 
E.  Reserved. 
F.  Entrance Sign. All entrance signs shall be placed on private property and may not be placed in the right-of-way. 
G.  Subdivision Sign. All subdivision signs shall be placed on private property and may not be placed in the right-of-way. 
H.  Flags. 
1.  In Ground. A flag may be flown from a metal pole permanently placed in the ground. The pole shall not exceed two and five-eighths inches in diameter, nor twenty feet in height. The flag flying from such pole shall not exceed three feet in width and five feet in length. 
2.  Projecting. A flag may be flown from a metal or wooden pole attached to a bracket projecting from the side of a building or door frame. The pole shall not exceed six feet in length, nor one inch in diameter. The flag flying from such pole shall not exceed three feet in width and five feet in length. Additionally, the flag displayed in such manner shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
3.  Hanging. A flag may be hung in either the primary facade or secondary facade of a property appropriately zoned under this chapter. The flag shall count against the percentage of window signage permitted for the zoned property as delineated in Section 15.24.080. 
4.  Limit. Only one flag (either ground, projecting or hanging) shall be flown or displayed on each property without permit. The flag provided by this paragraph shall not count against the allocation of the ground, projecting or window signage permitted for each property in Section 15.24.080. Any flag flown on property in excess of one flag shall be counted against the allocation of the ground, projecting or window signage permitted for each property in Section 15.24.080. 
I.  Hand Held Signs. All hand held signs shall meet the following regulations: 
1.  Hand held signs are permitted only in conjunction with the city's ordinances and regulations of mass gatherings. 
2.  No hand held signs shall be placed or carried which extend beyond the width of the carrier's body or that extend more than twenty-four inches above the carrier's head. 
3.  All persons carrying any such signs, shields or sandwich boards shall remain at least ten feet apart, shall not stand or loiter in front of any doorway, driveway or street intersection and shall not interfere with the general flow of traffic, whether pedestrian or vehicular. 
4.  All hand held signs are exempt from the permitting requirements of Section 15.24.030. 
J.  Banners on City Property. 
1.  Banners erected for city-sponsored events shall be exempt from payment of permit fees. 
2.  Banners shall be considered temporary signs as defined in Section 15.24.020 of this chapter. 
3.  In addition to the special limitations found in Section 15.24.050(D), banners placed on city property shall be further regulated as follows: 
a.  Banners on city property can be displayed for no more than seventy-two hours; 
b.  No person shall be permitted to display more than one banner on the premises, and only one banner shall be displayed on the premises at any given time; 
c.  Each person is responsible for erecting and removing its banner; 
d.  No banner shall be any larger than sixty square feet; 
e.  All banners shall be attached to poles provided by the city, and no banner shall at any time be attached to trees. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
(Ord. of 9-21-15, §§ 13—19) 
15.24.060 - Special requirements—All signs. 
A.  City Property. No signs shall be placed in the public right-of-way or other properties zoned TCU unless part of an approved wayfinding signage plan by the city council, the city downtown development authority, or the Georgia State Department of Transportation. 
B.  All Signs Must be Placed upon a Lot. No sign may be placed on any lot, which lot does not meet the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations of the Code of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
C.  Obstruction to Doors, Windows, or Fire Escapes. No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to, or egress from, any door, window, or fire escape; nor shall any sign be attached to any stand pipe or fire escape. 
D.  Sign Not to Constitute Traffic Hazard. No sign or other structure regulated by this chapter shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision from vehicles thereupon; or be placed at any location where, by reason of the position, shape, or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device; or make use of the words "STOP", "DANGER", or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse motorists. 
E.  Posting on Trees, Poles, Etc. No sign shall be allowed to be tacked, painted, posted, marked, or otherwise affixed on trees, utility poles, or other similar structures, or on rocks, the ground itself, or other natural features. 
F.  No Posting on Supports. No message or advertisement may be displayed on any portion of the structural supports of any sign. 
G.  Maintenance. All signs regulated by this chapter shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from all electrical and mechanical hazards, including, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose connections, and the premises surrounding the signs shall be maintained by the owner in a sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all weeds, rubbish, and debris. 
H.  Special Situations. Those developments which include at least one building of three stories or more may be permitted wall or roof signs in sizes not exceeding one hundred square feet per primary and secondary facade. The sign allowance provided under this section shall be exempt from the aggregate signage allowed per lot. 
I.  No Simulation of Public Signal. No sign shall be erected which simulates an official traffic control, warning sign or public service signal. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
(Ord. of 9-21-15, § 20) 
15.24.070 - Special requirements by zoning classification. 
See 15.24.080 for additional requirements. 
A.  No sign shall be illuminated, either internally or externally, in any residential zoning district, except that entrance signs and subdivision signs may be externally illuminated from dusk until dawn. 
B.  All temporary signs are prohibited on lots zoned for residential use, except for standard informational signs and one banner per year, per Section 15.24.050.D.2. 
C.  In any district zoned PD, in addition to those limitations found in Section 15.24.080, the following requirements shall be observed: 
1.  A uniform design scheme of signs shall be established for the development as a whole and/or for each building in the development and approved by the planning commission. Decals may be allowed provided they do not exceed four inches in width and twelve inches in length or forty-eight square inches in size. 
2.  Plans for the development shall include detailed descriptions of all signs, including but not limited to, size, height, location, type, colors and materials to be used, lighting and ownership responsibility. 
3.  Plans for signs shall undergo the same review and approval process as is required of other aspects of the development; provided that the city council may make no modification of these regulations which would permit a sign otherwise prohibited under this chapter. 
4.  All signs shall be designed, erected and maintained in accordance with an approved plan. 
5.  In addition to the signage allowed in Section 15.24.080, each individual unit with store front may have one wall sign with signable area not to exceed one square foot for each horizontal linear foot of store front. 
D.  Variances. This subsection shall provide the exclusive procedures for granting variances to the requirements of this chapter. 
1.  Upon application by the property owner of a lot zoned OI, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 or M-2, covering more than ten contiguous acres, the city council may grant a variance to allow the aggregate signable area to exceed five hundred square feet where the applicant has shown that: 
a.  All signs and structures within the business development are in conformance with this chapter; and 
b.  The variance, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to other property owners or tenants, or to the public good, nor would it impair the purpose and intent of this chapter; and 
c.  The city council shall consider at least one of the following factors: 
i.  The size of buildings constructed on the subject lot; 
ii.  The potential to subdivide the lot; or 
iii.  The number of different tenants occupying the buildings; and 
d.  Financial Loss to the Applicant. However, such loss is not sufficient grounds, by itself, to justify a variance. 
Furthermore, peculiar conditions or circumstances which are the result of actions of the current or former owner(s) of the property covered by the application cannot be considered as grounds to justify a variance. The authority to erect and maintain additional signs as may be permitted under any such variance shall terminate upon the subdivision of the lot upon which such variance was granted. 
2.  Signs will be of traditional materials, such as wood, glass, copper, corrugated "tin," bronze, or combinations thereof. Sandblasted wood signs are permitted. Printed/molded plastic, plywood, adhesive letters or unfinished wood are prohibited. 
3.  Upon application by the property owner of a lot with property described in Section 15.24.140, the city council may grant a height variance where the applicant has shown that: 
a.  All signs and structures within the business development are in conformance with this chapter; 
b.  The variance, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to other property owners or tenants, or to the public good, nor would it impair the purpose and intent of this chapter; 
c.  The city council shall consider at least one of the following factors: 
i.  The size of buildings constructed on the subject lot; 
ii.  The potential to subdivide the lot; or 
iii.  The number of different tenants occupying the buildings; and 
d.  Financial Loss to the Applicant. However, such loss is not sufficient grounds, by itself, to justify a variance. 
Furthermore, peculiar conditions or circumstances which are the result of actions of the current or former owner(s) of the property covered by the application cannot be considered as grounds to justify a variance. The authority to erect and maintain additional signs as may be permitted under any such variance shall terminate upon the subdivision of the lot upon which such variance was granted. 
4.  Upon application by the owner of a lot, the city council may grant a variance to allow a temporary sign to be placed on a lot for an additional ninety days. 
a.  The applicant shall, in writing, state the purpose of the request and show that: 
i.  All temporary signs on the lot are in conformance with this chapter; 
ii.  All other signs and structures on this lot are in conformance with this chapter; 
iii.  There are no other existing signs on the property which may be used in lieu of a temporary sign; and 
iv.  Any other reason which may justify the requested variance; 
b.  The city council shall consider one or more of the following factors: 
i.  Whether the applicant has provided the required information in his or her application; 
ii.  Whether the requested variance, if granted, would cause a substantial detriment to other property owners or tenants, or to the public good, or would impair the purpose and intent of this chapter; 
iii.  Whether there are existing signs on the 1ot and whether any of those signs could be used in lieu of granting this variance; 
iv.  The financial loss to the applicant; however, such loss is not sufficient grounds by itself to justify a variance; 
v.  Whether the peculiar conditions or circumstances, which underline the variance request, are the actions of the current or former owner(s) of the property, since such actions shall not be considered as grounds to justify a variance; 
vi.  The size of the buildings constructed on the potential lot; 
vii.  The potential to subdivide the lot; and 
viii.  The number of different tenants occupying the building. 
c.  The variance granted pursuant to this subparagraph shall terminate automatically on expiration of the time period granted; transfer of any interest to a non-applicant in the lot upon which such variance was granted; or subdivision of the lot upon which such variance was granted. 
d.  A variance under this subparagraph may be granted no more than two times per lot per calendar year. This limitation shall apply to all lots created by subdivision of the lot upon which such variance was originally granted. 
e.  All variances shall be heard by the city council. Variance hearings shall be conducted in accordance with standards of the zoning ordinance, provided that the standards in paragraph 1 above shall be utilized as the basis for decision on a variance application, and provided further that final decision on all variance applications shall be made and communicated in writing to the applicant no later than sixty days from date of application. 
(Ord. 03-12-01B § 1; Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
(Ord. of 9-21-15, §§ 21—25) 
15.24.080 - Charts. 
In addition to all other regulations in this chapter, all signs must conform to the requirements of the charts contained in this section. The notation of "X" in the chart shall mean that this type of sign is not permitted in that zoning district under the conditions stated. Any distance limitation herein shall be measured in a straight line from the closest structural aspect of the sign. 
A.  For properties zoned RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, RD, and RMH (where no residential use/structure is on the lot): 

 
B.  For properties zoned RA, R-1, R-2, R-3, RD, and RMH (where a residential structure is on the lot): 

 
C.  For properties zoned RM: 

 
D.  For properties zoned OI, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2: 

 

 
*  Any sign exceeding 250 square feet in signable area within the intersection of GSO and ISO must be separated by a minimum of 500 feet from another sign 250 square feet in area or greater on the same side of the street and a minimum of 250 feet from another sign 250 square feet in area or greater on the opposite side of the street. The distance restrictions herein shall be measured in a straight line from the closest structural aspect of each affected sign. 

 

 

 
E.  For properties zoned TCU: 

 
* A ground sign not to exceed thirty-two square feet in signable area and forty square feet in sign structure area may be permitted upon review and approval of city council for tracts of land in the CBDSO district that are greater than twenty thousand square feet in area and have a minimum of one hundred feet of frontage on a principal arterial street. 
** In the CBDSO district, a sandwich-type sign may be placed outside the business along the sidewalk area during open business hours that cannot exceed twelve square feet in signable area and sixteen square feet in structure area, with maximum height of three feet six inches, provided that a minimum of sixty inches of clearance along the sidewalk is made for pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
(Ord. No. 13-11-094, § 1, 11-4-13; Ord. of 9-21-15, §§ 26, 27) 
15.24.090 - Unsafe and unlawful sign. 
A.  The section shall be enforced by the community development director, or his designee. The community development director shall have full authority to remove, without notice to the owners thereof, and impound for a period of five business days: 
(1)  Signs located on a publicly owned street or highway right-of-way; or 
(2)  Signs located on city property that are attached to trees, fence posts, telephone and utility poles, or other natural features. 
B.  The community development director shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public safety, such as abandoned, dangerous or materially, electrically or structurally defective signs or a sign for which no permit has been issued or which is otherwise in violation of this chapter. 
C.  For signs erected or maintained in violation of the standards of this chapter, the community development director shall prepare a written notice which shall describe the sign and specify the violation involved and which shall state that if the sign is not removed or the violation corrected within thirty days, the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
D.  All notices mailed by the community development director shall be sent by certified mail and first-class mail. Any time period provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date of the receipt of the certified mail or, if the first class mail is not returned, after three days of mailing. Alternatively, notice may be personally hand-delivered to the sign owner, and notice shall be effective on such date of hand delivery. 
E.  The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, the owner of the sign if different than the property owner, and the occupant of the property. If any such person is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such person's last known address, if any, and posted on the sign or on the premises. 
F.  Any person having an interest in the sign or the property may appeal the determination of the community development director ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten calendar days after receipt of notice. Such appeal shall be heard by the city council and shall be governed by the same process and time frames as provided in Section 15.24.030.N. 
G.  All signs for which notice of removal is given shall be removed within ten calendar days of notice of violation or within forty-eight hours of final determination by the city of any appeals, provided that where permanent signs are installed, the time period may be extended for up to two weeks by the community development director where removal requires engagement of a sign contractor or other specialized expertise; and provided further that a sign that constitutes an imminent hazard to life may be removed by the city pursuant to subsection (I) without further delay. 
H.  Any sign removed by the community development director pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become the property of the city and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the city. The cost of removal of the sign by the city shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as city property taxes. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the city in connection with the sign's removal. 
I.  When it is determined by the community development director that the sign would cause imminent danger to the public safety, and contact cannot be made with the sign owner or building owner, no written notice will have to be served. In this emergency situation, the community development director shall document the imminent danger and his or her attempts to contact the sign owner, and may correct the danger, all costs being charged to the sign owner and property owner. 
J.  If it is necessary for the community development director to remove the sign pursuant to the provisions of this section, and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any material derived in the removal, he may sell the same at public or private sale at the best price obtainable, and shall keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the cost of removal to be charged to the sign owner or property owner. Where the proceeds derived from such a sale are less than the cost of removal, such deficiency shall constitute a lien against the property on which the sign is located, such lien to be collectible in the same manner as city property taxes. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
(Ord. of 9-21-15, § 28) 
15.24.100 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  The following provisions shall apply to signs which, on the effective date of this chapter, were approved and legally erected under previous sign restrictions and which became nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this chapter's restrictions: 
1.  The owner of the sign shall secure a permit for the continuation of the sign subject to the restrictions of this section. Application for such permit must be filed within ten days of the notice of nonconformance. There shall be no charge for this permit. Failure to apply for such permit within ten days shall result in waiver of the protections afforded nonconforming signs by this section and the display of such sign shall be thereafter unlawful. 
2.  No change shall be made in the size of any nonconforming sign, nor shall any structural changes be made in such a sign unless the sign is brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  Any nonconforming sign declared to be unsafe by the city council or its designated representative shall be removed or rendered safe and brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  Except as provided in this chapter, any sign erected on any public property or right-of-way in violation of this chapter may be removed therefrom by duly authorized employees of the city or Henry County, and the responsible party may be cited for such violation. 
B.  Except when destroyed by fire or other act of God, a nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
C.  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  No change in shape, size or design shall be permitted on a nonconforming sign except to make the sign comply with all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
15.24.110 - Prohibited signs. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect flashing signs, inflatable signs, roof signs, tri-vision signs, or aerial view signs at any location in the city. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect temporary signage within the city that does not conform in all respects to the standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
(Ord. of 9-21-15, § 29) 
15.24.120 - Exemptions. 
A.  The following signs are exempt from the permitting requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that such signs shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Wall signs one square foot and smaller; 
2.  Standard informational signs; 
3.  Projecting signs five square feet and smaller; 
4.  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, and dates of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials. 
B.  The following signs are exempt from all provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Signs that are not visible from any public right-of-way or any adjacent property. 
2.  Temporary signs required to be posted by federal law, state law or by the Code of Ordinances of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
3.  Decals affixed to or signs painted on equipment, fuel pumps or other types of vending equipment used for dispensing retail products, provided that such decals or signs have a signable area not exceeding four square feet on any single piece of equipment. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
(Ord. of 9-21-15, § 30) 
15.24.130 - Penalties. 
Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars per day. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. Any sign erected or maintained in violation of this chapter for more than thirty days shall also be subject to removal by the city at the owner's or permittee's expense. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
15.24.140 - Signs along interstate highways. 
A.  This section shall apply to all interstate signs visible from I-75 and located within the following area: one thousand two hundred feet long beginning five hundred feet from the right-of-way of the interstate point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp at every exit along I-75. 
B.  No new interstate sign shall be erected unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this section. Interstate signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not permitted to become dilapidated. 
C.  Nonconforming Interstate Signs. Any legally erected interstate signs which would become non-conforming as a result of this ordinance may be allowed to remain until purchased by the Georgia Department of Transportation provided that the interstate sign meets the requirements of state laws and rules and regulations governing such interstate signs. 
D.  Appendix A. To aid in the greater understanding of the meaning of this section, a sketch is attached to this ordinance and incorporated herein by reference as "Appendix A" and said appendix is hereby made an integral part of this section. 
E.  New Interstate Signs. New interstate signs shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  The outside measurement of all new interstate signs shall be fourteen feet in height and forty eight feet in length, with or without trim, except that existing factory manufactured metal signs, now located within the twelve hundred foot zones set out previously and if holding a conforming state permit on December 7, 1982, are considered to be conforming with respect to size requirements until such time as the interstate sign is moved, enlarged, raised or otherwise physically altered with respect to dimensions or changes from its present configuration or sign type. 
2.  The total height of the interstate sign may not exceed seventy feet above the level of the surface of the pavement of the nearest lane of the main traveled way or seventy feet from the ground at the base of the structure to the tallest part of the structure, whichever is greater. Upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no new permit applications shall be accepted for signs with the total height of the sign exceeding seventy feet above the level of the surface of the pavement of the nearest lane of the main traveled way or seventy feet from the ground at the base of the structure to the tallest part of the structure, whichever is greater. Permits for signs of this configuration, the applications for which were in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall retain conforming status. 
3.  Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
4.  Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows either a back to back sign or a "V" formation sign but prohibits two signs (side by side or stacked atop one another) facing the same direction. 
5.  Sign locations shall be no less than five hundred feet apart measuring from the two closest points. 
6.  Sign structures shall be no less than ten feet from any property or right-of-way line. 
7.  Three signs shall be allowed per quadrant of an interchange adjacent to the interstate. This will allow a maximum of twelve signs per interchange. These signs must be within an area zoned commercial or industrial as specified in state law. 
8.  No new interstate sign shall be allowed except within the corridor described in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
15.24.150 - Sign setbacks and restrictions. 
A.  All ground signs shall be required to be located within the required front yard of a principal structure, and shall not be permitted to extend beyond the front property line into the street right-of-way. The location of ground signs shall not interfere with the view of any traffic control device or impede traffic vision. 
B.  When the charts in Section 15.24.080 make reference to this subsection, in order to erect a second ground sign, a use must have frontage on two publicly dedicated streets with each street including a legal curb cut. In addition, there must be a minimum lot area of one-half acre to permit a second such ground sign to be erected. In those instances where one of the street frontages is on a street serving a residential subdivision, a second ground sign shall not exceed thirty-two square feet in signable area and forty-eight square feet in sign structure area. For second frontage not on a street serving a residential subdivision, the second ground sign, if permitted shall not exceed one-half of the signable area and the sign structure area. 
(Ord. 02-07.01C § 2) 
(Ord. of 9-21-15, § 31) 
APPENDIX A 

Chapter 15.28 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION, AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-03-013, § 1, adopted March 7, 2011, repealed the former Chapter 15.28, §§ 15.28.010—15.28.090, and enacted a new Chapter 15.28 as set out herein. The former Chapter 15.28 pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Ord. 04-04-018, § 2(part); Ord. 04-06-037, §§ 1—3; Ord. 05-12-89, § 1; and Ord. 10-07-041, §§ I and II, adopted July 6, 2010. 

15.28.010 - Title and definitions. 
A.  This chapter will be known as the city of Locust Grove ("city") Soil Erosion, Sedimentation, and Pollution Control Ordinance. 
B.  The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
1.  "Best Management Practices (BMPs)" means those sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
2.  "Board" means the board of natural resources. 
3.  "Buffer" means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
4.  "Certified personnel" means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
5.  "Commission" means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
6.  "CPESC" means Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
7.  "Cut" means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
8.  "Department" means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
9.  "Design professional" means a professional licensed by the state of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
10.  "Director" means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
11.  "District" means the Henry County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
12.  "Division" means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
13.  "Drainage structure" means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
14.  "Erosion" means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
15.  "Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan" means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in Section 15.28.030(B) and (C) of this chapter. 
16.  "Fill" means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
17.  "Final stabilization" means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
18.  "Finished grade" means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
19.  "Grading" means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
20.  "Ground elevation" means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
21.  "Land-disturbing activity" means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in Section 15.28.020(E). 
22.  "Larger common plan of development or sale" means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
23.  "Local issuing authority (LIA)" means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. Under this chapter, the LIA is the City of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
24.  "Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA)" means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et.seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
25.  "Natural ground surface" means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
26.  "Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU)" means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
27.  "NOI": A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
28.  "NOT": A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
29.  "Operator": The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
30.  "Outfall": The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
31.  "Permit": The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
32.  "Person": Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
33.  "Phase or phased": Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
34.  "Project": The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
35.  "Properly designed": Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
36.  "Roadway drainage structure": A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
37.  "Sediment": Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
38.  "Sedimentation": The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
39.  "Soil and water conservation district approved plan": An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Henry County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
40.  "Stabilization": The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
41.  "State general permit": The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
42.  "State waters": Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
43.  "Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices": Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
44.  "Trout streams": All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
45.  "Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures" means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such  measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
46.  "Watercourse" means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
47.  "Wetlands" means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 11-03-013, § II, 3-7-11) 
15.28.020 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
A.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
B.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
C.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
D.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
E.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
F.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of Section 15.28.030(C). of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
G.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
H.  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within two hundred feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (A) through (G), (I) and (J) of this section; 
I.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
J.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
K.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 11-03-013, § II, 3-7-11) 
15.28.030 - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
A.  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the chapter and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of Section 15.28.030(B) and (C) of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
B.  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in Section 15.28.030(B) and (C) of this chapter shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
2.  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
5.  The local issuing authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in Section 15.28.030(C)15. and Section 15.28.030(C) 16., in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
C.  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
3.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
12.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in Section 15.28.030(B)(2) of this chapter; 
15.  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the cirector pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
16.  There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
D.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in Section 15.28.030(C) of this chapter. 
E.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 11-03-013, § II, 3-7-11) 
15.28.040 - Application and permit process. 
A.  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
B.  Application requirements. 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in 15.28.040 C. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of Section 15.28.030B. through Section 15.28.030C. of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by six copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
3.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
4.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within thirty-five days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by Section 15.28.030(C)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per Section 15.28.040(B)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
5.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
6.  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
C.  Plan requirements. 
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Section 15.28.030(B) through 15.28.030(C) of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
2.  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
D.  Permits. 
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by Section 14.28.030(C)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per Section 15.28.040(B)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3.  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
4.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
5.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
6.  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 11-03-013, § II, 3-7-11) 
15.28.050 - Inspection and enforcement. 
A.  The community development department director of the city (or his designee) will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities, as defined herein, has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
B.  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
C.  The community development department director or his designee shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
D.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
E.  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
F.  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to Code Section 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 11-03-013, § II, 3-7-11) 
15.28.060 - Penalties and incentives. 
A.  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
B.  Stop-work orders. 
1.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
2.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
3.  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
C.  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of Section 15.28.040(B)(6) The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 11-03-013, § II, 3-7-11) 
15.28.070 - Education and certification. 
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 11-03-013, § II, 3-7-11) 
15.28.080 - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
A.  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council within fifteen days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
B.  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal of writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Henry County. 
(Ord. No. 11-03-013, § II, 3-7-11) 
15.28.090 - Effective date, validity, liability. 
A.  Effective date. The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become effective immediately upon its adoption by the city of Locust Grove. 
B.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
C.  Liability. 
1.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
2.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
3.  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 11-03-013, § II, 3-7-11) 
Chapter 15.30 - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 
Sections: 

15.30.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the stream buffer protection ordinance. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.020 - Findings of stream buffer protection. 
The city council of the city finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
A.  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
B.  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
C.  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
D.  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
E.  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
F.  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
G.  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
H.  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
I.  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
J.  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
K.  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
A.  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
B.  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.040 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"Buffer" means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by Section 15.30.060(A) below), lying adjacent to the stream. 
"Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
"Impervious cover" means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
"Land development" means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
"Land development activity" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
"Land disturbance" means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
"Land disturbance activity" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
"Parcel" means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
"Permit" means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
"Protection area, or stream protection area" means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
"Riparian" means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
"Setback" means, with respect to a stream, the area established by Section 15.30.060(A) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
"Stream" means any stream, beginning at: 
1.  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
2.  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of twenty-five acres or more; or 
3.  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than twenty-five acres, the city may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
"Stream bank" means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
"Stream channel" means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
"Watershed" means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.050 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in Section 15.30.040 of this chapter. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
A.  Existing Development Activity. This chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
1.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this chapter. 
2.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities, including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
3.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this chapter. 
4.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this chapter. 
B.  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this chapter. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
1.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
2.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least twenty-five feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection A above. 
3.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter. 
4.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
5.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the community development department on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the (review and permitting authority) to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
6.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
After the effective date of this chapter, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to Section 15.30.060(B) below. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.060 - Land development requirements. 
A.  Buffer and Setback Requirements. All land development activity subject to this chapter shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for fifty feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
2.  An additional setback shall be maintained for twenty-five feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
3.  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
B.  Variance Procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this chapter, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this chapter, and the community development director finds and determines that the requirements of this chapter prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the city council may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
2.  Except as provided above, the city council shall grant no variance from any provision of this chapter without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the same. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within Henry County. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
3.  Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in this chapter would create an extreme hardship. 
4.  Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this chapter, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
5.  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
6.  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.070 - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.080 - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
A.  A site plan showing: 
1.  The location of all streams on the property, 
2.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property, 
3.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals, 
4.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone, and 
5.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
B.  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
C.  Any other documentation that the (review and permitting authority) may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.090 - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.100 - Inspection. 
A.  The community development director or his designee may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the community development director or his designee in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
B.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.110 - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
A.  Notice of Violation. If the community development director or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
2.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
3.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal to the city manager within thirty days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
B.  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the community development director shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of the city's intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the community development director or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
1.  Stop Work Order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
2.  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
3.  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the community development director or his designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
4.  Civil Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the community development director shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the community development director or his designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
5.  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the community development director or his designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or imprisonment for sixty days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.120 - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
A.  Administrative Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the community development director, may appeal in writing within thirty days after the issuance of such decision or order to the city manager of the city and shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council of Locust Grove within thirty days of receipt of the written appeal. 
B.  Judicial Review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the community development director, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Henry County. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.130 - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-02-013 § 2 (part)) 
15.30.140—15.30.500 - Reserved. 
Chapter 15.32 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-07-028, adopted Aug. 3, 2015, repealed and recreated ch. 15.32 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 15.32 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. 06-05-045. 

15.32.010 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
C.  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
1.  Protect human life and health; 
2.  Minimize damage to private property; 
3.  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
4.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
D.  Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city does ordain the ordinance codified herein and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
A.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
B.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
C.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
D.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
E.  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, 
F.  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.030 - Definitions. 
"Accessory structure or facility" means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
"Addition" means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
"Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
"Adjacent" means those areas located within the defined horizontal distance from the future-conditions floodplain boundary that are at or lower in elevation than either three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc. with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation). 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the community development director's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
"Area of future-conditions flood hazard" means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (one hundred-year future-conditions flood). 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map ("FIRM")with a one-percent or greater chance of flooding to average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
"Area of special flood hazard" is the land area subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other flood-prone areas as referenced in Section 15.32.060. All streams with a drainage area of one hundred acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
"Base flood" means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the one hundred-year flood. 
"Base flood elevation" means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
"Basement" means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
"Building" has the same meaning as "structure". 
"City" means the City of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
"Department" means the community development department for the city. 
"Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Director" means the community development director for the city or his/her designee. 
"Elevated building" means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
"Existing construction" means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 16, 2006. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 16, 2006. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
"FEMA" means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
"Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
"Flood hazard boundary map" or "FHBM" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
"Flood insurance rate map" or "FIRM" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood insurance study" or "FIS" means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
"Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
"Floodway" or "regulatory floodway" means the channel of a stream, river or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but not does include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Future conditions flood" means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the one hundred-year future-conditions flood. 
"Future-conditions flood elevation" means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
"Future-conditions floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
"Future-conditions hydrology" means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is; 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
"Manufactured home" means a building, transportable in one or more sections built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
"Mean sea level" means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
"National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
"New construction" means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 16, 2006, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 16, 2006. 
"North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988" is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
"Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
"Permit" means the permit issued by the department to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and, 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
"Repetitive loss" means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Site" means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
"Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes repetitive loss. 
"Substantial improvement" means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. The market value of the building should be: 
1.  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or 
2.  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or 
b.  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
"Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
"Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.040 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.050 - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The director, of the community development department for the city, or his/her designee is designated by the city council and hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.060 - Basis for area of special flood hazard—Flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following are adopted by reference: 
A.  The flood insurance study ("FIS"), dated May 16, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. [For those land areas annexed into the city, the current effective FIS and data for Henry County, dated May 16, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference.] 
B.  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the one hundred-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
1.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
2.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency ("FEMA") approved methodology and approved by the department designated by the Henry County Board of Commissioners. 
C.  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
1.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
2.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the department designated by the Henry County Board of Commissioners. 
D.  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at Locust Grove City Hall, 3644 Highway 42, Locust Grove, Georgia 30248. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.070 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.080 - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.090 - Permit procedures and requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the department a permit application on a form provided by the department for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.100 - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management and flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
A.  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
2.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
3.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
4.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
5.  Proposed grading plan; 
6.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
7.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
8.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
9.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor registered in the State of Georgia. 
B.  Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
3.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in Section 15.32.190(B); 
4.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.32.190(E); and 
5.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect registered in the State of Georgia for all proposed structure(s). 
C.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
D.  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
E.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including, but limited to, permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
F.  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
The approved floodplain management and flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.110 - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management and flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the department a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a land surveyor or professional engineer registered in the state and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect registered in the state and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The department shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.120 - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the director to administer this chapter shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
A.  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
B.  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including, but not limited to, Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
C.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the director shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of subsections (D) and (E); 
D.  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
E.  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
F.  When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the director shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
G.  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
H.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the director shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and 
I.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the department and shall be open for public inspection; and 
J.  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
K.  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.130 - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
A.  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
B.  For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the department. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the department then it shall be determined by a professional engineer registered in the state using a method approved by FEMA and the department. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.140 - Standards for development. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the department. If floodway data is not available from the department, then it shall be determined by a professional engineer registered in the state using a method approved by FEMA and the department. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.150 - General standards. 
A.  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
1.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
2.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
3.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
4.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
B.  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under (1) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
1.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
2.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two percent; 
3.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
4.  Verification of no-rise conditions (one-hundredth foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of Section 15.32.150; 
5.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
6.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision ("CLOMR") or conditional letter of map amendment ("CLOMA"), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the department using the FEMA community concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision ("LOMR"). 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.160 - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate, to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of Section 15.32.210 apply. This study shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the department prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
A.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
B.  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the department. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
C.  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every one hundred feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; and 
D.  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.170 - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
A.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in (B) below; 
B.  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
C.  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the department until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision ("CLOMR") is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the department. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.180 - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The department may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the department. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.190 - Provisions for flood damage reduction. 
In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
A.  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of Sections 15.32.140, 15.32.150 and 15.32.160 have been met; 
B.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
C.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
D.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
E.  Elevated buildings - All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
1.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
2.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
3.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
F.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
G.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
H.  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
I.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
J.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
K.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; 
L.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; and 
M.  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
N.  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this chapter. 
O.  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
1.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area: 
2.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; 
3.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.200 - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
The following provisions, in addition to those in Section 15.32.180, shall apply: 
A.  Residential Buildings. 
1.  New Construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of Sections 15.32.140, 15.32.150 and 15.32.160 have been met. If all of the requirements of Sections 15.32.140, 15.32.150 and 15.32.160 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 15.32.180(E). 
2.  Substantial Improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 15.32.180(E). 
B.  Nonresidential Buildings. 
1.  New Construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of Sections 15.32.140, 15.32.150 and 15.32.160 have been met. If all of the requirements of Sections 15.32.140, 15.32.150, and 15.32.160 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with Section 15.32.180(E). New construction that has met all of the requirements of Sections 15.32.140, 15.32.150 and 15.32.160 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A professional engineer or architect registered in the state shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the department using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(2)  Substantial Improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the director to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 15.32.180(E). Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the department using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
C.  Accessory Structures and Facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of Sections 15.32.140, 15.32.150, and 15.32.160 and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with Section 15.32.180(E) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
D.  Standards for Recreational Vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (Section 15.32.190(A)(2)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
E.  Standards for Manufactured Homes. 
1.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of Sections 15.32.140, 15.32.150 and 15.32.160 have been met. If all of the requirements of Sections 15.32.140, 15.32.150 and 15.32.160 have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with Section 15.32.180(E). 
2.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. 
3.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of Section 15.32.180(G). 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.210 - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
A.  Residential Buildings: For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with Section 15.32.180(E). 
B.  Nonresidential Buildings: For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with Section 15.32.180(E). 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.220 - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-zones). 
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the director shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
A.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater; and 
B.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood-prone enclosures in accordance with Section 15.32.180(E). 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.230 - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
A.  New construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map ("FIRM"), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 15.32.180(E); 
B.  New construction and substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A professional engineer or architect registered in the State of Georgia shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the director using FEMA floodproofing certificate along with design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
C.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.240 - Standards for subdivisions of land. 
A.  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
B.  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
C.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with Section 15.32.090; 
D.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
E.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and 
F.  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.250 - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the department, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
A.  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the department. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the department and approved by the city council. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
B.  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the department shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city council as established the city in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city council. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Henry County as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
D.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
E.  Variances may be issued by the director for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
F.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
G.  In reviewing such requests, the director and city council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
H.  Conditions for variances: 
1.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
2.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
3.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as twenty-five dollars for each one hundred dollars of insurance coverage provided. 
4.  The department shall maintain the records of all variance actions and report them to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
I.  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the director and city council shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
J.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the director and city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
K.  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.260 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the department shall have the right to file a written appeal to the city council within ten days of such decision in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city council. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
B.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Henry County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.270 - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.280 - Notice of violation. 
If the department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
A.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
B.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
C.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
D.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
E.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
F.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within thirty days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four hours filing period shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.290 - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four hours cure period notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
A.  Stop Work Order. The department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
B.  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. The department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
C.  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
D.  Civil Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the department may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notices of violations. 
E.  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court of the city to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or imprisonment for sixty days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.300 - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-028, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-15) 
15.32.310—15.32.500 - Reserved. 
Chapter 15.34 - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 
Sections: 

15.34.010 - General provisions. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city's separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are to: 
1.  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city's separate storm sewer system by any person; 
2.  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city's separate storm sewer system; 
3.  Prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city's separate storm sewer system; and 
4.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the municipal boundaries of the city and to all discharges entering the city's storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
C.  Compatibility with Other Regulations. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
D.  Responsibility for Administration. The authorized enforcement agency shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employment of the agency. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
15.34.020 - Definitions. 
"Accidental discharge" means a discharge prohibited by this chapter which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
"Authorized enforcement agency" means employees or designees of the city manager designated to enforce this chapter. 
"Best management practices (BMPs)" mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
"City's separate storm sewer system" means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
1.  Owned or maintained by the city; 
2.  Not a combined sewer; and 
3.  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
"Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
"Construction activity" means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
"Hazardous materials" mean any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
"Illicit discharge" means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the city's separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in Section 8.26.030 of this Code. 
"Illegal connection" means either of the following: 
1.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
2.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city's separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
"Industrial activity" means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(14). 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit" means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. Section 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
"Nonstormwater discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
"Person" means, except to the extent exempted from this chapter, any individual, partnership, organization, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
"Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; oil and other automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from construction of a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
"Pollution" means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
"Premises" mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
"State waters" mean any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
"Storm drainage system" means publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
"Stormwater runoff" or "stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
"Stormwater pollution prevention plan" means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
"Structural stormwater control" means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
"Wastewater" means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
"Watercourse" means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
"Waters of the United States or Waters of the U.S." mean: 
1.  All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; 
2.  All interstate waters, including interstate "wetlands"; 
3.  All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, "wetlands," sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds, the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters: 
a.  Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes, 
b.  From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce, or 
c.  Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce; 
4.  All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; 
5.  Tributaries of waters identified in subsections 1 through 4 of this definition; 
6.  The territorial sea; and 
7.  "Wetlands" adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in subsections 1 through 6 of this definition. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
15.34.030 - Prohibitions. 
A.  Prohibition of Illicit Discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city's separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
1.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing when performed by a governmental agency or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl-space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
2.  Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
3.  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test; and 
4.  The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
B.  Prohibition of Illegal Connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city's separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
1.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
2.  A person violates this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city's separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
3.  Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the Locust Grove sanitation department. 
4.  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the authorized enforcement agency requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
15.34.040 - Suspension of access to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
A.  Suspension Due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations. The authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend the city's separate storm sewer system discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the city's separate storm sewer system or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the city's separate storm sewer system, state waters or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
B.  Suspension Due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. Any person discharging to the city's separate storm sewer system in violation of this chapter may have their city's separate storm sewer system access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its city's separate storm sewer system access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. 
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency, city's separate storm sewer system access to premises terminated pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
15.34.050 - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with the provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with such permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized enforcement agency prior to allowing discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
15.34.060 - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
A.  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
B.  Access to Facilities. 
1.  The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities at reasonable times subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
2.  Facility owners or operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photographing, videotaping, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
3.  The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
4.  The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary and make the monitoring data available to the authorized enforcement agency at the owner or operator's own expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
5.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
6.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter. 
7.  If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
15.34.070 - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city's separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Such person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than twenty-four hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within three business days of the phone call or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Such person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
15.34.080 - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
The authorized enforcement agency will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, state waters or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at such person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the city's separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
15.34.090 - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
15.34.100 - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Violations. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the authorized enforcement agency is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The authorized enforcement agency is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection E of this section. 
B.  Notice of Violation. Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
1.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address, when available, or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator; 
f.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
g.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the authorized enforcement agency by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty days of service of notice of violation. 
2.  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
C.  Appeal of Notice of Violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within thirty days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. 
D.  Enforcement of Measures After Appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within thirty days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It is unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the authorized enforcement agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
E.  Costs of Abatement of the Violation. After abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within fifteen days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within thirty days after receipt of notice, or if an appeal is taken, within thirty days after a decision on such appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
F.  Civil Penalties. 
1.  In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the authorized enforcement agency shall deem appropriate, after the authorized enforcement agency has taken one or more of the actions described above, the authorized enforcement agency may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
2.  Injunctive Relief. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated, or continues to violate, the provisions of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
3.  Compensatory Action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
G.  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the appropriate municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or imprisonment for sixty days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
H.  Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
I.  Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
15.34.110 - Ultimate responsibility. 
The standards set forth in this chapter and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
15.34.120 - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
15.34.130 - Adoption of ordinance. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in full force and effect after its final passage and adoption. All prior ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are repealed. 
(Ord. 04-06-039 § 2 (part)) 
Chapter 15.35 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY 
Sections: 

15.35.010 - Findings. 
The city council of the city makes the following findings: 
A.  The study and financing analysis, known as the stormwater management action plan, prepared by the city properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the city. 
B.  Given the problems, needs, goals, program priorities, and funding opportunities identified in the professional engineering and financing analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater systems in Locust Grove in concert with other water resource management programs. 
C.  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the corporate limits of Locust Grove. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the corporate limits of Locust Grove is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
D.  The stormwater needs in the city include, but are not limited to, protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. Provision of stormwater management programs and facilities renders and/or results in both service and benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of Locust Grove in a variety of ways as identified in the professional engineering and financial analysis. The service and benefit rendered or resulting from provision of stormwater management systems and facilities may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including, but not limited to, location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and programs, and risk exposure. 
E.  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by the city, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities in Locust Grove in concert with the management of other water resources in the city. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program operating and capital investment needs. 
F.  The city council finds, concludes and determines that a stormwater management utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering and funding stormwater management services in Locust Grove. 
G.  An equitable approach to funding stormwater management services and facilities can be provided by adopting a schedule of service charges upon properties that is related to the burden of stormwater quality control service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city. Such schedule of service charges can be complemented by other funding methods which address specific needs, including, but not limited to, allocations of special purpose local options sales taxes to stormwater drainage improvement projects. A service charge credit is an appropriate means of adjusting service charges in recognition that private stormwater systems and/or actions can effectively reduce or eliminate the burden of stormwater quantity and quality control service requirements and costs that a property or properties pose for the city. Impervious area is the most important factor influencing stormwater service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city, and therefore is an appropriate parameter for calculating stormwater service charges and associated credits. In addition, the value to the stormwater utility of certain actions and practices performed by property owners and other stormwater utility customers may be recognized by credits based on other factors, including, but not limited to, the avoided cost of public information and education realized by the utility when public information and education about stormwater management is provided by the public school system. 
(Ord. 08-04-021 § 2 (part)) 
15.35.020 - Establishment of a utility and enterprise fund. 
A.  There is established a stormwater management utility within the Locust Grove utility department which shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the city's corporate limits, and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. Such utility shall be under the direction of a stormwater utility director, appointed by the city manager. 
B.  The city manager and city clerk shall establish a stormwater enterprise fund in the city budget and accounting system, separate and apart from its general fund, for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the utility, including, but not limited to, rentals, rates, charges, fees, and licenses as may be established by the city council. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be deposited promptly upon receipt into the stormwater enterprise fund, to be held and invested in trust for the purposes dedicated, and expended exclusively for purposes of the utility, including capital project construction. No other funds of the city shall be deposited in the stormwater enterprise fund or commingled with dedicated stormwater revenues, except that other revenues, receipts, and resources not accounted for in the stormwater enterprise fund, including, but not limited to, grants, transfers of city funds, loans, and bond proceeds may be combined with and applied to stormwater management capital projects as deemed appropriate by the city council, upon recommendation of the city manager. 
C.  The city council transfers to the stormwater utility director operational control over the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and heretofore operated by the city and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties upon which such facilities are located, easements, rights of entry and access, and certain equipment. 
(Ord. 08-04-021 § 2 (part)) 
15.35.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Credit" means a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. Credits for on-site stormwater systems shall be generally proportional to the effect that such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the site. 
"Customers of the stormwater management utility" means and includes all persons, properties, and entities owning developed real properties served by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities, and activities related thereto. 
"Detached dwelling unit/single-family residential unit" means developed land containing one structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, or small storage buildings, or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional impervious areas such as parking spaces, playgrounds, or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar nonresidential uses. Detached dwelling unit shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple dwelling unit residential properties. 
"Developed land" means all real property altered from its natural state by grading, paving, compaction, construction of structures, impervious services, or drainage works so that hydrologic response of the property is changed from that which would occur in the natural undeveloped condition. 
"Duplexes and triplexes" means developed land containing two (duplex) or three (triplex) attached residential dwelling units located on one or more parcels of land. 
"Equivalent runoff unit (ERU)" is defined to serve as a reference point for comparing dissimilar properties and attaining an equitable distribution of the cost of services and facilities through a stormwater management service charge. The equivalent runoff unit in Locust Grove has been determined to include one primary parameter with the following metric: two thousand seven hundred sixty-eight square feet of impervious area. This unit will be used to determine and compute the service charge for all properties within Locust Grove. 
"Hydrologic response" of a property is the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area; the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property; antecedent moisture conditions; and groundwater conditions on a property. 
"Impervious" means not allowing the passage of water through the surface on the ground or ground covering or a substantial reduction in the capacity for water to pass through the surface of the ground or ground covering as it would under natural conditions. The following types of surfaces will be considered "impervious" for purposes of the stormwater utility: the projected area of buildings; asphalt-, concrete-, brick-, or stone-paved areas; improved vehicular drives and parking areas; compacted gravel and soil surfaces; fabric or plastic coverings; and other surfaces that prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff or that change the hydrologic response of the property that existed prior to development. 
"Multiple dwelling unit residential properties" means developed land whereon four or more attached residential dwelling units are located and shall include, but not limited to, apartment houses, condominiums, townhomes, attached single-family homes, boarding houses, group homes, hotels and motels, retirement centers, and other structures in which four or more family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside. In the application of stormwater service charge rates, multiple dwelling unit properties shall be treated as other developed lands. 
"Nonresidential developed land" means, but shall not be limited to, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, water reservoirs, and water and wastewater treatment plants. 
"Service charges" means the periodic rate, fee, or charge applicable to a parcel of land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by the city's stormwater utility. Service charges are based on measurable parameters which influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or more classes of similarly situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to the owners of particular properties for services or facilities uniquely related to stormwater management of that property, including but not limited to charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced level of stormwater services above those normally provided by the city. 
"Stormwater management systems" means and includes facilities, operations, and programs that address the issues of drainage management (flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion and sedimentation) of receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, and reservoirs through improvements, maintenance, regulation and funding of plants, works, instrumentalities and properties used or useful in the collection, retention, detention, and treatment of stormwater or surface water drainage. 
"Undeveloped land" is land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
(Ord. 08-04-021 § 2 (part)) 
15.35.040 - Scope of responsibility for the city stormwater system. 
A.  The stormwater management utility shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the corporate limits of the Locust Grove Government. The utility shall provide for the conservation, management, protection, control, use, and enhancement of stormwater through planning, acquisition, construction, installation, management, operation, maintenance, regulation, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater systems to collect, control, convey, store, detain, retain, recharge, and treat stormwater and through regulation of stormwater management systems on private property. It shall be the long-term objective of the city to provide a comparable and consistent level of stormwater service to similarly situated properties throughout the service area. 
B.  The city stormwater system consists of all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, channels, ditches, swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural or manmade, within the political boundaries of the city which control and/or convey stormwater through which the city intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and properties. The city owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvements to those segments of this system which: 
(1)  Are located within public streets, rights-of-way, and easements; 
(2)  Are subject to easements, rights of entry, rights of access, rights of use, or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or 
(3)  Are located on public lands to which the city has adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities. 
C.  Operation and maintenance of stormwater systems and facilities which are located on private property or public property not owned by the city and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of the systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, or its occupant, except as that responsibility may be otherwise affected by the laws of the state and/or the United States of America. 
D.  It is the intent of this chapter to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity by or upon property not owned by the city, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the city, its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. 08-04-021 § 2 (part)) 
15.35.050 - Requirements for on-site stormwater systems; inspections and enforcement methods. 
The appropriate and efficacious management of the stormwater management system by the city on behalf of all its citizens and in compliance with applicable state and federal law places necessary and appropriate obligations on private property owners as well. All property owners and developers of developed real property within the city shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all city development regulations and the laws of the state and the United States of America. The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this chapter, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance. 
Any failure to meet the obligations set forth in this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by the city in the municipal court. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the city may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed. The actual cost thereof shall be assessed against the owner in the same manner as a tax levied against the property. 
The city shall have lien rights from the date of the filing of the abatement action by the city, and said lien rights may be perfected through: 
A.  A judgment; and 
B.  The filing of a writ of fieri facias against all property of the person or entity against whom the assessment was made. Upon issuance of said fieri facias, and forwarding of same to the sheriff, the sheriff shall be authorized pursuant to Georgia law to levy same upon the property of the owner to satisfy the amount due on the judgment. 
These enforcement methods shall be perfected by filing a notice of lien on the General Execution Docket of the Superior Court of Henry County. A fieri facias issued by any court in the state can be recorded on the General Execution Docket of the Superior Court of any other county in the state in which the owner possesses property. When the execution has been entered upon the docket, the lien shall date from such entry. 
(Ord. 08-04-021 § 2 (part)) 
State law reference: O.C.G.A. § 9-12-81(b). 
15.35.060 - General funding policy. 
A.  It shall be the policy of the city that funding for the stormwater utility is equitably derived through methods that have demonstrable relationships to the varied demands and costs imposed on the stormwater systems and programs and/or the level of service provided as a result of the provision of stormwater services and facilities. 
B.  Service charges for stormwater management shall be fair and reasonable and shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing services and facilities. The cost of stormwater services and facilities may include administrative, operating, capital investment, debt service, engineering and planning, and reserve expenses, and may also include related regulatory expenses associated with watershed management requirements. Properties shall be charged rentals, rates, charges, fees, or licenses in proportion to their related cost of service impact. 
C.  Service charge rates shall be designed to be consistent and coordinated with the use of other funding methods employed for stormwater management by the city, whether within or outside the stormwater utility, including, but not limited to, plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in-lieu of regulatory requirements, impact fees, system development charges, and special assessments. 
(Ord. 08-04-021 § 2 (part)) 
15.35.070 - Effective date of stormwater charges. 
Stormwater service charges shall accrue beginning April 1, 2008, and shall be billed periodically thereafter to customers, except as specific exemptions and credits may apply. 
(Ord. 08-04-021 § 2 (part)) 
15.35.080 - Stormwater management utility service charges. 
A.  There are established stormwater management utility service charges that shall be billed to all properties in the Locust Grove service area, except as specific exemptions or credits may allow for in this chapter or shall allow in future ordinances or amendments to this chapter. The stormwater management utility service charges may, but are not required to, include a service rate charge applied to each property. The service rate charge, if applied, shall be related generally to the amount and quality of runoff discharged to the public stormwater systems and stormwater receiving waters and to the costs of services associated with stormwater management. The service charge may also include a base rate charge for certain costs of service common to all stormwater management accounts, and/or special service charges to persons, entities, or properties that require services and/or facilities not commonly needed by all persons, entities, or properties. 
B.  The service rate charge, if applied, shall be reflective of the cost of providing services and facilities to properly control stormwater runoff quantity and quality. The three most important factors in the city's present cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities to individual properties are: 
(1)  The size of each property; 
(2)  The amount of impervious area on each property; and 
(3)  The number of parcels in the service area. 
C.  A base rate charge, if applied, shall be structured to recover those stormwater management costs of service that are not related to the size of individual properties or the amount of impervious area on individual properties, and may include, but are not limited to, the cost of billing and accounting for service charges to each account and other administrative and overhead expenses. 
D.  Special service charges, if applied, shall be structured to recover the cost of providing to certain persons, entities, and properties types or levels of stormwater management services that are not commonly required by all stormwater service charge ratepayers. Such services may include, but are not limited to, private development plan review and inspection, site inspections to verify the operational condition of on-site stormwater management systems, such as private detention/retention and conveyance facilities, monitoring and mitigative activities related to conditions on individual properties that impact water quality, and actions to abate conditions on private properties that do not comply with adopted city standards and/or that interfere with proper stormwater management and have been determined to constitute a public nuisance. 
E.  The study and management analysis conducted by the city determined that properties within the city service area classified as single-family residential property can be equitably and fairly charged based on the average area of impervious surface. This has been established as two thousand seven hundred sixty-eight square feet and comprises one ERU. This method greatly simplifies the computation of charges and eliminates the significant costs associated with individual parcel measurements. The mayor and city council adopts one ERU as representative of the conditions of single-family residential property in Locust Grove. 
F.  Properties classified as nonresidential shall be billed on the basis of the number of ERU's and acres calculated or measured to exist. Each acre or fraction thereof and ERU or fraction thereof shall be charged a service rate charge at the rate per ERU of impervious area and each acre unit as defined below. 
G.  The method of calculating the service rate charge for all properties shall be as follows: 
Parcel Fee = (IR) × (ERU's) + (AR) × (AU) + (AF) 
IR is the impervious area rate as established by this chapter or by amendment to this chapter. It is applied to the number of ERU's rounded to the next whole number. An ERU is defined as two thousand seven hundred sixty-eight square feet of impervious area. 
AR is the gross area rate as established by this chapter or by amendment to this chapter. It is applied to the number of acre units (AU's) in the parcel rounded to the next whole acre. 
AF is the administrative cost factor established by this chapter or by amendment to this chapter. The AF is applied as a fixed uniform flat charge to each parcel. 
H.  The annual IR per ERU for the service rate charge applicable to each property shall be thirty-six dollars unless modified to equitably account for special conditions on an individual property, adjusted for a particular property through the appeal process specified in this chapter, or changed hereafter by ordinance. 
I.  The annual AR per AU for the service rate charge applicable to each property shall be zero dollar unless modified to equitably account for special conditions on an individual property, adjusted for a particular property through the appeal process specified in this chapter, or changed hereafter by ordinance. 
J.  The annual base rate charge AF per each billed account shall be two dollars and twenty-one cents unless changed hereafter by ordinance. 
(Ord. 08-04-021 § 2 (part)) 
15.35.090 - Exemptions and credits applicable to stormwater service charges. 
Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater utility service charges or receive a credit or offset against such service charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater service charges shall be granted based upon property value or usage; the age, tax, or economic status, race, or religion of the customer; or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. A Stormwater Utility Service Charge Credit Manual will be prepared by the city specifying the design, performance and maintenance standards of on-site systems, facilities, activities, and services which quality application of a service charge credit, and how such credits shall be calculated. This manual will be separately approved by the city council and, by reference, incorporated herein. 
A.  Undeveloped land as defined in this chapter shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
B.  Developed land other than single-family residential units, including, but not limited to, multiple dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, public streets, roads, alleys, and by-ways, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, water reservoirs, and water and wastewater treatment plants may be eligible and receive a stormwater service charge credit. The stormwater service charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements and standards contained in the Stormwater Utility Service Charge Credit Manual. The stormwater service charge credit shall be proportional to the extent that on-site systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities. 
C.  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the Stormwater Utility Service Charge Credit Manual and/or upon continuing the provision of the systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. A credit may be revoked by the city at any time for noncompliance. 
D.  In addition to the foregoing credits based upon the design and performance of on-site systems, an educational credit shall be available to all public and private schools or school systems which agree to teach the "Water Wise Program", an environmental science curriculum approved by the Georgia Department of Education, in grades one through twelve. The educational credit shall be proportional to the extent the approved curriculum is taught. Educational credits may be taken in conjunction with any other credit available under this section. The superintendent of schools shall certify annually to the stormwater utility director, before July 1st, the extent to which the curriculum was taught. 
(Ord. 08-04-021 § 2 (part)) 
15.35.100 - Stormwater service charge billing, delinquencies, collections. 
A.  Stormwater management utility service charges shall be billed and collected in the manner and at the interval deemed most efficient by the city, and shall be payable in accordance with the rules and regulations of the city finance department as applied generally to all bills. A stormwater service charge bill may be sent through the United States mail or by an alternate means notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the past due date. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land, as shown from public land records of Henry County, shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent, the city may back bill for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency. A one and one-half percent per month late charge shall be billed based on the unpaid balance of any stormwater management utility service charge that becomes delinquent. 
B.  The stormwater service charge may be billed on a common statement and collected with other utility services through separate bills or any other method by which the city could bill property owners. 
C.  Any stormwater management utility service charge or portion of a service charge not paid when due may be recovered in an action at law or equity by the city. 
D.  In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this or any other ordinance of the city, failure to pay any utility service charge when billed in conjunction with another utility bill may result in a discontinuance of any or all other utility services provided by the city or by other with whom contractual agreements provide for discontinuance of service for nonpayment. The owner of each property, building, premises, lot, or house shall be obligated to pay such fee, which shall be enforceable by the city by action at law or equity. 
E.  No lien shall be imposed for delinquent collections unless a judgment is first obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
F.  Suits for collection shall be commenced by the city in the county of the owner's residence; provided, however, if the owner is not a resident of this state, suit may be filed in the superior or state court of Henry County, Georgia. If a suit is instituted by the city for collection, the owner shall pay court costs, litigation expenses, and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city. 
G.  If suit is instituted for the collection of any fees due hereunder or for the enforcement of this chapter, the owner shall pay the court costs, litigation expenses, and reasonable attorney's fees associated therewith. 
(Ord. 08-04-021 § 2 (part)) 
15.35.110 - Appeals. 
Any customer who believes the provisions of this chapter have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
A.  An appeal must be filed in writing with the city stormwater utility director. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. The appeal survey shall be submitted to the city in a digital format readable by CAD or GIS software. A paper copy may also be submitted. 
B.  Based on the information provided, a technical review shall be conducted by the stormwater utility director of the stormwater management utility and a written determination will be issued within thirty days stating whether an adjustment to the service charge is appropriate and, if so, the amount of such adjustment. 
C.  In response to an appeal, the stormwater utility director may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this chapter. 
D.  A decision of the stormwater utility director which is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the city manager within thirty days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. Notice of the appeal shall be served on the city manager by the appellant, stating the grounds for the appeal. The city manager shall issue a written decision on the appeal within thirty days. All decisions of the city manager shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant. 
E.  If the person or entity seeking adjustment or relief from the service charge desires, the decision of the city manager may be appealed in writing to the mayor and city council. Such appeals must be made within thirty days of the decision of the city manager and include a written basis for the appeal. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
F.  This appeal process shall not interfere with the rights of the person or entity to seek judicial relief in a court of competent jurisdiction, but shall be exhausted before judicial relief is pursued. Any appeal to the Superior Court of Henry County must be filed within thirty days of the decision of the mayor and city council. 
G.  Notices of the appeal and decisions shall be served personally or delivered by registered or certified mail to the address of record. 
(Ord. 08-04-021 § 2 (part)) 
Chapter 15.36 - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 1, adopted June 21, 2004, repealed the former Chapter 15.36, § 15.36.010, and enacted a new Chapter 15.36 as set out herein. The former Chapter 15.36 pertained to stormwater runoff and derived from Ord. 01-05.03B, § 2. 

15.36.010 - General provisions. 
A.  Findings of fact. It is hereby determined that: 
Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or "credits." The Georgia Greenspace Program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas which provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; 
Localities in the state of Georgia are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution; and 
Therefore, the city of Locust Grove has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
B.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and, 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
15.36.020 - Definitions. 
"Accelerated erosion" means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action. 
"Applicant" means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
"Building" means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than one hundred square feet of area. 
"Channel" means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
"City" means the City of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
"Conservation easement" means an agreement between a land owner and the city and/or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
"Dedication" means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
"Detention" means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
"Detention facility" means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
"Developer" means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
"Development" means a land development or land development project. 
"Drainage easement" means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
"Erosion and sedimentation control plan" means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
"Extended detention" means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four hours or greater. 
"Extreme flood protection" means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of one hundred years or more. 
"Flooding" means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
"Greenspace" or "open space" means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
"Hotspot" means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
"Hydrologic soil group (HSG)" means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
"Impervious cover" means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
"Industrial stormwater permit" means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
"Infiltration" means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
"Infiltration facility" means any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade. 
"Jurisdictional wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
"Land development" means any land change which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of the vegetation, or any activity which bears soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
"Land development activities" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
"Land development project" means a discrete land development undertaking. 
"Land owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
"Inspection and maintenance agreement" means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
"New development" means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
"Nonpoint source pollution" means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
"Nonstructural stormwater management practice" or "nonstructural Practice" means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
"Off-site facility" means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
"On-site facility" means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
"Offset fee" means a monetary compensation paid to a local government for failure to meet pollutant load reduction targets. 
"Overbank flood protection" means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through twenty-five-year frequency storm events. 
"Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
"Permit" means the permit issued by the city and/or its designee to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
"Person" means, except to the extent exempted from this ordinance, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
"Post-development" refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
"Pre-development" refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
"Project" means a land development project. 
"Recharge" means the replenishment of underground water reserves. 
"Redevelopment" means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
"Regional stormwater management facility" or "regional facility" means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
"Runoff" means stormwater runoff. 
"Site" means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
"Stop work order" means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
"Stormwater better site design" means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
"Stormwater management" means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
"Stormwater management facility" means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
"Stormwater management measure" means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
"Stormwater management plan" means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this ordinance. 
"Stormwater management system" means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
"Stormwater retrofit" means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
"Stormwater runoff" means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
"Stormwater treatment practices (STPs)" means measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies. 
"Structural stormwater control" means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
"Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
"Water quality volume (WQ v )" means the storage needed to capture and treat ninety percent of the average annual stormwater runoff volume. Numerically (WQ v ) will vary as a function of long term rainfall statistical data. 
"Watercourse" means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
15.36.030 - Applicability. 
(1)  This chapter shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the city and/or its designee. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(a)  New development that involves the creation of five thousand square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(b)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(c)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city and/or its designee to be a hotspot land use; or, 
(d)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items (a) and (b) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(2)  The following activities are exempt from this chapter: 
(a)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(b)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(c)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; 
(d)  Developments that do not disturb more than one thousand square feet of land, provided they are not part of a larger common development plan; and, 
(e)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city and/or its designee. 
When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project as defined in section 15.36.020 of this chapter, decisions on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current stormwater design manual which is defined in section 15.36.050 below. This criteria is dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the city and/or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
15.36.040 - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The wastewater manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
15.36.050 - Stormwater design manual. 
The city does hereby adopt and incorporate herein by reference the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volumes 1 and 2, 2016 Edition; Volume 3, First Edition dated April 2012, and any amendments thereto. The city and/or its designee will utilize the policy, criteria, and information including technical specifications and standards of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
The city and/or its designee may furnish additional policy, criteria, and information, including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this ordinance and may provide such information in the form of a local stormwater design manual. 
This manual will include a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including specific design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the city and/or its designee, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 16-12-063, § 1, 12-19-16) 
15.36.060 - Permit procedures and requirements. 
A.  Permit required. No land owner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
B.  Permit application requirements. Unless specifically exempted by this chapter, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city and/or its designee a permit application on a form provided by the city and/or its designee for that purpose. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with Section 15.36.070; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with Section 15.36.080; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with Section 15.36.090, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with Section 15.36.100, if applicable; and, 
(5)  Permit application and application review fees in accordance with Section 15.36.060(C) and (D). 
C.  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city and/or its designee. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection (B) above (two copies of the stormwater management plan and two copies of the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable), and any required review fees. 
(3)  The city and/or its designee shall inform the applicant within sixty business days of receipt of a complete permit application, whether the application, the stormwater management plan and the inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If either the permit application, the stormwater management plan or the inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city and/or its designee shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subparagraph (3) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the city and/or its designee that the permit application, the stormwater management plan and the inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this chapter, the city and/or its designee may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this chapter and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(b)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(c)  The city and/or its designee shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(d)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city and/or its designee; and, 
(e)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by Section 15.36.130(B). 
D.  Application review fees. The fee for review of any land development application shall be based on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee structure shall be established by the city and/or its designee. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to support local plan review, inspection and program administration, and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
E.  Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the city and/or its designee notifies the permit holder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under permit condition. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
15.36.070 - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the land owner or developer shall meet with the city and/or its designee for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(A)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(B)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(C)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
Local watershed plans, local greenspace protection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
15.36.080 - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this ordinance, including the performance criteria set forth in Section 34-311 below. 
This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this chapter are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. This includes: 
(A)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(B)  Vicinity map. 
(C)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(D)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Section 15.36.110; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than fifty percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in Section 15.36.110 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(E)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Section 15.36.110; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(F)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(G)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the city's ordinance on soil erosion and sedimentation control found at Sections 15.28.010 through 15.28.090 or NPDES Permit for Construction Activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(H)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(I)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(J)  Maintenance access easements. Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the city and/or its designee, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this chapter. The easement agreement shall be recorded by the city and/or its designee in the land records. 
(K)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city and/or its designee as provided in Section 15.36.090 below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice. 
(L)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city and/or its designee that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
15.36.090 - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city and/or its designee requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city and/or its designee, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city and/or its designee prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include; removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the city and/or its designee, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. 
In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city and/or its designee may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in Section 15.36.140 of this ordinance. 
The city and/or its designee, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
15.36.100 - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
The city and/or its designee may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to insure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus twenty-five percent. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. 
The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of "as built plans" and written certification by a registered professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this chapter. The city and/or its designee will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this ordinance. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development stages can be done at the discretion of the city and/or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
15.36.110 - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter: 
A.  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city and/or its designee are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
B.  Stream channel protection. 
(1)  Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(a)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(b)  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event; and 
(c)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(2)  This requirement is waived for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a man-made channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream streambank or channel integrity. 
C.  Overbank flooding protection. 
(1)  Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm under subsection (B) of this section is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the twenty-five-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(2)  This requirement is waived for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
D.  Extreme flooding protection. 
(1)  Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the one hundred-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(2)  This requirement may be adjusted or waived for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
E.  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city and/or its designee before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city and/or its designee may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
F.  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (A) of this section. The applicant may, if approved by the city and/or its designee, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
G.  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-ways and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and, 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
H.  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
15.36.120 - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city and/or its designee which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city and/or its designee that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
15.36.130 - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
A.  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. The applicant must notify the city and/or its designee in advance before the commencement of construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city and/or certified by a professional engineer or their designee who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No added work shall proceed until all violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the city and/or its designee. 
B.  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city and/or its designee is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
15.36.140 - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
A.  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this chapter. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city and/or its designee shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city and/or its designee, may correct the violation as provided in subsection (D) of this section hereof. 
Inspection programs by the city and/or its designee may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
B.  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city and/or its designee to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this chapter is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this chapter. 
C.  Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five years. These records shall be made available to the city and/or its designee during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
D.  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city and/or its designee, after thirty days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city and/or its designee may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
15.36.150 - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
A.  Notice of violation. If the city and/or its designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city council and/or its designee by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
B.  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city and/or its designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city and/or its designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order - The city and/or its designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy - The city and/or its designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit - The city and/or its designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city and/or its designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties - In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city and/or its designee shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city and/or its designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city and/or its designee may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties - For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city and/or its designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or imprisonment for a period of up to sixty days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
C.  Holds on occupation permits. Occupation permits will not be granted until corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the city and/or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 04-06-038, § 2, 6-21-04) 
Chapter 15.38 - TREE CONSERVATION AND REPLACEMENT 
Sections: 

15.38.010 - Short title—Purpose and intent. 
The short title of this chapter is the "City of Locust Grove Tree Conservation and Replacement Ordinance." The city deems it necessary and desirable in the interest of public health, safety and welfare to enact an ordinance for the conservation, planting and replacement of trees and to prevent the indiscriminate removal of trees in the city without denying the reasonable use and enjoyment of real property. The importance of trees is recognized for their shade, cooling, noise and wind reduction, soil erosion prevention, oxygen production, dust filtration, carbon dioxide absorption, aesthetic and economic enhancement of all real property, and their contribution to the general well being and quality of life of the citizens of Locust Grove. Consistent with the expressed purpose of this chapter, all persons shall make reasonable efforts to preserve and retain certain existing, self-supporting trees as defined herein. It is also the intent of this chapter that all applicable sites within the city maintain or obtain a minimum tree density, as defined and explained herein. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning prescribed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. All other terms shall be accorded their common meaning. 
"Basal area" means the cross-sectional area expressed in square inches, of a tree trunk at Diameter Breast Height (DBH) expressed herein in terms of "units" per acre. 
"Board of appeals" means the Locust Grove city council. 
"Buffer" means an area required to remain undisturbed pursuant to the subdivision regulations, the zoning ordinance, a condition of zoning or this chapter. 
"Building department" means Henry County building department. 
"Caliper" means a standard of trunk measurement for understory or replacement trees. Caliper inches are measured at the height of six inches above the ground for trees up to and including four inch caliper and twelve inches above the ground for trees larger than four inch caliper. 
"City" means the city of Locust Grove, Georgia or its designee. 
"City arborist" means the person or his or her designee who shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Until a city arborist has been chosen by the city council or when the position becomes vacant, the city arborist shall be the city manager. 
"Conifer tree" means any tree with needle leaves and a woody cone fruit including, but not limited to, pine, juniper and cedar species. 
"Construction area" means that area outside the tree save area that is used for any of the following purposes: (a) public or private rights-of-way; (b) driveways, not to exceed twenty feet in width; (c) utility easements, not to exceed ten feet in width unless otherwise required by law or the utility provider; (d) sewer and stormwater easements not to exceed forty feet in width; (e) parking facilities; (e) lot building areas. 
"Critical root zone" means the minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone (CRZ) will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one and three-tenths times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. Example: The CRZ radius of a twenty-inch diameter tree is twenty-six feet. 
"Density factor" means a unit of measurement used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a site. 
"Developer" means the person, persons, or entity making application for land disturbance permits, building permits, or certificates of occupancy for any development activity. 
"Development activity" means any alteration of the natural environment which requires the approval of a development or site plan and issuance of a land disturbance permit. By way of illustration but not limitation, development activity shall also include the "thinning" or removal of trees from land in conjunction with a forest management program, the removal or destruction of trees incidental to the development of land or to the marketing of land for development, the removal or destruction of trees in conjunction with any grading activity, including the removal or filling (stockpiling) of soil, and logging or the removal of trees not in conjunction with an ongoing forest management program. Nothing in this definition shall be deemed to require or authorize the issuance of a permit for any activity described herein. 
"Development plan review department" means the Henry County development plan review department. 
"Diameter breast-height (DBH)" means the standard measure of tree size for trees existing on a site. The diameter of the tree trunk is measured at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, measure the trunk at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
"Grading activity" means altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions, and/or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
"Land disturbance permit" means a permit issued by the city that authorizes development activity, and includes, but is not limited to, a soil erosion permit, clearing and grubbing permit, land disturbance permit or building permit. 
"Lot building area" means that area of a lot, set aside for construction of the primary structure, not including the front, side and rear setbacks, as established by the city zoning ordinance. The lot building area may be expanded into said setbacks by no more than ten feet from the foundation of a structure where such foundation is located on or within five feet of the setback line so as to minimize construction impacts on the tree save area, unless a variance has been granted for any such setback. 
"Non-development activity" means any alteration of the natural environment, which does not require development or site plan approval, but which would include the proposed removal or destruction of any tree(s). Any removal of trees that constitutes development activity as that term is herein defined shall not constitute non-development activity. 
"Overstory tree" means trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than forty feet. 
"Pervious surface" means all that area of land that can be landscaped or planted, allows natural passage through by water and is not covered by man-made materials or structures such as building or paving. 
"Planning and zoning department" means the Henry County planning and zoning department. 
"Plantable area" means the pervious surface area (expressed in square feet) available for the preservation or planting of trees on a single-family subdivision lot. Plantable area shall not include that portion of the lot that is covered by buildings and structure. 
"Registered landscape architect" means a person registered in the state of Georgia as being a landscape architect. 
"Semi-pervious" means hardscape, aggregate or porous paver that allows at least fifty percent of surface water to pass through the man made material and into the underlying soil. 
"Single-family residential" means any residential-agricultural district (RA); single-family residential district including R-l, R-2, and R-3; two-family residential district (RD); mobile home development district (RMH); type of planned development districts containing such uses; or other single-family districts that may be adopted. Single-family residential does not include multi-family districts. 
"Specimen tree" means any tree which qualifies in accordance with Appendix C for special consideration for preservation due to its size, type, condition, location or historical significance as determined by the city arborist. 
"Timber harvest" means harvesting of timber from sites as a timber management activity as part of a demonstrated ongoing agricultural land use. Timber harvesting shall be regulated pursuant to Appendix D of this chapter. 
"Tree" means any living, self-supporting woody or fibrous plant which normally obtains a diameter breast height of at least three inches, and typically has one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
"Tree planting list" means the recommended species of trees listed in Appendix A. 
"Tree removal" or "removal of trees" means any act which causes a tree to die within two years after commission of the act, including but not limited to damage inflicted upon the root system in the critical root zone or trunk as the result of: 
1.  The improper use of machinery on the trees; 
2.  The storage of materials in or around the trees; 
3.  Soil compaction; 
4.  Altering the natural grade to expose the roots or to cover the tree's root system with more than four inches of soil; 
5.  Causing the infection or infestation of the tree by pests, fungus or harmful bacteria; 
6.  Pruning judged to be excessive by the city arborist or not in accordance with the standard set forth by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA); 
7.  Paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious surface within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree or its root system; and 
8.  Application of herbicides or defoliants to any tree without first obtaining a permit. 
"Tree save area" means the area exclusive of construction areas designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving natural trees, preventing soil disturbance, and/or preserving natural buffers. 
"Understory" means those trees that grow beneath the overstory, and will generally reach a mature height of under forty feet. 
"Zoning districts" means those areas as defined in the zoning ordinance and shown on the zoning map. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.030 - Applicability. 
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property within the corporate limits. The provisions of this chapter shall not limit the applicability of the buffering and open space provisions of the zoning ordinance. The terms and provisions of this chapter shall be consistent with any requirements imposed by state law or by the Georgia Department of Transportation in connection with any state-owned or maintained right-of-way. This chapter shall not apply to any development activities for which land disturbance permits have already been issued. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.040 - Tree board. 
The mayor and each city council member shall appoint one member to a seven member tree board. This tree board should be the same body as provided under Chapter 12.12 of the Code of Ordinances for the city of Locust Grove. 
A.  The tree board shall give advice to the city council based on an annual reevaluation of experience under this chapter, provide leadership in the development of understanding of the objectives and methods of the tree program, and assist the city arborist in the development and maintenance of technical specifications and guidelines. 
B.  The tree board shall produce and maintain a list of proposed changes to the kinds and species of trees described in the tree planting list attached as Appendix A to this chapter. Any such changes may be adopted by resolution of the city council and may be changed from time to time by resolution of the city council. Upon adoption of the resolution, the changes shall become a part of this chapter. 
C.  The tree board should enlist technical advisors in the fields of land development, landscape architecture and horticulture or related professions. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.050 - General tree conservation. 
Every property owner, occupant, or developer of property shall be responsible for the normal care of trees located on such property. 
A.  Willful injury or disfigurement of any tree growing within the city shall be a violation of this chapter. 
B.  No person shall: 
1.  Attach any sign, notice or other object to any tree or fasten any wires, cables, nails or screws to any tree in a manner that could prove harmful to the tree, except as necessary in conjunction with activities in the public interest or as part of construction of a tree house absent the intent to kill or seriously disfigure the tree. 
2.  Pour any material near or around any tree which could be harmful to the tree. 
3.  Cause or encourage any unnecessary fire or burning near or around any tree. 
4.  Construct a concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel sidewalk, significantly compact the soil, place fill material, or create other impervious or semi-impervious surfaces around any tree so as to cut off air, light or water from the roots of the tree so as to adversely impact the tree's root system. 
5.  Pile building material or equipment around any tree so as to cause growth threatening injury thereto. 
6.  Deny routine maintenance, watering and reasonable arboricultural care to existing and newly established trees as may be required as a result of activities taking place under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.060 - Exemptions—Approval letter required for non-development activity. 
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  The removal of trees from an owner-occupied, single-family lot, not any way associated with development activities; 
B.  The removal of trees from horticultural properties such as farms, nurseries or orchards. This exception shall not be interpreted to include timber-harvesting incidental to development of the land; 
C.  The necessary removal of trees within dedicated utility easements; 
D.  The removal of trees on public right-of-ways (and adjacent areas within the construction limits of right-of-ways) conducted by, on behalf of, or any activity pursuant to work to be dedicated to, a federal, state, county, municipal or other governmental agency in pursuance of its lawful activities or functions in the construction or improvement of public right-of-ways; 
E.  The removal of trees from lakes, detention ponds, and drainage easements; or 
F.  The removal of any tree which has become or threatens to become a danger to human life or property. 
G.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, all reasonable efforts should be made to save specimen trees. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.070 - General requirements for active development. 
A.  Prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit for the applicable development, or phase of development the following general steps shall be satisfied. 
1.  Developer shall prepare an integrated site plan and tree survey as prescribed under Section 15.38.080. 
2.  Developer shall submit the integrated site plan and tree survey to the city arborist who will determine which specimen trees will be preserved. This determination should be made after consultation with developer. All specimen trees not preserved shall be replaced in accordance with Section 15.38.090(D). Developer shall also submit to the city arborist the administration fee required under Section 15.38.140 and an aerial photograph of the entire area upon which development activities are to take place. (Such photographs may be obtained from Henry County administration.) 
3.  Developer shall mark all specimen trees to be preserved with a ring of blue colored water-based paint around the base of their trunks. Developer shall cordon off all tree save areas from construction areas with heavy millimeter plastic tape, a minimum of four inches wide with dark letters on a bright background reading "Tree Save Area Do Not Enter" or equivalent signage on a continuous, durable restraint. Such signage shall be installed no less than three feet and no more than five feet from the ground and shall remain in functioning condition until the construction proximate to the tree save area is complete. Thereafter, developer shall remove and dispose of said signage. 
4.  Unless preexisting, developer shall plant and maintain a dense vegetative buffer along the perimeter of the development or phase of the development in which grading activity may occur. The width of said buffer shall be at least as wide as that required under the city zoning ordinance. In addition, the area in which grading activity may occur shall be visually screened from public roads by at least a fifty foot buffer. Planting of said buffer shall begin no later than thirty days after tree removal or grading activities have begun and shall be complete no later than ninety days thereafter. 
5.  City arborist shall inspect the development site for compliance with the above requirements. Where tree trunks or critical root zones are in jeopardy of being damaged by equipment, the city arborist shall require the developer to provide meaningful protection of such aspects of trees, such as strap two-inch by four-inch boards around tree trunks or erect a fence around the critical root zone. Such tree protection shall remain in functioning condition until the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
6.  After lawfully receiving a land disturbance permit, developer may undertake tree removal and grading activities within the construction area only. No grading activity shall be permitted in tree save areas. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of any building permit for the applicable development or phase of development, the following general steps shall be satisfied. 
1.  City arborist shall inspect to determine whether developer has impermissibly disturbed the tree save areas. 
2.  If developer wishes to count trees in tree save areas towards satisfaction of the minimum tree density requirement under Section 15.38.090, landscaping requirements under Chapter 15.42 of this title, or remove trees under twelve inches DBH in the tree save area, then developer shall submit a tree survey, as prescribed under Section 15.38.080(C), to the city arborist of those trees in the tree save area developer wishes to count towards either or both of the mentioned provisions and those non-pine species in the tree save area twelve inches DBH or greater. Said survey shall be prepared, certified, signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect. Developer shall mark those surveyed trees in the tree save area with a ring of blue colored water-based paint around the base of their trunks. To satisfy the landscaping requirements under said chapter, the marked trees in the tree save area and preserved specimen trees shall be located on the same lot which is subject to said landscaping requirements. 
3.  After submission of the tree save area tree survey and prior to tree removal in a tree save area, city arborist shall inspect the tree save areas for proper marking consistent with the tree save area tree survey. 
4.  If after inspection the city arborist determines that deve1oper has complied with the above requirements, the developer may remove any trees in the tree save area under twelve inches DBH that are not to be counted toward compliance with the minimum tree density requirement under Section 15.38.090 or landscaping requirements under Chapter 15.42 of this title. Also, the city arborist shall sign-off on developer's building permit for the applicable lot or area of the development. 
C.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any lot the applicable development or phase of development, the following general steps shall be satisfied. 
1.  Developer shall plant those trees necessary to comply with the minimum tree density requirements under Section 15.38.090 and the landscaping requirements under Chapter 15.42 of this title. 
2.  Developer shall submit to the city arborist a plat of the lot indicating the location of any replacement trees and a document certifying that the particular lot in question contains the minimum tree density required under Section 15.38.090 and satisfies the landscaping requirements under Chapter 15.42 of this title, both items signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect. Prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy above eighty percent of those needed to complete the development or phase of development, developer shall submit to the city arborist a document prepared, signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect certifying that those portions or lots of the development or phase of development which will not need certificates of occupancy contain the minimum tree density required under Section 15.38.090 and satisfy the landscaping requirements under Chapter 15.42 of this title. Such certifications shall contain calculations showing compliance with the required site density factor using existing trees, replacement trees, and/or contributions to the city of Locust Grove tree replacement fund. (See density factor analysis, Appendix B.) 
3.  City arborist shall inspect tree plantings and review the assertions of the developer's registered landscape architect. If the city arborist determines compliance with of the above requirements, city arborist shall sign-off on developer's certificate of occupancy for the applicable lot or area of development. 
D.  Following any inspection, the city arborist shall advise the applicant of any recommended changes in the applicant's proposed tree removal, protection or planting plans necessary to make the plans comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  The city arborist shall review all requests and supporting data and take one of the following actions: approve, approve with conditions or disapprove. Requests, which meet the requirements of this chapter, shall be approved. 
F.  In no case shall a land disturbance permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy be issued for a property upon which timber harvesting has occurred, with or without a permit, where such timber harvesting was completed within the last eighteen months. 
G.  Except as provided in Section 15.38.100 of this chapter authorizing certain limited cut and fill activities, the city arborist may refuse to sign-off on any tree removal or land disturbance permit until the submission of all development plans and receipt of other evidence satisfactory to the city arborist that there is a reasonable certainty that the development activity is imminent. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.080 - Integrated site plan and tree survey submission requirements. 
A.  When a person applies for a land disturbance permit for active development, such person shall pay the administration fee as required under Section 15.38.140 to the city and file an integrated site plan and tree survey with the city arborist providing the following information: 
1.  The species, location, health, size (DBH) and density unit value for specimen trees; 
2.  Site area, including location of existing and proposed utility property or easements, boring sites for underground utilities, and all structures, driveways and curb cuts and detention ponds; 
3.  A delineation of all tree save areas and construction areas; 
4.  All buffers required under the city zoning ordinance shall be delineated; 
5.  Property lines and phase lines if any for the development; 
6.  Water bodies and topographical lines sufficient to show elevation and drainage of land; 
7.  If applicable, details concerning any tree protection devices or measures (such as fencing, tree wells, aeration systems, permeable paving, retaining walls, bollards, etc.); 
8.  The integrated site plan and tree survey shall be certified, signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect; and 
9.  Any additional information as required by the city arborist as he or she deems necessary on a case-by-case basis. 
B.  Minor additions to existing development require only a sketch showing changes to be submitted to the city arborist for review and approval. 
C.  The tree survey for tree save areas, as may be required in Section 15.38.070(B)(2), shall also be integrated into the site plan for a particular lot certified, signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect noting the species, location, health, size (DBH) and density unit value of all trees within the tree save area as deep as is necessary to meet the minimum density requirements under Section 15.38.090 or landscaping requirements under Chapter 15.42 of this title or to determine those trees to be preserved from tree removal. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.090 - Minimum tree density requirements. 
A.  All sites within the city, other than single-family residential lots, shall maintain a minimum tree density of twenty units per acre. The term "unit" is an expression of basal area as defined herein and is not synonymous with "tree." Minimum tree density shall be calculated and established pursuant to the formula and analysis set forth in Appendix B to this chapter. The developer shall be subject to the minimum tree density requirement set forth in this section, but the developer shall base its density calculations on the net site area excluding construction areas, except parking areas. For the purposes of this section, parking areas shall not be considered part of the construction area. 
B.  All newly constructed single-family residential lots in the city shall maintain a minimum tree density based upon the maximum number of trees that can be maintained within thirty percent of the lot's plantable area, taking into consideration the standards for tree size and separation — overstory trees, two hundred square feet and understory trees, seventy-five square feet. 
C.  The minimum tree density requirement shall be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development. The density requirement may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees in accordance with the minimum standards of this chapter or some combination of the two. In addition, planting on such lots shall be at the ratio of not less than one overstory tree (minimum two-inch caliper) for every three understory trees (minimum one-inch caliper). No more than thirty percent of any one genus may be included in any replanting plan. 
D.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is required that all reasonable efforts be made to save specimen trees. (Reasonable efforts shall include, but not be limited to, alternate building design, building location, parking area layout, parking area location, water detention location and the like.) Developers shall receive a density credit of two times the assigned unit value for each specimen tree saved by utilizing an alternate design. Specimen trees that cannot be saved shall be replaced with trees having a total density equal to three times the unit value of the tree removed with a minimum four-inch tree caliper. Specimen trees removed without prior approval shall be replaced with trees equal to eight times the unit value with a minimum four-inch tree caliper and subject to the applicable penalties as described in Section 15.38.170. 
E.  The intent of this chapter is to insure that a minimum density of trees is maintained on all developed sites. Occasionally, this intent cannot be met because a project site will not bear the required density of trees. To provide some alternatives in such cases, two alternative methods of compliance may, at the discretion of the city council, be approved: planting at a location remote from the project site; or, contributing to the city of Locust Grove tree replacement fund. 
1.  The following standards have been established for administering these alternative compliance methods. The city arborist shall review requests for alternative compliance and recommend to the city council whether to approve or disapprove the request. In no instance will more than eighty percent of the required site density be met through alternative compliance. As many trees as can reasonably be expected to survive shall be planted on the site in question. 
2.  No certificate of occupancy for a development or phase of development shall be issued until the city arborist has received the necessary documentation and/or funds and the city council has approved the request. If trees are to be planted at another location, a plan indicating location, caliper, number and species of trees to be planted as well as schedule for completion of planting shall be submitted to the city arborist for review and recommendation. The off-site location should be in the same area of the city as the project site 
3.  If the city council chooses to accept a donation to the city of Locust Grove tree replacement fund, the city arborist shall establish the amount of the donation. The amount of the donation shall be based upon the number, size and species of trees that cannot be planted at the site. The city arborist shall estimate the cost to the city for the materials, labor and three-year maintenance requirements associated with the trees. The amount of the donation shall be one hundred percent of the estimated costs of the average of two bids from reputable landscape contractors for the materials, labor and maintenance. The city shall use the funds for the purpose of planting trees on public property, which is preferred, for tree conservation education, landscaping public property or soil erosion minimization projects. 
F.  Documentation of compliance with this section, including tree density calculations described in Appendix B, shall be prepared, certified, signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.100 - Land disturbance permit for non-active developments. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no tree removal shall be allowed or approved for any site not under active development. For the purposes of this chapter, a site is not under active development unless there exists an approved development plan delineating the improvements to be constructed on the site consistent with the use for which the site is zoned, and there is a reasonable certainty that construction is imminent. 
B.  A land disturbance permit may be issued for grading activity on a site not under active development provided that all of the following requirements have been met. 
1.  The sole purpose of the grading activity is for the storage, removal or altering of soil for fill balancing on another site under active development. 
2.  The proposed grading activity shall not decrease the tree density below the minimum tree density for the site as calculated under Section 15.38.090(A). For the purposes of this section, trees in buffers that will be required shall be excluded from minimum density calculations. 
3.  The area to be disturbed within the site shall be the area that will have the least adverse impact on existing trees, as determined by the city arborist. In addition, the area shall be visually screened from public roads and all adjacent properties by a one hundred foot dense vegetative buffer along the perimeter of the property on which there will be land disturbance. In order to provide reasonable visual screening, it may be necessary to locate access roads to the impacted area in a winding manner to prevent a straight line of site to the impacted area. Planting of said buffer shall begin no later than thirty days after tree removal or grading activities have begun and shall be complete no later than ninety days thereafter. 
4.  The disturbed area within the site shall be replanted with trees to a tree density of twenty units per acre no later than eighteen months from the issuance of the land disturbance permit authorizing the grading activities. A tree replacement plan and a bond shall be submitted and approved by the city arborist prior to the issuance of the permit authorizing the grading activities. The bond shall be in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent of the estimated cost of the materials, labor and maintenance associated with the replanting. The bond shall be held for one year and to the end of the succeeding planting season to ensure survival of the replacement trees. The applicant shall be responsible for the irrigation (watering) of trees during the period of the bond. The replanting requirements of this section shall not apply and the bond shall be released, if, on or before fifteen months from the issuance of the permit authorizing the grading activity, the site becomes under active development pursuant to the issuance of a land disturbance permit and the approval of development plans in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize any grading activity or similar activity not otherwise in compliance with the city subdivision ordinance including the city soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. Further, nothing in this section shall be deemed to eliminate the requirement that all reasonable efforts shall be taken to save and to not adversely impact the critical root zones of specimen trees and that all applicable sites from the city shall maintain or obtain the minimum tree density required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.110 - Tree damage. 
Any tree designated in the plan to be saved that is damaged during construction or as a result of such construction shall be treated according to accepted National Arborist Association Standards or replaced with a tree(s) equal to the unit value of the tree damaged beyond treatment. However, any specimen tree damaged as described above shall be replaced with a tree(s) eight times the unit value of the tree removed with a minimum four-inch tree caliper. In the event that a damaged specimen tree shall be removed, the location occupied by the tree's critical root zone shall remain in a pervious state with no structures or buildings placed in this area and violations shall be subject to the applicable penalties as described in Section 15.38.170. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.120 - Tree planting standards. 
A.  Unless otherwise documented, signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect or approved by the city arborist, trees selected for planting shall be on the tree planting list. (See Appendix A.) Trees selected for planting shall be free from injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and shall be of good vigor in order to assure a reasonable expectation of survivability. Standards for transplanting shall be in keeping with those established in the International Society of Arboriculture publication "Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual" or similar publication. Reference the American Association of Nurserymen publication "American Standard for Nursery Stock" (ANSI Z60, 1973) for plant material quality specifications. Reference the "Manual of Woody Landscape Plants" (Michael Dirr, 1983, Castle Books, or later editions) or similar publication for information on tree species site requirements. 
B.  It is desirable that planted trees be ecologically compatible with the site and neighboring sites. Accordingly, the replanted trees shall be of the same or similar species as those removed when practical. 
C.  All planted overstory trees shall be at least six feet tall and have a trunk of not less than two caliper inches. All replanted understory trees shall be at least four feet tall or have a trunk not less than one caliper inch. In order to provide sufficient growing area for planted trees, the following minimum criteria shall be observed unless otherwise approved by the city arborist: 
Overstory trees - two hundred square feet of pervious root zone. 
Understory trees - seventy-five square feet of pervious root zone 
(However, up to thirty percent of critical root zone may be impervious area) 
D.  Planted trees shall be placed in areas so as to maximize their benefits, such as shade for single-family residential structures, streets or parking lots; augment the minimum depth of buffers around commercial or industrial activities; or soil erosion prevention on slopes. 
E.  At developer's discretion, planted trees under this section may be applied to the minimum landscaping requirements under Chapter 15.42 of this title to the extent such planted trees are located on a lot or area subject to said landscaping requirements. 
F.  Compliance with this section shall be documented, signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.130 - Tree removal compliance inspection. 
A.  Following the issuance of a land disturbance permit for the development site, the city arborist shall from time to time inspect the site for the purpose of certifying compliance with the requirements of the chapter. In the event of noncompliance, the city arborist, may revoke or modify any city permit pertaining to the development activity for which the land disturbance permit has been issued. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until actual compliance is obtained. 
B.  If any required land disturbance permit conditions have not been met within the time specified in the land disturbance permit, and provided the city arborist has not granted a written extension, the city may use the cash or bond proceeds to insure that these conditions are met. The bond will have an expiration date no longer than one year, and the proceeds will go to the city of Locust Grove tree replacement fund under Section 15.38.090(E). 
C.  After development is complete, the city arborist shall continue to make random inspections to insure that required trees are maintained. Replacement shall be required or bond/letter of credit posted within thirty days of notice by the city arborist should any of these trees die, be removed or be destroyed within two years after completion of development. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, a developer's responsibility to replace a newly planted tree or trees on a particular lot shall terminate one year after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for that lot provided that an inspection by the developer or his designee conducted immediately prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy confirms that the planted tree or trees were planted properly as established in the ISA (international Society of Arboriculture) standards, and are healthy and free of pests and disease. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to eliminate any other obligation the developer may have pursuant to any private agreement between the developer and subsequent landowner or tenant, or any restrictive covenants that are applicable to the property. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.140 - Permit fees. 
The fee for review of all documents required under this chapter and inspections shall be fifty dollars per acre not to exceed a maximum of five hundred dollars. These fees may be revised from time to time by resolution of the city council, or delegated to the city arborist to be administratively established and revised from time to time. Such fees shall be paid to the city. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.150 - Enforcement—Appeals and variances. 
A.  Enforcement. The city arborist shall be primarily responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. All requests for approval letters and all documentation or tree removal shall be submitted to and reviewed by the city arborist. The city arborist shall be responsible for recommending the approval or denial of applications for land disturbance permits. 
B.  Appeals. 
1.  Written requests for appeal of any administrative decision are permitted and shall be submitted to the board of appeals within ten days after notice of such decision. Such written appeal shall be made in the form of a letter which outlines the salient points upon which the appeal is based. 
2.  The board of appeals shall schedule a hearing as soon as reasonably practicable to consider the appeal, and shall issue a written decision within thirty days of the hearing. 
3.  If the appeal concerns an administrative decision regarding specimen trees, it shall be the applicant's burden to demonstrate that reasonable alternatives (as described in Section 15.38.090(D)) have been considered in order to save specimen trees. Documented evidence shall be filed by the applicant with the written request for appeal and shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Integrated site plan and tree survey as required under Section 15.38.080. 
b.  Two alternative development plans, which include the specimen tree(s). 
c.  An itemized estimate of additional costs associated with saving the tree(s). 
C.  Variance. 
1.  Written requests for a variance are permitted. 
2.  The city arborist shall have the authority, but is not required to exercise such authority, to grant variances not to exceed twenty percent of the minimum or maximum standards of this chapter. 
3.  Variance requests, not acted upon by the city arborist, shall be ruled on by the board of appeals in writing and shall be issued no later than thirty days after a request is reviewed. 
4.  Variances can be granted only in the case of extreme hardship or unusual circumstance. The factors to be taken into consideration shall include, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  The ease with which the applicant can alter or revise the proposed development or improvement to accommodate existing trees. 
b.  The economic hardship that would be imposed upon the applicant were the variance denied. 
c.  The heightened desirability of preserving tree cover in densely developed or densely populated areas. 
d.  The need for visual screening in transitional zones or relief from glare, blight, commercial or industrial unsightliness or any other visual affront. 
e.  Whether the continued presence of the tree or trees is likely to cause danger to a person or property. 
f.  Whether the topography of the area in which the tree is located is of such a nature to be damaging or injurious to trees. 
g.  Whether the removal of the trees is for the purpose of thinning a heavily wooded area where some trees will remain. 
h.  Whether tree removal would have an adverse impact upon existing biological and ecological systems. 
i.  Whether tree removal would affect noise pollution by increasing source noise levels to such a degree that a public nuisance may be anticipated or a violation of the noise control ordinance will occur. 
D.  Appeals from Decisions of the Board of Appeals. Appeals from decisions by the board of appeals shall be by writ of certiorari to the Henry County Superior Court, and must be filled within thirty days of the date of the board's decision. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.160 - Non-liability of city. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees or to relieve the owner and occupant of any private property from the duty to keep trees and shrubs upon private property or under its or his control in a safe condition. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
15.38.170 - Penalties. 
A.  A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars and/or a sentence of up to thirty days incarceration per day per occurrence. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violations. Replacement shall also be required. 
B.  In the event that a specimen tree is damaged or removed in violation of this chapter, violators shall be subject to replace specimen trees with trees having a total density equal to eight times the unit value of the tree removed with a minimum four-inch tree caliper. Furthermore, the location and extent of the tree's critical root zone shall permanently remain in a pervious state with no structures or buildings placed on it. 
C.  In addition to subsections A and B of this section, upon notice from the city arborist, work on any development that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease. The stop-work notice shall be in writing and shall go to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. When an emergency exists, the city arborist shall not be required to give written notice prior to stopping the work. Further, in the event that work on any development is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the city arborist may revoke any permit pertaining to the development activity for which the land disturbance permit has been issued and may refuse to issue any further permit until, at the discretion of the city arborist, the work on the development is brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
APPENDIX A  RECOMMENDED SPECIES LIST OF OVERSTORY TREES 

 
* Indicates not suitable for parking lot islands. 
RECOMMENDED SPECIES LIST OF UNDERSTORY TREES 

 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
APPENDIX B  TREE DENSITY CALCULATION 
A basic requirement of the Tree Conservation and Replacement Ordinance is that all applicable sites maintain a minimum tree density of twenty units per acre. The term "unit" is an expression of the Basel area (a standard forest inventory measurement), and is not synonymous with "tree." 
This density requirement shall be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development. The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees, or some combination of the two as represented by the formula: 
SDF - EDF = RDF 
where: 
SDF (Site Density Factor) — the minimum tree density required to be maintained on a developed site (units per acre). 
EDF (Existing Density Factor) — Density of existing trees to be preserved on a site. 
RDF (Replacement Density Factor) — Density of new trees to be planted on a site. 
The SDF is calculated by multiplying the number of acres by the minimum tree density requirements. 
EXAMPLE: A 2.2 acre site has a SDF of 2.2 × 20 = 44 
The EDF is calculated by converting the diameter of individual trees to density factor units. Table A below does this. 
EXAMPLE: A total of 15 trees will remain on the 2.2 acre site. The tree inventory is as follows: 
7 — 12 inch diameter pines 
3 — 14 inch diameter pines 
3 — 18 inch diameter pines 
1 — 21 inch diameter hickory 
1 — 30 inch diameter oak 
Converting diameters (DBH) to density units, the EDF is determined as follows: 

 
The RDF is calculated by subtracting the EDF from the SDF. 
EXAMPLE: RDF = 44 - 21.6 = 22.4 
In this example, the site would require replacement trees of 22.4 density credits. 
The density credit for each caliper size of replacement (new) trees is shown in TABLE B. Following TABLE B are tree replacement requirements. 
TABLE A  Conversion of Tree Diameters (DBH) to Density Factor Units 

 
Note: DBH is rounded to nearest inch (.5 and higher is rounded up to next full inch, .4 and lower is rounded down to lower full inch). 
Note: Values for tree sizes twenty-four inch and greater are for trees that do not qualify as specimen trees and are not subject to specimen tree designation under Appendix C. Trees qualifying as specimen trees are subject to the benefits and restrictions of this chapter. 
TABLE B  Conversion of Replacement Tree Caliper to Density Credits 

 
Note: This column represents the number of trees that would need to be replanted if all one-size tree was used. This is provided for information purposes only, as it is likely that a variety of tree sizes would be used. 
Tree Replacement Requirements: 
1.  No more than thirty percent of all trees planted for replacement density credit may be of any one species. 
2.  No more than ten percent of all trees planted for replacement density credit may be pine trees. 
3.  Seven gallon pine trees to be planted to meet required replacement densities shall be a least one inch in caliper and greater than or equal to four feet tall. 
4.  Specimen tree replacement/recompense trees shall be at least four-inch caliper. 
5.  No more than twenty percent of all trees planted for replacement density credit may be under two-inch caliper. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
APPENDIX C  SPECIMEN TREES 
A.  Some trees on a site warrant special consideration and encouragement for conservation. These trees are referred to as specimen trees. 
B.  The following criteria are used by the city arborist to identify specimen trees. Both the size and condition criteria shall be met for a tree to qualify. 
1.  Size Criteria. 
a.  Trees, exclusive of conifer trees: twenty-four-inch diameter or larger. 
2.  Condition Criteria. 
a.  Greater than fifteen years life expectancy. 
b.  Trunk is relatively sound and solid with no extensive decay. 
c.  No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwood trees only). 
d.  No major insect or pathological problem. 
C.  In order to encourage the conservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, additional density credit will be given for specimen trees, which are successfully saved by a design feature specifically designated for such purpose. Credit for any specimen tree thus saved would be two times the assigned unit value shown in Appendix B. The critical root zone of specimen trees will be protected with hog-back/wire-back tree save fencing with metal support posts. 
D.  If a specimen tree is to be removed, a plan or written documentation indicating the reason for the removal shall be submitted to the city arborist. 
E.  Specimen trees that cannot be saved (see Section 15.38.090(D)) shall be replaced with trees having three times the unit value of the tree removed with a minimum four-inch tree caliper by species with potentials for comparable size and quality. 
F.  Any specimen tree which is removed without the appropriate review and approval of the city arborist shall be replaced by trees with a total density equal to eight times the unit value of the tree removed with a minimum four-inch tree caliper. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval and there is no evidence of its condition. Violations will be subject to the applicable penalties as described in Section 15.38.170. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
APPENDIX D  TIMBER HARVEST PERMITTING 
A.  Tree cutting, clearing, or clearing and grubbing projects, which result in the sale of timber, shall conform to state law regarding payment of taxes. A Georgia Department of Revenue Form PT-283T, along with the required payment, shall be submitted to the Henry County tax assessor's office within the time frame prescribed by law. Failure to do so shall be considered a violation of the City Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance as well as the tax law. Call the Henry County tax assessor's office for more information. 
1.  Provided documentation regarding the type of timber sale, estimated date of purchase, and estimated PT-283T submittal date when submitting plans to the engineering public works department for review. 
B.  Applications for, tree cutting, clearing, or clearing and grubbing shall be in accordance with current land disturbance permit plan review procedures. 
C.  Plans and other supportive documents submitted for a land disturbance permit for tree cutting in areas greater than five acres shall bear the signature of a registered forester. 
1.  The minimum size of plans shall be eleven by fourteen inches. The maximum size shall be twenty-four by thirty-six inches. 
2.  Plans shall include the following information: 
a.  Owner's name, address and phone number; 
b.  Consultant's and contractor's names, addresses and phone numbers; 
c.  Location/vicinity map; 
d.  Land lot(s) and district(s); 
e.  North arrow; 
f.  Scale (minimum one inch equals one hundred feet); 
g.  Closed property boundary showing bearings and distances of all property lines; 
h.  Current zoning of property; 
i.  Current zoning of adjacent properties; 
j.  Total acreage of property and approximate acreage of area to be disturbed; 
k.  Twenty-four hour emergency contact name and phone number(s) in bold type (no smaller than twenty point type); 
l.  Names of adjoining roadways; 
m.  Location of and detail for the trunk exit (Co or crushed stone pad); 
n.  Approximate location of the following land features: 
i.  All state waters, 
ii.  Topography at twenty-foot intervals (U.S.G.S. Quadrangle Map), 
iii.  Forest cover areas, 
iv.  One hundred-year floodplain, 
v.  Wetlands; 
o.  Limits of land disturbance; 
p.  Approximate locations and dimensions of any logging decks; 
q.  Location of any state water buffers (dimension twenty-five-foot undisturbed zones from the top of each bank); 
r.  Location of Streamside Management Zone (dimension required width); 
s.  Approximate locations of any haul roads; 
t.  Approximate locations of any stream crossings showing approximate width of crossing (bank to bank) and method of sediment control (rock riprap or culvert); 
u.  Approximate locations of any historical features including cemeteries; or, a note indicating the absence of such on the site; 
v.  Delineation and labeling of any required buffer zones around the perimeter of the property; 
w.  A detail of the method to be used to delineate all buffers on the site; 
x.  Expected time frame in which the operation will occur; and 
y.  Additional information as may be required by the planning department to perform a proper review of the project and assure that the intent of the Soil and Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance is met. 
D.  The Following Notes: 
1.  The building department reserves the right to require additional erosion and sedimentation control measures deemed necessary. 
2.  The contractor shall implement all Best Management Practices for forestry as prescribed by the Georgia Forestry Commission and the U.S. Environment Protection Agency. 
3.  No trees may be cut in buffer zones marked "undisturbed." Tree cutting shall be limited to the non-mechanical removal of pine (Pinus spp.) Or yellow-poplar (Lirodendrom tulipifera) trees with stump diameters greater than fifteen inches; provided that a minimum of fifty square feet of basal area remains in good condition in the buffer area at completion of the project. The non-mechanical removal of dead, diseased or insect infested trees is also allowed in this buffer (subject to verification by the city of Locust Grove arborist). 
4.  All buffers of state waters shall remain undisturbed except for haul road crossing points. 
5.  Projects, which are restricted to a "Residential Thinning," shall leave a minimum density of thirty square feet of basal area throughout all area not designated as buffers or logging decks. Trees in buffers shall be preserved and undisturbed. Trees to be preserved to meet this requirement shall be identifiable both before and after the harvest either by species or by a continuous marking around the trunk at 4.5 feet and at .5 feet above the ground. These trees shall be left in good condition with no injuries to the trunk, crown or root system, which would redispose them to disease or pest infestation. 
E.  All pine logging slash with stems larger than five inches in diameter shall be chipped and returned to the site or removed from the site to reduce the possibility of insect infestation. 
1.  Logging decks, temporary haul roads, skis trails and any other disturbed areas left idle for two to four weeks will be restored to their contours and established to temporary vegetation (DsD). These disturbed areas left idle for four weeks or more will be established to permanent vegetation (Ds3). All areas remaining at the end of the project will be established to permanent vegetation within two weeks. 
2.  When hand planting, mulch (hay or straw) should be uniformly spread over seeded area within twenty-four hours of seeding. 
3.  During unstable growing seasons, mulch will be used as a temporary cover (Ds1). On slopes that are 4:1 or steeper, mulch will be anchored. 
4.  The city of Locust Grove land disturbance permit shall be displayed on site at all times during the project operation and in plain view from an adjacent county road or street. 
F.  Before any activity can begin an inspection shall be performed for basal area confirmation, erosion control devices and buffer area delineation. At this time, the contractor shall show a current city of Locust Grove business license or registration certificate. At completion of the project, a final inspection shall be performed. 
(Ord. 04-01-001 § 2 (part)) 
Chapter 15.40 - CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEES 
Sections: 

15.40.010 - Schedule of permit fees. 
A.  One and Two Family Residential Permit (includes Manufactured MF and Industrialized Residential Buildings (IB). 

 
Note: Construction value shall be determined as eighty-five percent of the latest building valuation data as published by the International Code Council, Inc. 
B.  Multi-Family, Institutional, Commercial, Industrial and Office Project Permit Fees. 

 
Note: Construction value shall be determined as eighty-five percent of the latest building valuation data by type of construction and occupancy as published semiannually by the International Code Council, Inc. Should reported value be less than this figure, the chief building official is designated with the responsibility of assignment in value, including reduction in amounts where actual bid data or other documentation is submitted to show a lesser amount. 
C.  Building Plan Review Fees for Multi-Family, Institutional, Commercial, Industrial and Office Projects. When construction value exceeds one thousand dollars plans shall be submitted for review by the chief building official and the other responsible agencies for zoning, life/safety, and utilities review. No permit shall be issued until plans have been reviewed and approved. Prior to plans being reviewed, a plan review fee must be paid which shall be equal to, and in addition to, one-half of the required building permit fee. 
D.  Penalties. Where work has been started prior to obtaining a permit, the fees specified herein shall be subject to a penalty of twice the required permit fee up to one thousand dollars, plus a one hundred dollar administrative fee. Payment of the penalty and the administrative fee shall not relieve anyone from fully complying with the requirements of the technical codes in Chapter 15.08 nor from any other penalties. 
E.  Building Re-inspection Fees. When the chief building official has found a project or phase of a building project in noncompliance with the adopted technical codes on a requested inspection, the following re-inspection fees shall apply: 

 
F.  For multi-family, institutional, commercial, industrial and office projects, the following trade (Electrical, Mechanical/HVAC, Plumbing) permit fees shall apply: 

 
G.  Specialized permits are required for the following projects listed below, and the following permit fees shall apply: 

 
H.  For other items listed below, the following fees shall apply: 

 
(Ord. 02-12.02D) 
(Ord. No. 11-03-12, § 1, 3-7-11) 
Chapter 15.42 - LANDSCAPING 
Sections: 

15.42.010 - Short title—Purpose—Administration—Applicability. 
A.  Short Title. This section shall be referred to as the "City of Locust Grove Landscaping Ordinance." 
B.  Purposes. The purposes of this chapter are to protect and enhance the natural environment by establishing landscaping standards for property to be developed; enhancing the appearance of the city; protecting public and private investment by enhancing property values; buffering incompatible land uses; and providing for enforcement of the provisions contained in this chapter. 
C.  Administration. The city arborist shall have the primary responsibility for administration of this chapter. The city arborist may adopt policies and procedures to be followed by the planning and zoning department, the development plan review department and the building department in administering this chapter. 
D.  Applicability. This section shall apply as follows: 
1.  For any new development or construction in any district and for property on which public and semi-public uses or buildings are located. 
2.  For any development or construction that increases the gross floor area, lot area, or parking area of an existing structure or development located in any of the districts listed above by twenty-five percent or more. 
3.  For any new development or construction for which development plans are required. 
4.  For any development or construction that increases by twenty-five percent or more the gross floor area, lot area, or parking area of an existing structure or development for which development plans were required. 
5.  If trees of eight inches DBH or greater are removed from any street right-of-way or any tree protection area in order to accommodate the erection of a billboard, the site shall be landscaped according to the planting requirement schedules in this chapter, provided, however, that overstory trees shall not be required for sites on which billboards are erected. 
6.  In order to accommodate the preservation of specimen trees, the city arborist may authorize the alteration of normal building setbacks, yards, and parking requirements in accordance with Chapter 15.38 of the city code. 
7.  This chapter shall control over any conflicting provisions found in the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 03-68-04C § 1 (part)) 
15.42.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter. Other words and terms shall have their customary dictionary meaning. 
"Board of appeals" means the Locust Grove city council. 
"Building department" means the Henry County building department. 
"Caliper" means a standard of trunk measurement for understory or replacement trees. Caliper inches are measured at the height of six inches above the ground for trees up to and including four inch caliper and twelve inches above the ground for trees larger than four inch caliper. 
"City arborist" means the arborist, or his/her designee, appointed by the city council. The city manager shall serve as city arborist whenever the position is vacant. 
"City" means the city of Locust Grove. 
"Conifer (or coniferous) tree" means any tree with needle leaves and a woody cone fruit including, but not limited to, pine, juniper and cedar species. 
"Critical root zone" means the minimum area beneath a tree, which shall be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone (CRZ) will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one and three-tenths times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. Example: The CRZ radius of a twenty-inch diameter tree is twenty-six feet. 
"Development plan review department" is the Henry County development plan review department. 
"Diameter breast-height (DBH)" means the standard measure of overstory tree size (for trees existing on a site). The tree trunk is measured at a height of four feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four feet, measure the trunk at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
"Ground cover" means natural plant material such as vines, shrubs, or grasses that would not normally attain a height of more than two feet. 
"Hardwood tree" means any tree that is not coniferous (cone bearing). This definition is based on the colloquialism and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
"Landscaping" means any additions to the natural features of a plot of ground to restore construction disturbance and to make it more attractive, as by adding lawns, trees, and shrubs to the natural environment. 
"Landscaping plan" means a plan containing the information provided for in Section 15.42.040. 
"Natural vegetation" means a generally undisturbed, maintenance-free, self-perpetuating stand of vegetation comprised of indigenous shrubs, flowers, wild grasses, and trees. 
"Overstory tree" means those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than forty feet. 
"Planning and zoning department" is the Henry County planning and zoning department. 
"Recommended overstory or understory tree" means any tree listed in Chapter 15.38, Appendix A of this code or any tree determined by the city arborist; or a landscape architect licensed by the state of Georgia to be suited to the soils and climate of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
"Recommended shrub/ground cover" means any shrub or ground cover listed in Appendix A of this chapter or any tree determined by the city arborist; or a landscape architect licensed by the state of Georgia, after consultation with the city arborist, to be suited to the soils and climate of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
"Registered landscape architect" is a person registered in the state of Georgia as being a landscape architect. 
"Shrub" means a woody plant or bush of relatively low height (two to six feet) distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk. 
"Softwood tree" means any coniferous (cone bearing) tree. This definition is based on the colloquialism and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
"Specimen tree" means any tree which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to its size, type, condition, location or historical significance. 
"Tree" means any living, self-supporting woody or fibrous plant which normally obtains a diameter breast height of at least three inches, and typically has one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
"Tree plan" means a plan conforming to Section 15.38.030 of this code. 
"Tree protection area" means an area encompassing the critical root zone of a tree. 
"Understory" means those trees that grow beneath the overstory, and will generally reach a mature height of under forty feet. 
(Ord. 03-68-04C § 1 (part)) 
15.42.030 - Landscaping plan required. 
A landscaping plan shall be required as follows. 
A.  For developments or structures for which development plans are required to be reviewed by the planning and zoning department, a landscaping plan, signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect, shall be included as part of the development plans and both shall be submitted to the city but not subject to review by the Henry County planning and zoning commission. Rather, a landscape plan shall be subject to review by the city arborist. The landscaping plan, as approved or amended by the city council, shall be required and included as part of any subsequent submittal for a building permit and no such permit shall be issued until such landscaping plan has been submitted. 
B.  For any other property, development, or construction to which this section applies, an approved landscaping plan shall be included as part of the submittal for a building permit and no such permit shall be issued until such landscaping plan has been submitted. 
(Ord. 03-68-04C § 1 (part)) 
15.42.040 - Required information for landscaping plan. 
At a minimum, landscaping plans shall include the following information. Additional information may be required by the city arborist or city council. 
A.  Any tree removal plan previously approved for the property. 
B.  Location of any tree protection areas and residential buffers on the property. 
C.  Tree survey as required under Chapter 15.38 of this code. 
D.  Information showing the locations, species, and sizes of all proposed landscaping materials, including existing trees and other plant materials that will be incorporated into the landscaping. 
E.  Calculations showing that the proposed plant materials will satisfy the planting requirement schedule as described in Section 15.42.050 of this chapter. 
F.  If the development is to include an irrigation system, information about the type and coverage of the irrigation system shall be included in the landscaping plan. 
G.  The location of any existing or planned power lines or other utilities located on the proposed development or on any adjacent rights-of-way. 
H.  Measures to be taken to prevent damage to any existing trees that are to be incorporated into the landscaping in accordance with Chapter 15.38 of this code. 
(Ord. 03-68-04C § 1 (part)) 
15.42.050 - Planting requirement schedules. 
A.  For any development or construction to which this chapter applies, the following point schedule shall be satisfied. However, at least twenty-five percent of the points shall be accounted for by hardwood overstory trees and at least fifty percent of the points shall be accounted for by a combination of overstory trees and understory trees. 
Table 1. Required Points by Size of Developed Lots* 

 
* The landscaping requirements of this subsection are to be applied to individual lots whether residential, commercial, office/institutional, or industrial. This means that the requirements of this subsection can not be met through landscaped buffers or preserved natural areas. Preserved trees on individual lots, however, may be counted towards the requirements of this subsection as provided herein. 
B.  The following schedule shall be used to calculate the value of new plant materials in a landscaping plan. 
Table 2. Point Values for New Plant Materials 

 
C.  The following schedule may be used to calculate point values for existing trees that are preserved and incorporated into the landscaping plan for a development. 
Table 3. Point Values for Existing Trees 

 
D.  The following schedule shall reflect the minimum sod requirements for each district under the city zoning ordinance. 
Table 4. Minimum Sod Requirement 

 
E.  Residential Developments. 
1.  All residential developments shall have one overstory tree per forty feet on each side of the street within the subdivision. Said trees shall be planted between the street edge and the sidewalk of rights-of-way and shall be of a species that can survive in close proximity to impervious surfaces without damaging sidewalks, curbs, and streets. These plantings shall be located to maintain visibility at all intersections as stated in Section 3-7-78 of the Henry County zoning provisions. 
2.  There shall be a minimum of one overstory tree, one understory tree, and five shrubs planted in conjunction with each subdivision entrance sign that is proposed. 
3.  The above required plantings under subsection E of this section are in addition to any landscaping requirements under this section and any landscape strip or buffer requirements listed in the city zoning ordinance, but may contribute toward compliance with Chapter 15.38 of the city code. 
F.  Commercial, Office/Institutional, and Industrial Districts. 
1.  Interior drive aisles shall have one overstory tree per forty-five feet, or portion thereof, on each side of any proposed drive aisle. Said trees shall be planted between the street edge and the rights-of-way line and shall be of a species that can survive in close proximity to impervious surfaces without damaging sidewalks, curbs, and streets. These plantings shall be located to maintain visibility at all intersections as stated in Section 3-7-78. 
2.  There shall be landscaped areas a minimum of four feet width immediately adjacent to buildings on all four sides. Trees, shrubs, sod, or other ground cover shall be placed in those landscaped areas immediately adjacent to buildings and within the front, side and rear setbacks. Sod appropriate to the season shall be planted in all yard areas not occupied by building, driveways and vehicles parking areas. 
3.  Garbage and refuse collection areas shall be screened on three sides by upright evergreen shrubs planted five foot centers and a minimum six foot high solid fence or wall which shall be compatible in material, in terms of texture and quality, as the material and color of the principal building. 
4.  Loading areas shall be screened from view from any public rights-of-way or their entire length except where necessary to provide access to the loading area. The screening shall consist of upright evergreen shrubs planted on five foot centers. The city arborist may require a mixture of plant materials and a minimum six foot high solid fence or wall which shall be compatible in material, in terms of texture and quality, as the material and color of the principal building. In the case of buildings in a mixed-use neighborhood where mixed-use buildings (containing both residential and commercial, office, and/or institutional uses) are located proximate to the curb, the city arborist may waive or alter this requirement. 
5.  Vehicular use areas designed to accommodate more than twenty automobiles are required to install interior landscaped areas such as islands, peninsulas, and medians so that no more than twelve adjacent parking spaces exist without a landscaped separation at least eight feet in width. Interior landscaped areas shall be located to most effectively relieve the monotony of large expanses of paving and contribute to orderly circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
6.  The above required plantings under subsection F of this section are in addition to any landscaping requirements under this section, any landscape strip or buffer requirements listed in the city zoning ordinance, but may contribute toward compliance with Chapter 15.38 of the city code. 
G.  Documentation of compliance with this subsection, shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect. 
(Ord. 03-68-04C § 1 (part)) 
15.42.060 - Required landscaped areas. 
A.  All developments shall include a sodded landscaped area of at least ten feet in depth adjacent to any public right-of-way, exclusive of those interior public right-of-ways to be dedicated to the city, unless a shallower depth is approved by the city council in its approval of the landscaping plan. 
B.  Any area used for vehicular parking, access, or circulation shall be separated from any residentially zoned property by a landscaped area of at least ten feet in depth. 
C.  The required landscaping areas under this section may be included in a required buffer area. 
(Ord. 03-68-04C § 1 (part)) 
15.42.070 - Maintenance of landscaping. 
A.  Landscaping materials, including preserved trees that die or become diseased or damaged shall be replaced by the developer one year from the date the lot on which the plant material is located is sold. The replacement plants shall have point values equal to or greater than those being replaced as determined by the planting requirement schedules in Section 15.42.050. Replacement plants shall be the same type as those being replaced unless the city arborist or a registered landscape architect determines that one or more alternate species would be more likely to thrive in the development, in which case one of the alternate species may be used. 
B.  Failure to maintain landscaping materials or to replace landscaping materials that have died or become diseased or damaged shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as provided for in Section 15.42.100. 
(Ord. 03-68-04C § 1 (part)) 
15.42.080 - Completion of landscaping or bond required for certificate of occupancy. 
A.  No certificate of occupancy for any building or development covered by this chapter shall be issued unless the required landscaping has been completed. A temporary certificate of occupancy, not to exceed six months, may be issued if a cash bond for the completion of the required landscaping is provided to the city in accordance with the following provision. 
B.  The bond shall be in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent of the estimated cost of the materials, labor and maintenance associated with the required landscaping. The bond may be paid with each phase of development rather than for the development as a whole. Otherwise, the bond shall be held for one year and to the end of the succeeding planting season to ensure survival of the landscaping and the applicant shall be responsible for the irrigation (watering) of landscaping during the period of the bond. Upon compliance with the landscaping requirements for either the development as a whole or a particular phase of development the bond shall be released. 
(Ord. 03-68-04C § 1 (part)) 
15.42.090 - Variances. 
A.  Written requests for a variance are permitted. 
B.  The city arborist shall have the authority to grant written variance requests not to exceed twenty percent of the minimum or maximum standards of this chapter. The city council shall schedule a hearing as soon as reasonably practicable to consider an appeal of a variance request denied or granted by the city arborist. Variance requests in excess of twenty percent must be presented in writing to the city council for review and consideration. 
C.  Variance requests shall be ruled on by the city arborist or city council in writing and shall be issued no later than thirty days after a request is reviewed. 
D.  Variances can be granted only in the case of extreme hardship or unusual circumstance. The burden is on the applicant to establish the basis for a grant of a variance. The factors to be taken into consideration by the city arborist or city council may include the following: 
1.  The ease with which the applicant can alter or revise the proposed development or improvement to accommodate existing trees. 
2.  The economic hardship that would be imposed upon the applicant were the variance denied. 
3.  The need for visual screening in transitional zones or relief from glare, blight, commercial or industrial unsightliness or any other visual affront. 
4.  Whether the topography of the area in which the plant is located is of such a nature to be damaging or injurious to plant. 
5.  Whether reducing the landscaping requirement would have an adverse impact upon neighboring property values. 
(Ord. 03-68-04C § 1 (part)) 
15.42.100 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Enforcement. The city arborist or his or her designee shall be primarily responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The city arborist shall be responsible for recommending to the director of the Henry County building department, or other position with similar authority, the approval or denial of applications for certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Penalties. 
1.  A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars (per day per occurrence) and/or a sentence of up to thirty days incarceration. Replacement of dead, diseased, or damaged plant material shall also be imposed. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violations. 
2.  In addition, upon notice from the city arborist, work on any development that is being done contrary to the provisions of this section shall immediately cease. The stop-work notice shall be in writing and shall go to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. When an emergency exists, the city arborist shall not be required to give written notice prior to stopping the work. Further, in the event that work on any development is being done contrary to the provisions of this section, the city arborist may revoke any permit pertaining to the development activity for which the land disturbance or building permit has been issued and may refuse to issue or allow to be issued any further permit until, at the discretion of the city arborist, the work on the development is brought into compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 03-68-04C § 1 (part)) 
Appendix A  Recommended Shrubs and Ground Cover 
A.  Shrubs. 
American Holly 
American Boxwood 
Arborvitae 
Azalea (deciduous - interior) 
Bar Harbor Juniper 
Bayberry 
Bigleaf Hydrangum 
Burford Holly 
Camellia 
Cherry Laurel 
Chinese Witchhazel (deciduous - interior) 
Chinese Privet (deciduous - interior) 
Common Privet 
Dwarf Burford Holly (evergreen - interior) 
Dwarf Burning Bush (deciduous - interior) 
Dwarf Chinese Holly (evergreen - interior) 
Dwarf Nandina (evergreen - interior) 
Dwarf Yaupon Holly (evergreen - interior) 
English Ivy 
Flame Azalea 
Flowering Jasmine (deciduous - interior) 
Forsythia (deciduous - interior) 
Golden Raintree 
Hetz Juniper 
Hibiscus 
Holly 
Hollywood Juniper 
Hydrangea 
Japanese Flowering Quince (deciduous - interior) 
Japanese Holly (evergreen - interior) 
Juniper (evergreen - interior) 
Leatherleaf Vinburnum (evergreen - interior) 
Ligustrum 
Mother-in-Laws Tongue 
Mugo Pine (evergreen - interior) 
Nandina (evergreen - interior) 
Nellie R. Stevens Holly 
Oakleaf Hydrangea (deciduous - interior) 
Oregonholly Grape (evergreen - interior) 
Osmanthus 
Pepp'mint Geranium 
Piedmont Azalea 
Plumleaf Azalea 
Red Columbine 
Russian Olive 
Savannah Holly 
Spirea (all varieties) (deciduous - interior) 
Thorny Eleagnus 
True Myrtle 
Varigated Privet 
Viburnum (deciduous - interior) 
Warty Barberry (evergreen - interior) 
Weigela (deciduous - interior) 
Winter Jasmine (deciduous - interior) 
Winter Honeysuckle (evergreen - interior) 
B.  Ground Cover. 
Aaronsbeard St. Johnswort 
Aragula 
Bermuda Grass 
Birds Nest Fern 
Blue Carpet Juniper 
Centipede Grass 
Common Sassafras 
Creeping Lilyturf (shade) 
Dwarf Juniper 
Dwarf Roses 
English Ivy (shade) 
Evergreen Candytuft (border) 
Fescue 
Hybrid Daylily 
Lily-Turf 
Ornamental Grasses 
Pachysandra (shade) 
Periwinkle (shade) 
Purpleleaf Wintercreeper 
Rockyspray Cotoneaster 
Sargent Juniper 
Shore Juniper 
St. Augustine Grass 
Willowleaf Cotoneaster 
Zoysia Grass 
C.  Understory Trees. 
Trident Maple 
Serviceberry 
American Hornbeam, Musclewood 
Eastern Redbud 
Chinese Redbud 
Fringe Tree, Grancy Graybeard 
Common Smoketree 
Washington Hawthorne 
Leyland Cypress 
Japanese Cryptomeria 
Silverbell 
Savannah Holly 
Decidious Holly 
Nellie R. Stevens Holly 
American Holly 
Yaupon Holly 
Bougainvillea Goldenraintree 
Panicled Goldenraintree 
Crapemyrtle improved hybrids 
Osage—orange 
Sweetbay Magnolia 
Saucer Magnolia 
Star Magnolia 
Flowering Crabapple 
Waxmyrtle 
Ironwood, Carolina Hornbeam 
Sourwood 
Chinese Pistache 
Sassafras 
Chastetree 
D.  Overstory Trees. 
Southern Sugar Maple 
Florida Maple 
Red Maple and improved hybrids 
Sugar maple 
River Birch 
Pecan 
Shagbark Hickory 
Chinese Chestnut 
Common Chinafir 
American Beech 
Green Ash 
Ginko, grafted (male only) 
Eastern Red Cedar 
Sweetgum 
Yellow Poplar 
Southern Magnolia 
Dawn Redwood 
Swamp Tupelo 
Black Gum 
Sourwood 
Slash Pine 
White pine 
Loblolly Pine 
Virginia Pine 
American Sycamore 
Sawtooth Oak 
White Oak 
Scarlet Oak 
Southern Red Oak 
Water Oak 
Willow Oak 
Pin Oak 
Chesnut Oak 
Shumard Oak 
Japanese Pagodatree 
Bald Cypress 
True Chinese Elm 
Japanese Zelkova 
Chapter 15.44 - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW 
Sections: 

15.44.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The mayor and council of the City of Locust Grove intend for this chapter to regulate the aesthetics, quality of exterior building materials and to the promotion of the health, safety, prosperity and general welfare of the citizens of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. 04-12-093 § 2 (part)) 
15.44.020 - Definitions. 
"Architectural Plans" means a drawing or diagram having or conceived of as having an overall design and form of a building or structure illustrating measurements, colors, materials and exterior architectural features. Such plans shall include a color palate and color rendering of the structure or building. Photographs of similar structures are not required, but may be helpful. 
"Architectural Review Board" or "Board" means the mayor and city council of the City of Locust Grove, Georgia, 
"Building" — A building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
"Exterior architectural features" means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
"Exterior environmental features" means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affects the character of the property, including mechanisms for outdoor advertisements. 
"Material change in appearance" means a change that will require a building permit and will affect either the exterior architectural or exterior environmental features of a property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within the city, such as: 
A.  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, color or facade of property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
B.  Demolition or relocation of a structure; 
C.  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
D.  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure within the city, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
"Structure" — A structure is a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. 04-12-093 § 2 (part)) 
15.44.030 - Applicability and prohibition. 
A.  This chapter applies to all construction in commercial, industrial, office/institutional and multi-family zoning districts for which a building permit is required. 
B.  No building permit shall be issued except when in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-12-093 § 2 (part)) 
15.44.040 - Creation of an Architectural Review Board. 
A.  Creation of the Board: There is hereby created a board whose title shall be "Architectural Review Board for the City of Locust Grove" (hereinafter "Board"). 
B.  Board Members: The Board shall consist of the mayor and city council. 
C.  Statement of Board's Power: The Board shall be authorized to: 
1.  Review architectural plans and approve, approve with modifications or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of architectural plans, design guidelines and criteria in addition to those stated herein; 
3.  Seek technical advice from outside its members on any set of architectural plans; and 
4.  Consult with the city manager, the better hometown director, and/or the downtown development authority or members thereof or any one else it deems proper in the execution of its duties. 
D.  Conflict of Interest: The Board shall be subject to conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statutes and in the city charter. 
E.  Records of Board Meetings: A public record shall be kept of the Board resolution, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. 04-12-093 § 2 (part)) 
15.44.050 - Exterior materials standards. 
A.  Except where otherwise provided in this chapter or in the Code of Ordinances, the exterior architectural features of buildings and structures within multi-family, office/institutional, commercial and industrial zoning districts shall adhere to the following minimum standards: 
1.  All exterior siding materials shall be limited to brick; natural stone including granite, marble, sandstone, field stone, or any other natural stone approved by the Board; manufactured stone including imitation filed stone, marble terrazzo, and any other manufactured architectural finish stone approved by the Board; clay tile with baked-on enamel finish; architecturally treated decorative concrete block; architecturally treated slabs or block either fluted or with exposed aggregate; stucco; efis; masonry siding such as hardiplank, wood; or acceptable substitute approved by the Board. 
2.  All exterior siding material such as aluminum, steel, vinyl, mirrored or reflective glass, cinderblock, unfinished concrete, fiberglass or plastic are prohibited except that architectural fiberglass or plastic are allowed to the extent that such material is used in detailing and decorative trim if approved by the Board. 
3.  Fifty percent of the width of the front façade of the building at ground level shall consist of fenestration. All fenestration shall be multi-paned in appearance. Single-paned plate glass windows greater than six square feet in surface area without the appearance of being multi-paned shall be prohibited unless approved by the Board. 
4.  All exterior painted surfaces, where visible from the public street, shall be painted in earth tones. Colors shall be non-primary colors including darker and cooler shades of green, red such as brick, yellow including beige, and lighter shades of brown including tan. However, white may be permitted if approved by the Board. 
5.  Burglar bars and steel roll down doors or curtains shall not be visible from the public street. 
6.  Service bays shall be designed so that the openings of service bays are not visible from a public street (i.e., side entry). 
7.  Fabric and canvas awnings and all other building materials must be of durable quality and shall be compatible with materials used in adjoining buildings. 
8.  All exterior building elevations that face public streets and/or customer parking areas shall be designed so that there are no large expanses of blank walls. This requirement can be met by employing the use of architectural features including but not limited to the following: doors, windows, pilasters, columns, horizontal and vertical offsets, material and color variations, decorative cornices, awnings, canopies, murals, and graphics. 
B.  The exterior and features of buildings and structures within the industrial zoning classification shall adhere to the following additional requirement: 
Except when abutting an existing residential building or district, or public streets, exterior walls are permitted to have plain painted, baked or acrylic finish corrugated metal panels, plain painted concrete or cinder block siding in addition to the materials in subparagraph A.1. above. 
C.  The exterior architectural features of buildings and structures within the office/institutional and commercial zoning classifications shall adhere to the following additional requirement: 
Front facades and any exterior sides facing public streets shall consist of a minimum of seventy percent of brick or natural or manufactured stone or a combination thereof. 
(Ord. 04-12-093 § 2 (part)) 
15.44.060 - Application to Board for approval of architectural plans. 
A.  Where Required. 
1.  Approved architectural plans shall be required before a building permit may be issued to a person wishing to undertake any material change to the exterior architectural features and/or exterior environmental features of existing property or prior to new construction within the following zoning districts: multi-family, office/institutional, commercial or industrial. 
2.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the following material changes shall not require submission of architectural plans: 
a.  Work to sustain the existing form or to correct deterioration, decay or damage, provided that such work does not involve a change in design, material or exterior appearance; 
b.  The removal or replacement of roofing materials, provided that no other significant alterations, i.e., removal of original architectural features, dormers, and chimneys. Proposed replacement materials must be similar to existing materials. 
B.  Submission of Plans to Board: Ten sets of architectural plans shall be submitted by the owner or owner's agent to the city clerk or her designee for retention of one set of plans and transmittal to the city manager, better hometown director and Board. The person submitting such plans shall provide his or her contact information, proof of ownership, proof of authorization to submit such plans if not the owner, and pay an administration fee set by the city council from time to time based on the square footage of the building or structure but no less than fifty dollars. 
C.  Interior Alterations: The Board shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
D.  Hearings on Applications for Approval of Architectural Plans, Notices, and Right to Be Heard: The Board shall meet on the fourth Monday of every month, except where rescheduled due to a holiday or other reason, at 7:00 p.m. at Locust Grove City Hall, to discuss architectural plans. This meeting shall be open to the public, but shall not be open for public comment. However, final determination of approval, approval with modifications or denial shall be determined by the city council during the next regular scheduled public meeting. Notice shall be given to the person who submitted architectural plans for review. 
E.  Acceptable Board Action on Architectural Plans: 
1.  The Board may approve the architectural plans as proposed, approve the architectural plans with any modifications it deems appropriate under the standards of this chapter, or reject it. 
2.  The Board shall approve submitted architectural plans if it finds that the architectural plans conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
3.  Approval shall be by a majority vote as may be taken by the Board in its capacity as the local governing body of the city. 
F.  Undue Hardship: When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the city council, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications and interpretations which shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural integrity, or character of the property or area, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the city council may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
G.  Necessary Action to be Taken by Board upon Rejection of Architectural Plans: 
1.  In the event the Board rejects architectural plans, it shall state its reasons for doing so in the minutes of the hearing, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The Board may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he/she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
2.  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of architectural plans by the Board shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
H.  Requirement of Conformance with Approved Architectural Plans: 
1.  All work performed pursuant to approved architectural plans shall conform to said plans. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the city manager or his designee shall issue a cease and stoppage order of all work. 
2.  The city council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such property or district. 
I.  Approval of Architectural Plans Void if Construction not Commenced: Approved architectural plans shall become void unless a building permit has been issued within six months of approval of said plans. Otherwise, approved architectural plans shall be issued for a period of eighteen months and are renewable without a fee for a single period of six additional months. Failure to renew or after the passage of the first renewal period, approved architectural plans must be resubmitted for review and an administrative fee paid. The Board shall review the plans and approve the plans if there has been no substantial change to said plans. 
J.  Recording an Approved Architectural Plan: The city clerk shall keep a public record of all approved architectural plans and of all the Board's proceedings in connection with said application for a period of no less than three years. The city clerk shall stamp date the architectural plans when received and date the architectural plans when approved. 
(Ord. 04-12-093 § 2 (part)) 
15.44.070 - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 04-12-093 § 2 (part)) 
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 16.04 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Sections: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-11-047, adopted Nov. 2, 2015, amended Ch. 16.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 16.04 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 98-5.11, 1998; Ord. 99-1.11A, 1999; Ord. 04-07-046; Ord. No. 13-11-02, adopted Nov. 4, 2013; Ord. No. 13-09-082, adopted Sept. 23, 2013; Ord. No. 13-11-095, adopted Nov. 4, 2013; and Ord. No. 14-10-048, adopted Oct. 20, 2014. 

Article I. - Purpose, Authority and Jurisdiction 

16.04.001 - Purpose and scope. 
These regulations are to provide for the orderly growth and development of the city in accordance with the city's zoning ordinance, land use plan, stormwater management plan, sediment control ordinance, watershed ordinance(s), construction standards and all other applicable city ordinances that govern the development of and division of lands in the city limits. The primary purposes of this chapter are: 
A.  To provide for safe and efficient traffic circulation by development of a coordinated street network in relation to existing and planned streets, adjoining residential and non-residential developments and public facilities. 
B.  To achieve the most efficient development and livability of the division of properties throughout the city limits. 
C.  To provide for the acceptance of land for public rights-of-way. 
D.  To provide for the installation, construction, maintenance and upkeep of privately owned infrastructure related to the article and development of tracts of land where appropriate. 
E.  To provide for the installation and construction of utilities, infrastructure, public facilities and other public improvements essential to service land being divided for use by the general public. 
F.  To assure that public improvements will be constructed according to safe and enduring standards. 
G.  To enable the dedication or preservation of lands for public schools, parks and other public facilities/amenities. 
H.  To assure that developments that occur within an environmentally sensitive atmosphere are consciences and protective of the area's natural elements and that the potential for natural or manmade hazards or disasters is lessened. 
I.  To provide for the division and development of tracts of land that complies with the goals, standards and policies of the land use plan. 
J.  To establish the procedures for submittal and approval of preliminary and final plat/plans for both residential, nonresidential and mixed use developments. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 2, 3, 11-2-15) 
16.04.002 - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted by the Locust Grove City Council pursuant to authority granted by the constitution and laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 2, 3, 11-2-15) 
16.04.003 - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall govern the development of lands within the city limits of Locust Grove. The city community development director shall review and approve all required materials and documents relevant to the development and division of lands within the city. Furthermore, the community development director shall coordinate with other city departments and when necessary, with state, county and regional agencies in assuring the proper implementation of all necessary rules and regulations pertinent to the development of lands within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 2, 3, 11-2-15) 
16.04.004—16.04.020 - Reserved. 
Article II - Interpretation 

16.04.21 - Minimum requirements. 
The provision contained in this chapter shall be considered as minimum requirements. When the city council or community development director imposes greater restrictions on a development that protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and that do not impose a hardship upon a developer/development or community, than those restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 4, 5, 11-2-15) 
16.04.22 - Definitions. 
Certain terms and words are defined for the purpose of this chapter. Words used in the present tense shall also include the use of the word(s) in the future tense, unless otherwise indicated. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. 
"As-built plans:" Detailed construction plans showing completed improvements as constructed. 
"Boulevard:" A street developed with a minimum of two one-way paved lanes, separated by a landscaped median. 
"City:" City of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
"City council:" The city council of Locust Grove, Georgia. The term "city council" shall be synonymous with the term "council." 
"City manager:" The city manager of the city, the city manager shall be chief administrator for the city. 
"Cluster residential development:" A form of development that permits a reduction in lot area and bulk requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of lots permitted under a conventional subdivision or increase in the overall density of development, and the remaining land area is devoted to open space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive areas or agricultural use. 
"Commercial office/subdivision:" A division of land developed and intended to serve the needs of office, retail and professional business uses. 
"Community development department:" The city community development department shall administer all land use community development projects as directed by the city council, as well as develop and enforce policies, programs and ordinances that govern the development of lands, the proposal of zonings, the preparation of current and long-range plans and the coordination of capital improvement (infrastructures) projects. 
"Community development director:" The city community development director shall be responsible for promoting and assuring the health, safety and welfare of residents, property owners, and businesses within the city, as well as promoting the aesthetics, conservation and preservation of natural and historical elements of the city. The director shall uphold and enforce this mission through the codes, policies, goals, objectives, programs and services of the city. 
"Construction plans:" Detailed plans (prepared by a professional licensed engineer, surveyor or landscape architect), indicating the location of streets, cross sections, grading profiles and elevations and all other public improvements to a parcel of land. This shall include, water and sewer, drainage, stormwater and soil erosion control improvements. 
"Construction standards:" The city's adopted construction and development standards manual. The standards and specifications related to the design and drawing of public improvement. 
"Covenant:" An agreement or detailed restrictions which runs with the land placed on lots and recorded of record with the clerk of superior court. 
"Dedicated plat:" A plat required for the dedication to the city or other public authority of right-of-way for streets, public easements, sewer or water facilities, or other public improvement. 
"Development permit:" Permit issued by the community development department for construction of residential or nonresidential land improvements, including soil erosion and sedimentation control, clearing and grading, street and drainage construction and stormwater management. 
"Easement:" A right granted by a property owner to the general public, a public utility, the city or a private individual or corporation for the use or access to a portion of an owners land(s). The use of the easement must be specific and designated as "public or private", depending on the nature of its use. 
"Engineer:" A professional engineer licensed in the state and registered through the state board of professional engineers, who is competent in the field of civil design. 
"Flood hazard area:" The area threatened by periodic flooding as determined by data and maps provided by the Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA), U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), U.S. Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or hydrological studies utilizing generally accepted engineering practices. All lands within the limits of a flood having a one hundred-year return frequency or greater. The floodplain area consisting of both the floodway and the flood fringe areas. 
"Health department:" The city health department shall be responsible for enforcement of city/county health regulations including the issuance of permits for onsite sewage disposal and water wells. 
"Improvements:" The physical changes to land(s) which are necessary to make properties useable, this includes without limitation, the installation of water and sewer facilities, grading, paving of streets, hydrants, sidewalks, trails, utilities, drainage and detention systems and other public facilities/amenities. 
"Industrial subdivision:" A division of land developed and intended to serve the needs of industrial or manufacturing uses. 
"Landscape architect:" A licensed professional in the state who is competent in the field of civil as well as landscape and streetscape design. 
"Lot:" Recorded parcel(s) or tract(s) of land(s) held in common or single ownership. In order to meet this definition of "lot", a parcel must meet all applicable requirements of this chapter and the city's zoning ordinance. 
"Lot, corner:" A lot having frontage at the intersection of at least two public streets. 
"Lot, coverage:" The portion of a lot, parcel or tract of land that is covered with buildings or other impervious surfaces. The ratio of the horizontal area of a lot covered with buildings or structures. 
"Lot, depth:" The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
"Lot, division:" The division of land, into multiple pieces. To be valid under this chapter, each piece of land divided must meet the definition of "lot" as provided in this chapter. 
"Lot, flag:" A large lot whose maximum width does not front along a public street, but is served by a narrow strip of frontage along a public street. 
"Lot, frontage:" The length of the front lot line measured along the street right-of-way. 
"Lot, minimum area:" The smallest lot area, without regard to setbacks and easements, established by a zoning district on which a use or structure may be located. 
"Lot of record:" A lot that exists as shown or described on a plat/plan or deed in the records of the Henry County Clerk of Superior Court and described by metes and bounds. 
"Lot, through:" A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on more than one street: corner lot having front on three or more streets. 
"Lot, width:" The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured along the front yard building setback line as established by the city zoning ordinance. 
"Marginal access-street:" A residential or nonresidential street paralleling a major or minor arterial public street, which provides access to abutting properties and is intended to protect those properties from through traffic. 
"Nonresidential:" Any development, site, zoning or project that is unrelated to the use, zoning and/or proposal of residential land uses (single- and/or multifamily). 
"Open space:" Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use. 
"Open space, common:" Land within or related to a development, not individually owned but dedicated for public use within a designated area. Uses common to such areas are without limitation: recreational facilities, swimming pools, play equipment, ball fields, court games, picnic areas, etc. 
"Open space, private:" Common open space, which is limited to the occupants of a single dwelling, planned unit, community or property. 
"Open space, public/green:" Land dedicated or reserved for use by the general public; including the development and/or preservation of parklands, recreational facilities, trails, scenic and historical sites, schools and similar spaces for public use. An area with limited or no structures or impervious surfaces, owned by a public agency and maintained by it for the use of the general public. 
"Open space, ratio/percentage:" The total area of open space deducted from the total site area in which the open space is located. Total site area divided by the open space area. 
"Pavement width:" The cross section width of a paved public street measured from the edges of pavement. 
"Perennial stream:" Any stream which flows throughout the year and is shown as a solid blue line on a United States Geological Survey, 7-Minute Topographic Series Map. 
"Plan, concept/conceptual:" A draft drawing of a development showing proposed improvements to a parcel or tract of land. Such a plan does not require all the standards required in this chapter for a preliminary or final plat/plan, nor does it constitute a submitted preliminary plan unless all requirements of this chapter are complied with. 
"Planned unit development:" A development within the PUD zoning district that provides for innovative development and site design standards for a parcel of land with specified development standards. Planned developments generally contain one or more residential clusters or planned residential areas and one or more public, commercial and/or industrial areas in such a range that each is a defined portion of the total land acreage of the site. 
"Planning and zoning setback line(s):" A designated area as determined by a zoning district that is declared an unbuildable area or where a structure(s) is not permitted; measured from the lot lines of the property and creating a designated distance between the lot lines and the structure. 
"Plat/plan:" A map or plan representing a subdivided parcel of land or combination of lands, prepared for the purpose of installing and/or finalizing existing and proposed elements of a site to be developed; this would include preliminary and final plat/plans. 
A.  Preliminary plat/plan: A plan showing the detailed design and layout of a subdivision of land, prepared for the purpose of development and which includes all improvements and meets all requirements specified in this chapter. 
B.  Final plat/plan: A plat of a subdivision unit, or phase of development, with legal description of all lots, easements, open space and right-of-way sufficient to reproduce the plat in the field, and which meets the requirements of the Georgia Plat Act of 1978. The final plat is intended for legal recording of lots, right-of-way, easements, and restrictive covenants. 
"Private street:" A private street includes the land between platted or prescriptive right-of-way lines whether improved or unimproved, paved or unpaved, and may be comprised of easement, shoulders, curb and gutter, drainage ditches and other structures and areas within the private right-of-way lines. Where applicable, private street is synonymous with "court", "road", "trace", "trail", and other such words which commonly refer to public thoroughfares. Private streets may be permitted under the regulations established in this chapter subject to public hearing and approval by the city council and mayor, including public rights-of-way abandoned within the guidelines of this chapter and O.C.G.A. § 32-7-2(c). Private streets shall be eligible to be established where: 
A.  Where such private road development would not effectively subvert or negate the benefit to the general public intended to be created by application of the public street requirements of this chapter; and 
B.  Where potential future development beyond the properties abutting the private road would not require use of the private road for traffic circulation. 
"Public hearing:" Meetings announced and advertised in advance in accordance with the Georgia Planning Act of 1989 and open to the public, where the public is given an opportunity to participate in the discussions of the meeting. 
"Public street:" A public street includes the land between dedicated or prescriptive right-of-way lines whether improved or unimproved, paved or unpaved, and may be comprised of easement, shoulders, curb and gutter, drainage ditches and other structures and areas within the public right-of-way lines. Where applicable, public street is synonymous with "court", "road", "trace", "trail", and other such words which commonly refer to public thoroughfares. Public streets are classified as follows: 
(1)  Principal Arterial. A principal arterial street carries large volumes of traffic at high speeds and provide regional connectivity. These streets are typically part of the National Highway System (NHS) and include such streets as I-75 and SR 42 or other such streets defined on the transportation system map. 
(2)  Major Arterial. A major arterial street carries relatively large volumes of traffic and provide regional connection as defined on the transportation system map. 
(3)  Minor Arterial. An arterial public street similar in function to a major arterial but which is intended to provide moderate levels of traffic flow and greater access to abutting properties. Minor arterials serve as traffic feeders to major arterials and for regional travel. 
(4)  Collector Public Street. A public street which carries traffic from local public streets to minor and major arterial public streets, and may include the principal entrance of a development. 
(5)  Local Public Street. A public street designed to provide access to adjoining properties within a subdivision or other development. 
(6)  Cul-de-sac. A local public street with only one outlet, closed and terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(7)  Marginal Access Public Street. A public street which is parallel to, and adjacent to an arterial public street or highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
"Public street, cul-de-sac:" A public street that does not terminate into an intersection with another public street, but rather ends in a turnaround. 
"Public street, dead-end street:" A public street that does not terminate into an intersection with another public street and does not end in a turnaround. 
"Public utilities:" Gas, water, sewer, electrical, communication and similar services that are provided to the public through the city, Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority, and/or a corporate entity, that is regulated and is a service provided for the benefit of public's health, safety and welfare. 
"Public utility facilities:" Buildings and structures including generating and switching stations, poles, lines, pipes, pumping stations, antennas, transmitters, valves, and all other structures related to the furnishing of utility services in the city. 
"Settling tank:" A tank or basin (in a wastewater treatment facility) in which settleable solids are removed by gravity. 
"Sewer:" Collection lines, pipes or conduit that transports effluent, sewage or stormwater runoff from a generating source to a treatment facility or receiving body of water. 
"Sewer system and treatment:" Devices for collection, treatment and disposal of sewage. 
"Sewerage/sewage:" The total of organic or inorganic waste and wastewater generated by residential and nonresidential sources; effluents which may or may not be sanitary, such as industrial, stormwater runoff, etc. 
"Sight distance, intersection:" The distance measured from a vehicles eye-height, measured from ground level to the eye-height of a motorist to a specific object to a specific distance based on the speed of oncoming vehicles. 
"Sight distance, stopping:" The unobstructed vision of a motorist on a horizontal plane along a street centerline as measured from the motorist's eye-height. 
"Soil erosion and sediment control plan:" A plan for temporary and permanent facilities to control soil erosion and sedimentation on a construction site (see: City's soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance). 
"Stub out service:" Sanitary sewer or public water connection lines/facilities within the street right-of-way or on public or private properties that are intended to extend and serve adjacent properties in the future. 
"Subdivision:" The division of a parcel or tract of land for the purpose of creating sites for development and/or the rearrangement of existing lot lines. A division of parcels or tracts of land shall be considered a subdivision and shall comply with all subdivision regulations if one of the following elements is proposed for the proper development of such lots; 
A.  If new streets/public streets are created. 
B.  If new utility improvements are required. 
C.  If new sanitary sewer or public water are required. 
D.  If the division has created two or more lots from the original parcel. 
"Surveyor, land:" One who is licensed by the state as a land surveyor and is qualified to make accurate field measurements and to mark, describe and define land boundaries. 
"Transportation system map:" The map adopted by the city developed and maintained in electronic format by the community development department that classifies streets within the city according to functional class. 
"Utility department:" The city utilities department shall be responsible for approving the design, development, maintenance, finance and construction inspection of sewer and water facilities and all public utilities within the city. 
"Utility director:" The city utility director shall be responsible for approving the design, development, maintenance, finance and construction inspection of sewer and water facilities and all public utilities within the city. 
"Utility, easement:" The right-of-way acquired by a utility or governmental agency to locate utilities (pipelines, telephone lines, cable, towers, sewer, etc.) on a publicly or privately owned parcel of land. 
"Utility, private/public:" Any agency that, under public franchise, ownership or under certificate of convenience and necessity or by grant of authority, provides the public with electricity, gas, water, sewer, etc., or other similar services. 
"Utility, services:" The generation, transmission and/or distribution of gas, electrical, water or communication oriented facilities that are installed by a public utility company or the city; including the collection and treatment of sewage and solid waste. 
"Wetlands:" Areas within the city or Henry County that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; or as defined by federal law. 
"Zoning:" The delineation of districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings. 
"Zoning, district:" The various zoning districts as defined in the city zoning ordinance. 
"Zoning map:" The official geographically defined document that is part of the zoning ordinance and delineates the boundaries of zoning or overlay districts. 
"Zoning, ordinance:" The City of Locust Grove Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 4, 5, 11-2-15) 
16.04.023—16.04.030 - Reserved. 
Article III - Procedure 

16.04.031 - Generally. 
Within the territorial limits of the city, no person shall subdivide or rearrange a lot line of any lot or parcel of land or grade, install streets, utilities or make any improvements to a parcel(s) of land without complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
No residential or non-residential final plat/plan of a development shall be recorded by the Henry County Clerk of Superior Court unless the same has been approved as provided herein. 
No building permits shall be issued or improvements or services authorized or installed in any unapproved development. 
The review and approval process for residential or nonresidential developments shall include a pre-application conference with the community development director and/or city manager. Nonresidential developments shall submit/present a preliminary/conceptual plan of the layout, architectural and sign designs of the project. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 6, 7, 11-2-15) 
16.04.032 - Pre-application conference and preliminary/conceptual plan. 
A.  Purpose of Conference. Every subdivider/developer shall consult with the city community development director for advice and assistance prior to preparation of a preliminary plat/plan and submittal of an application for approval, as well as inquire as to the necessary documents and materials needed for a plan submittal. 
The purpose of the conference is to familiarize applicants with the development process of the city and the applicable ordinances and regulations necessary to guide a development appropriately. For developments requesting access onto state highways, the applicant should consult with and get confirmation from the state department of transportation. All projects affecting state, Henry County, or city infrastructure (public streets, utilities, etc.), projects will need to be coordinated with the affected state, Henry County, or city department, and/or authorities. 
B.  Preliminary/Conceptual Plan. The subdivider/developer shall prepare and present a preliminary plan at the pre-application conference. The preliminary plan shall be a general design of the proposed subdivision including boundaries of the proposed subdivision and all lots, topographic contours, layout of lots and streets (including public streets adjacent to the subdivision) size and dimensions of the property and proposed lots (including lot area), delineation of creeks, streams, and all other bodies of water, open space and other planned improvements, and such other information as may be deemed necessary by the community development department. 
Following the pre-application conference the community development director shall review the preliminary plan and provide the applicant with the following items within ten working days: 
•  Verification of either compliance or non-compliance with the city zoning ordinance. 
•  Recommendations for improvement of request with current ordinances and policies. 
•  Compliance with the land use plan. 
•  Recommendations or comments from other city departments, the county health department and fire department. 
•  Recommendations for improvements to the proposed development, its design, layout, zoning adjustments, etc. 
If the property is not in the correct zoning district for the proposed development, in order to continue with the development, the developer/subdivider will be required to apply for the appropriate zoning that is applicable to his/her request 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 6, 7, 11-2-15) 
16.04.033 - Preliminary plat/plan, filing and review procedures. 
The subdivider shall file with the community development department five copies of the preliminary plat/plan and construction improvements (erosion and sediment control plans, public street improvement profiles, structural plans and all civil engineering documents), and two copies of a stormwater management plan. The community development director shall review the preliminary plat/plan with the appropriate city departments, or county and state departments, if applicable. 
The community development department shall notify the local school district office, the county tax assessor's office, and the county 911 department of all proposed developments. 
The plan review process shall determine compliance with the regulations of this chapter and the zoning ordinance and make any changes necessary to improve the development. 
If the preliminary plat/plan is determined to be deficient of required information by the city, it shall be the responsibility of the developer/subdivider to make all necessary changes and corrections and resubmit all changes to the community development department for further review. 
The approval of all preliminary plat/plans shall include on the plat/plan, applicable zoning standards of development, rezoning conditions and any other modifications or recommendations from the city. 
Following the review and approval of a preliminary plat/plan by the city's departments, a meeting with a representative of each department or appropriate agencies shall be held to verify compliance of the plat/plan with all necessary regulations and in order to issue all appropriate and permissible permits. 
All plat/plans that are deemed to meet the threshold for a development of regional impact as stated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs or other regional or federal impact requirements/standards shall be submitted to ARC and/or other appropriate state agency, all plans for review, comment and recommendation prior to approval of said plat/plans or issuance of any permits for the site. This may take place during or prior to the rezoning processes if deemed necessary by the community development director or as part of the preliminary plan review. 
If required to submit a plan to the ARC for a DRI review or other state or federal analysis; those recommendations or reasonable changes to a plan or rezoning shall be incorporated into the design or study of the plan(s). 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 6, 7, 11-2-15) 
16.04.034 - Expiration of preliminary plat/final plat approval. 
A.  Approval of a preliminary plat does not vest any rights in development of the property nor does it constitute approval of a final plat, it indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. Approval of a preliminary plat shall expire and be null and void after a period of one year from the date of approval by the mayor and city council. 
B.  If no final plat is submitted for review within the time specified in Section 16.04.034(A), the owner may request an extension of time from the mayor and city council at a public meeting. Only one such extension of time may be granted. 
C.  If action on a preliminary plat is not taken by the mayor and city council within ninety days of the date of submittal, the preliminary plat shall be considered denied. However, the applicant may request from the community development director an extension of time for city council review, which he or she may or may not grant. 
D.  Plat approval shall be valid for twelve months. If no building permits are issued in that time based upon an approved final plat, the properties contained therein must thereafter conform to current zoning requirements and a new final plat shall be required that conforms to the current zoning. 
E.  Any and all preliminary plats and final plats approved as of April 1, 2016, shall expire one year from said date unless otherwise acted upon in accordance with the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 16-03-022, § 1, 3-21-16; Ord. No. 16-09-047, § 1, 9-6-16) 
16.04.035 - Preliminary plat/plan, required information. 
The preliminary plat/plan shall meet the minimum standards of design and requirements for the construction of public improvements as provided in Article IV, improvements standards of this chapter, and shall have the following information: 
A.  Description: 
1.  Proposed name of development, its units and/or phases of development. All phases or units of a development must be delineated on the submitted plan. 
2.  A plan layout of the proposed development and potential phases/units of development must be submitted for a development that has or may have more than two phases/units to it. 
3.  Names, addresses and telephone numbers, cell phones of subdivider, engineer, landscape architect, surveyor and project manager; as well as each person's e-mail address. 
4.  Graphic scale, north arrow (which shall be identified as magnetic, true or grid north). 
5.  Date and revision schedule. 
6.  Location map showing the relationship of the development to the surrounding area, including identification of landmarks or distances to landmarks within the area of the project. 
7.  Acreage to be divided and the total number of lots/parcels. 
8.  Proposed net and gross density for residential projects and the total square footage of buildings of non-residential projects. The total approved density shall reflect the total net density of the entire project, including a running tally of all phases/units of the entire project unless otherwise approved, which may include approval of a net density per individually zoned properties within the development. 
9.  Lineal feet of proposed public streets (per phase and total in project). 
10.  Zoning of property and all of that district space standards, any special conditions of zoning, minimum house size and lot sizes. 
11.  Impervious surface calculations. 
B.  Existing Conditions: 
1.  Topographic contours and vertical intervals of not more than two feet when new streets are involved. 
2.  Location and delineation of wooded/tree areas, vegetation, lakes, streams, creeks or other natural elements of the land. 
3.  Topographic data shall be based on field surveys or aerial photos. 
4.  Soil conditions according to the U.S. Soil Conservation Service Classifications Manual. 
5.  Current name and address of adjacent property owners, names of subdivisions, businesses, and/or non-residential projects; including zoning of adjacent properties. 
6.  In the case of a submittal of a replatted development, a copy of the existing plat shall be submitted also. The words; "replat or revised plat" shall be included on such document. 
7.  Location/delineation and calculations of the acreage of wetlands, floodplains, reservoirs, recharge areas, other bodies/sources of water and land subject to a one hundred-year flood hazard, including contour elevations. The plat shall state if elevations are taken from a surveyed stream on a FEMA map or if the elevations are from an independent study (HEC-2, QUICK-2, etc.). Wetland areas shall be field located. 
8.  Delineation of such natural resources shall be indicated in a report from a registered soil scientist in the state. 
9.  State whether or not a project lays within a watershed district. 
10.  Location of existing and proposed property lines, location, width and names of all platted public streets, rail public streets, utility right-of-ways, public areas, existing community developments, structures and/or landmarks. 
11.  Existing utility, sewer, water mains and lines, easements, drains, culverts, and/or other underground or above ground facilities adjacent to or within the boundaries and rights-of-way of the proposed project. Included shall be the sizes, grades and invert elevations from field surveys or other sources. All sizes and data on all utilities shall be provided. 
12.  Existing drainage patterns. The boundaries of the pre-developed drainage basins shall be shown on a map. The map shall include the number of acres in each basin, the pre-developed runoff coefficient and the time of concentration. 
C.  Proposed Conditions: 
1.  Layout and names of proposed public streets, alleys, public walkways (bike trails, sidewalks, paths, etc.) with width of pavement and right-of-way. 
2.  Layout of all lots, including building setback lines, lot dimensions and area/square footage of lots. Showing all existing and proposed easements (drainage, water, sewer, storm pipes, etc.) and the location of them on all lots. Also include the proximity (distance and location) of all adjacent easements and utilities. 
3.  Stormwater detention ponds must be on separate tracts and shall not be included as part of a lot area. 
4.  Lots within a one hundred-year flood hazard area may only have up to one-half of their lot area within the floodplain. All lots shall meet the minimum zoning setbacks. Any remainder areas within a one hundred-year flood hazard area must be set aside as open space where not practical to include as part of individual lot ownership. 
5.  Flood elevations on any lots within a one hundred-year flood hazard area. In addition, the foundation elevation that is a minimum of three-foot above the established one hundred-year flood elevation shall be shown. This data may be shown either on the lot layout or in tabular form. The flood hazard area shall include both studied and unstudied streams, including drainage ways as designated on the preliminary plat. 
6.  Construction plans of street including typical cross section and grade profiles shall show the percent of each grade and length of each vertical curve. The minimum centerline stopping sight distance for interior streets is two hundred feet. Construction plans of sanitary sewers with grades, service, pipe size and points of discharge and connection to other trunk or lateral sewers. 
7.  Show the centerline stopping distance for all points of access onto state and county public streets. Show posted speed limits of such public streets. 
8.  As-built construction plans of storm drainage systems with grade, pipe sizes, lengths, location of outlets, runoff and velocity calculations, and other drainage structures. All storm drainage systems carrying off-site runoff shall be designed for the one hundred-year storm event. All storm pipes within the public street right-of-way shall be asphalt coated corrugated metal pipe or concrete. 
9.  Improvement construction plans of water supply systems with pipe sizes and location of hydrants, valves and all other appurtenances. 
10.  Draft of proposed deed restrictions/covenants to be imposed on any or all parcels within the development. 
11.  Easements for drainage and proposed and existing water and sewer lines and utilities along the side, rear lot lines or wherever else they may be placed and watercourses as required in Section 16.04-88. 
12.  Proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
13.  Final contours: In some cases, the street profiles will suffice in showing the amount of cut and fill; however, in all cases, final contours need to be shown on the plans. 
14.  Stormwater management: A hydrologic study should be included and the necessary outlet control structures shown on the plan. No increase in runoff or velocity will be permitted. A professional engineer's certification that the improvements will not adversely impact downstream property. (See: Locust Grove Stormwater Management Ordinance). 
15.  Proposed drainage patterns. The boundaries of the post-developed drainage basins shall be shown on a map. The map shall include the number of acres in each basin, the post-developed runoff coefficient and the time of concentration. (See: Locust Grove Stormwater Management Ordinance.) 
16.  Show a five-foot high fence on all detention ponds with a one hundred-year pond elevation over four feet. A ten-foot wide gate to be located as to provide the best vehicular access. Vegetation shall be planted around all fences in order to minimize the visual impact the fencing has on a development, except at the designated gate area. 
17.  Detail drawings. Any structural practice used should be explained and illustrated with detail drawings and must meet minimum city standards. 
18.  Tree save areas shall be field located, staked and flagged or marked with tenzar and shall be submitted to the city for approval prior to any land disturbance. 
D.  Show the following notes on all plans: 
1.  That all storm sewer, sanitary sewer, water, etc., easements exist where such utilities are placed. If placed on or along property lines, such utilities or infrastructure shall be centered on lot lines. All easements shall include an indication of their width. 
2.  All storm drains shall be extended to the rear setback line. 
3.  Grade stakes shall be set on all streets prior to any street grading. An as-built subgrade centerline profile shall be submitted and approved by the city prior to the installation of curb and gutter or other infrastructure and utility improvements. 
4.  An as-built detention pond detail and revised hydro study shall be submitted to the city prior to the final approval of by the city. 
5.  All undisturbed buffers shall be field located, staked and flagged or marked with tenzar and shall be submitted to the city for approval prior to grading. 
6.  Total amount of impervious surface of the entire site. No site shall exceed twenty-five percent impervious surface except where provided in Chapter 17.04 (zoning). 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 6, 7, 11-2-15) 
16.04.036 - Filing procedures for final plat/plan. 
A.  Once the proposed improvements are substantially in place and the developer/subdivider is seeking final approval from the city, the developer/subdivider shall submit to the city community development department five copies of the final plat for review and comment. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved by the city. The plat shall include those portions of the preliminary plat, which have been developed and/or approved, provided that it complies with all requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The developer/subdivider shall submit with all final plat submittals, soil data, which shall have been prepared by a qualified soil scientist that is approved by the board of health. The soil data should include test results for all proposed (septic tank) lots for which final plat approval is requested. Soil study test results shall be reviewed and certified by the Henry County Health Department. A report from the county health department indicating the status of each lot's capability to be developed. 
C.  When the final plat has been reviewed and approved by the community development department, the developer/subdivider shall supply one original drawing of the final plat on mylar or sepia in black ink, as well as seventeen copies of the plat in blue line format. A licensed professional engineer or landscape architect shall prepare the plat. The minimum size of the plat(s) shall be eight and one-half inches x eleven inches and a maximum size of seventeen inches × twenty-two inches. In addition, all other necessary documentation for recording must be submitted at this time. Both community development director and mayor shall sign the final plat. The final plat shall then be presented to the city council as an update to them of development activities occurring in the city. 
D.  The developer shall be responsible for properly recording the final plat at the Clerk of Superior Court of Henry County. The developer shall than submit to the city, confirmation (letter, receipt, signed plat, etc.) from the superior court, that the plat has been recorded. The mylar and three copies of the plat will be returned to the developer, with one copy going to the following city/county departments: 
1.  Two copies to the city community development department; 
2.  One copy to the city engineer; 
3.  Two copies to the city utility department; 
4.  One copy to the county health department; 
5.  One copy to the county D.O.T.; 
6.  One copy to the county tax assessor's department; 
7.  One copy to the county board of education; 
8.  One copy to the county 911 office; 
9.  One copy to the city police department; 
10.  One copy to the county G.I.S. department; 
11.  One copy to the county voters registration; and 
12.  One copy to the postmaster general. 
In addition, an electronic copy of the plat and all as-builts shall be submitted in AutoCad or MicroStation format for filing and use by the GIS department. Such submission shall be on CD-ROM or DVD format and shall be in the projection of NAD 1983 Georgia State Plane West. 
The community development department shall retain remaining copies of the final plat. 
E.  Other important items necessary for consideration of final plat approval by the community development department shall consist of: 
1.  Completion of Public Improvements. The developer shall contact the community development department for a checklist specifying the procedure in obtaining the various approvals from the city, which will release the subdivision or final plat consideration. 
2.  Bonds and/or Letters of Credit and/or Letters of Surety Required: The developer/subdivider may be required, in the discretion of the community development director, the following bonds and/or letters of credit: 
a.  Bond Defined. For the purposes of this section, the term "bond" shall mean a performance guaranty given in form satisfactory to the community development director and obtained from a surety licensed to do business in the state and named in the current list of "Companies Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and as Acceptable Reinsuring Companies" (as published in Circular 570 (amended) by the Financial Management Service, Surety Bond Branch, U.S. Department of the Treasury. All bonds signed by an agent must be accompanied by a certified copy of such agent's authority to act. 
b.  Letter of Credit Defined. For the purposes of this section, the term "letter of credit" shall mean an irrevocable letter of credit given in form satisfactory to the community development director and drawn upon a banking or other financial institution licensed to do business in the state. At a minimum, the letter of credit shall provide for the immediate and unconditional drawing of any or all of the amount of the letter upon presentment and demand for payment. 
c.  Letter of Surety Defined. For the purposes of this section, the term "letter of surety" shall mean a security given against loss or damage or as a guarantee that an obligation will be met shall be given in form satisfactory to the community development director and drawn upon a banking or other financial institution licensed to do business in the state. At a minimum, the letter of surety shall provide for the immediate and unconditional drawing of any or all of the amount of the letter upon presentment and demand for payment. 
d.  Maintenance Bond/Letter of Credit/Letter of Surety. The developer/subdivider shall be required to post either a bond or, in the sole discretion of the community development director, a letter of credit/letter of surety in an amount at least equal to that necessary to cover the cost of infrastructure improvements upon neglect or abandonment of the project. 
e.  Residential Bond/Letter of Credit/Letter of Surety. The amount of the maintenance bond/letter of credit/letter of surety for a residential development shall not be less than fifty dollars per lineal foot of street with sidewalks and forty dollars per lineal foot of streets without sidewalks within the development. 
f.  Commercial Bond/Letter of Credit/Letter of Surety. The amount of the maintenance bond/letter of credit/letter of surety for a commercial development shall not be less than sixty dollars per lineal foot of street with sidewalks and fifty dollars per lineal foot of streets without sidewalks within the development. 
g.  Industrial Bond/Letter of Credit/Letter of Surety. The amount of the maintenance bond/letter of credit/letter of surety for an industrial development shall not be less than seventy-five dollars per lineal foot of street with sidewalks and sixty-five dollars per lineal foot of streets without sidewalks within the development. 
h.  Acceleration and/or Deceleration Lane Bond/Letter of Credit/Letter of Surety. The amount of the maintenance bond/letter of credit/letter of surety for acceleration and deceleration lanes shall not be less than thirty-three dollars per lineal foot with sidewalk and twenty-eight dollars per lineal without sidewalk. 
i.  Landscape Bond/Letter of Credit/Letter of Surety. The maintenance bond/letter of credit/letter of surety shall state, in addition to all other amounts listed in this section, sufficient funding available to cover the cost of required landscaping or vegetating a site of development. Tree replacement, ground cover replacement, or buffer replacement shall be the responsibility of the developer/subdivider in addition to the required landscape plan provided for in the zoning ordinance. The additional amount of the bond/letter of credit/letter of surety shall be set by the community development director or, in his absence, by the city manager. Additional costs to the city outside of the amount of the bond shall be charged to the developer/subdivider and shall constitute a lien upon the property. 
j.  Duration of Bond/Letter of Credit/Letter of Surety. The maintenance bond/letter of credit required by this section shall have an initial duration of three years and shall be renewed. Except as otherwise provided in this section, upon final inspection and certification from the city that all infrastructure work covered under the bond is satisfactorily completed, in good condition and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, and construction standards, the maintenance bond/letter of credit/letter of surety shall be released. 
For developments with multiple phases of construction, separate maintenance bonds/letters of credit/letters of surety may be accepted by the community development director for each phase. However, where improvements in one phase of a development connect or are integrated into another phase, or if a previously approved phase is used as access for construction traffic, the maintenance bond(s)/letter(s) of credit/letter(s) of surety given on one, multiple, or all phases of development may, when, in the sole discretion of the community development director and/or the city council it is necessary, be renewed until certification from the city that all infrastructure work within the development as a whole is satisfactorily completed, in good condition and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, and construction standards. The community development director may limit extensions of the bond or letter of credit or letter of surety to only those streets used for access for newer phases. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 6, 7, 11-2-15) 
16.04.037 - Necessary final plat/plan documentation. 
The final plat and acceptance of public improvements will be presented to the community development director along with the following items at a final review meeting. The purpose of the meeting is to determine completion of all infrastructure improvements, notify the developer of additional requirements necessary to move forward, confirm approval of all city-county agencies/departments and to insure that all required documentation is accurate and that all fieldwork is in compliance with this chapter. The following items shall be presented to or in position of the community development director during the final plat review meeting: 
A.  Completed application form. 
B.  Final plat/plan drawn to the required standard set forth in this chapter. 
C.  Copy of all materials test results for base and asphalt paving (core test). 
D.  Verification from the appropriate city/county departments that all required inspections have been made and approved and that improvements to the subdivision include street construction, sidewalks, drainage systems, right-of-way seeding/sod are in compliance with the approved plans. This would include the installation of all utilities (above or below ground), street and traffic signs and any other appropriate and necessary improvements as required by the city. 
E.  Verification from the city development inspector that the soil erosion and sedimentation control for the development is in compliance with the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
F.  Verification from the city utility department that all water and sewer requirements have been met, including submission of required documents and inspections. 
G.  Three-year maintenance bond/letter of credit/letter of surety. 
H.  Three-year landscape bond/letter of credit/letter of surety. 
I.  A bond/letter of credit/letter of surety for water and sewer system improvements submitted to and approved by the city utility department director. 
J.  Results from tests of the water/sewer system within the development. 
K.  Affidavits of materials and all lien waivers over the water/sewer system. 
L.  Deeds for proper conveyance of all streets, utilities, and drainage facilities. 
M.  As-built drawings of all water and sewerage facilities as approved by the city utility department. The plans shall include the grade, pipe sizes and points of discharge. 
N.  Soil study for developments not using public sewerage, including recommendation or comments provided from the county health department. 
O.  As-built drawings of streets, sidewalks, storm drainage systems and stormwater detention. The minimum required as-built information to be submitted with the final plat application shall include the following: 
1.  The existing center line profile of all newly constructed streets. 
2.  The size, material, length, slope, invert elevations and accurate location of all storm drain pipes. 
3.  The top and invert elevations of all drainage structures. 
4.  An as-built topographical survey of all detention basins and details of existing outlet structures. Calculations showing volumes and outflow rates. A registered professional engineer, surveyor or licensed landscape architect, shall prepare the as-built drawings at a minimum scale of one hundred feet to the inch. 
P.  Processing fee. 
Q.  Master plan of all phases for developments with more than two phases. 
R.  Results of density tests of all areas of fill and/or compaction. 
S.  A set of "as-built" plans submitted to the community development department in such format as the community development director may specify from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 6, 7, 11-2-15) 
16.04.038 - Processing fee. 
Prior to the approval of the final plat application in the review meeting, the developer shall pay a fee to the city community development department. This fee shall be set by the city council from time to time. Such fees shall be set forth on the final plat application form. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 6, 7, 11-2-15) 
16.04.039 - Final plat/plan required information. 
The final plat shall include the following items including the requirements from Section 16.04.035. Preliminary plat/plan, required information: 
A.  Name, address and telephone numbers and e-mails of the owner of record of the proposed development, including the main contact or project manager. Project management changes shall be given to the community development director within twenty-four hours of such changes. 
B.  Certification by a surveyor that all monuments exist and their sizes, locations and materials are correctly shown on the plat. 
C.  Legal description of the property including reference to land lot(s) and district(s) lines, street right-of-way lines, easements and other right-of-way infrastructure/utility locations. All street right-of-way boundaries, street names, addresses, tax identification numbers, bearings and angles of intersections. 
D.  All lot lines measured to hundredths of a foot. The bearings shall be indicated for all lot lines to the nearest second. The error of closure should not be less than one foot in ten thousand feet. 
E.  Stipulation of deed restrictions and/or covenants on the property. 
F.  The lengths of all arcs, including radii, points of curvature, tangent bearings, and the length and bearing of the long cord of every arc. 
G.  Detention pond maintenance and access easement to be shown, minimum twenty feet to a public right-of-way. Location of all storm drains including pipe sizes. 
H.  Any buffer areas required in the zoning ordinance, including statements whether or not the buffer areas are to be enhanced with additional landscape materials, remain undisturbed, fenced, or a combination of all screening and protection techniques. 
I.  Individual lot sizes measured in square feet; placed either in a table or on the individual lots. 
J.  The outline of all property to be dedicated or reserved for public use or to be reserved for common use of all property owners in the subdivision with the purpose of the dedication or reservation indicated. 
H.  Location of sidewalks, pedestrian or bicycle ways and their length and width. 
I.  If wetlands do lie within the development or unit/phase, the plat must include the following notation: "Wetlands shown on this plat are under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Lot owners may be subject to penalty by law for disturbance to these wetland areas without proper authorization". In addition, the plat shall include the amount of wetlands, in acreage, within the development. 
J.  The following notation shall be included on all final plats; "This plat is hereby approved for recording by the City of Locust Grove, Georgia 
Date: ____________ 
By: (Mayor, City Manager or Director of Community Development)" 
K.  Notation that the city assumes no responsibility for the overflow or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way, nor for the extension of culverts beyond the points shown on this plat and as required by this chapter. 
L.  Notation that all storm drains shall be extended a minimum of thirty feet behind any future residence or building. 
M.  Proposed net and gross density for residential projects and the total square footage of buildings of nonresidential projects. The total approved density shall reflect the total net density of the entire project, including all phases/units of the entire project unless otherwise approved, which may include approval of a net density per individually zoned properties within the development. The plat shall also include the calculation of impervious surface area. 
N.  A statement that street rights-of-way, sidewalks, and designated easements and properties shown are specifically dedicated for public use and upon recording, are accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 6, 7, 11-2-15) 
16.04.040 - Planned unit development projects. 
A planned unit development district is intended to allow projects that include a mixture of residential uses, commercial, retail, office, industrial and public uses. The planned community is intended to encourage creativity and flexibility, to insure the preservation of open space and to promote a coordinated standard of design and particular character or sense of place. 
The procedure for reviewing and approving planned communities or any other mixed use or overlay districts is the same as reviewing and approving all other residential or non-residential developments. 
The land use plan shall reflect the improvements and conditions demonstrated on the preliminary plan of the proposed site. Alterations to the land use plan that drastically alter the intent of the preliminary land use plan or the intent of the property as approved during the rezoning process shall require rezoning/modification by the city council. 
Drastic Changes: 
A drastic change in a land use plan shall constitute a change in the lot yield or dimensions of lots by more than ten percent, a reduction in required/conditioned open space by more than ten percent, an increase in impervious surface area above ten percent of the permissible amount of impervious surface, and/or any change in the conditions of zoning or required standards that may change the intent of or nature of the zoning district. 
The following items shall be required as part of a planned community/development: 
A.  Restrictive covenants specifying the ownership of the open space areas and any amenity areas and their method and responsible party for maintenance. 
B.  Rules and regulations of any homeowner or community association guidelines for condominiums, townhouses, commercial, industrial uses, conditional use areas or overlay districts. 
C.  Typical building elevations and floor plans for any multifamily dwelling units. 
D.  Conceptual drawings of building elevations and streetscape designs, signage and architectural materials used on nonresidential buildings. 
E.  Landscape plans. 
F.  A development agreement with the city. 
G.  All items required by Sections 16.04.032 through 16.04.039 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 6, 7, 11-2-15) 
16.04.041 - Administrative (minor) changes to a land use plan. 
The community development director, mayor or city manager may approve alterations to a land use map which depart from the standard street and lot arrangement requirements, as well as the open space required/conditioned standards of this chapter as long as the adjustments do not alter the purpose and intent of these regulations or the object of the intended zoning or land use plan. Such changes shall be less than the ratio changes described in the above as drastic changes. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 6, 7, 11-2-15) 
16.04.042 - Individual lot divisions. 
The process for approving an individual residential plat (only), that is not part of a subdivision. All applicants shall include the following information on all individual plat submittals. The community development department shall check the plat(s) for accuracy of other city/county mapping and ordinance compliance. The following information shall be included on each plat/survey: 
A.  Zoning of property; including setback information; 
B.  Correct land lot(s) and district(s); 
C.  Scale of measurement (preferably; one inch: one hundred feet or one inch: fifty feet); 
D.  Outline of community development foot prints; 
E.  Notes which indicate if property(s) is in a one hundred-year floodplain, wetland and/or watershed area or if any other bodies of water are on property(s) and indicate on property; 
F.  Dimensions and acreage of property; 
G.  Proposed and existing easements and setbacks on site; 
H.  Contours at two-foot intervals; 
I.  Tree save areas; 
J.  North arrow; 
H.  Engineer's/surveyor's seal, signature, phone number, address; 
I.  Iron pins set at all corners unless otherwise noted; 
J.  A twenty-foot drainage easement and sanitary easement shown inside all rear lot lines and all easements shown on side and/or front lot lines; 
K.  Calculations which demonstrate that the development, as a whole, complies with the twenty-five percent impervious cover requirements of this chapter; 
L.  Note: City assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way; nor for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on this plat; 
M.  All storm drains shall be extended a minimum of thirty feet behind future residence; 
N.  The field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of at least one foot in one hundred thousand feet; 
O.  This plat has been calculated for closure and is accurate within at least one foot in one hundred thousand feet; 
P.  All lot lines measured to hundredths of a foot. The bearings shall be indicated for all lot lines to the nearest second. The error of closure should not be less than one foot in one hundred thousand feet; 
Q.  Stipulation of deed restrictions and/or covenants on the property; 
R.  The lengths of all arcs, including radii, points of curvature, tangent bearings, and the length and bearing of the long cord of every arc; 
S.  Restrictive covenants and/or conditions of zoning; and 
T.  These and all other standards as described in Section 16.04.039 of this chapter shall apply to the approval of individual plats. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 6, 7, 11-2-15) 
16.04.043 - Dedication plats for right-of-way acquisition. 
A plat is required for dedication to the city of property for acquisition of right-of-way and public improvements such as public streets, water/sewer, or other utilities that will require public facilities. The review and approval of plats for this purpose shall require the plat/survey to meet the requirements of Section 16.04.042 of this chapter. A bond/letter of credit/letter of surety (which shall not expire until three years after completion) shall be required for all public improvements as required for final plats. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 6, 7, 11-2-15) 
16.04.044—16.04.056 - Reserved. 
Article IV - Improvements Standards 

16.04.057 - Street layout and design. 
The location, arrangement, extension width and grade of all streets shall conform to the standards of this chapter and shall be coordinated with city infrastructure projects, as well as applicable Henry County and state projects. 
A.  Whenever a tract to be subdivided/developed includes any part of or the entire part of a city planned public street project, such public street or part of said public street shall be installed by the subdivider according to the specifications of this chapter and in accordance with the land use plan. 
B.  Proposed streets of a development shall be designed so as to be continuous and in alignment with existing, planned or platted streets with which they are adjacent to. 
•  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided/developed, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions (as determined by the community development department) for the coordination of the layout of the development with existing and future development of adjacent tracts. Proper coordination may be required with neighboring developments to insure proper connection. 
•  Where there exist in adjacent tracts half-width streets, alleys or stubbed-out streets, the proposed development that adjoins such public streets shall connect to such public streets and/or alleys in order provide continuity of public street networks. 
•  Half streets shall be prohibited unless review and approved by the county engineer and the city council as a matter of a variance. If proven not to be necessary to create a half street, the developer of such public street(s) shall construct such public streets to the specification of this chapter and shall be required to finish any existing half streets or unpaved public streets if such public streets will provide access to the proposed development. 
C.  All residential subdivisions having less than seventy-five lots may include a boulevard entrance(s) when on city or county public streets (this will be determined by the county engineer and the speed limit of the public street in which the development has its access from). When fronting off of a state route, boulevard entrances shall be installed. Subdivisions with seventy-six to one hundred fifty lots shall have boulevard entrances and shall provide a secondary entrance when access to a second public street is feasible. Subdivisions with lots of more than two hundred homes shall have an additional entrance or connection where frontage and proximity to public streets are feasible. The sum of all lots within a multi-phases development shall be regarded as one entire development. Developments unable to meet the required entrance yield shall not submit continuous phases of a development until such requirement can be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.058 - Developments constructed off of state highways, major and minor city/county arterial roads. 
A.  Whenever a proposed development has streets that will enter off of a state highway that is maintained and controlled by the (G.D.O.T.) Georgia D.O.T., the preliminary plat shall be submitted to (G.D.O.T.) for review and approval. 
B.  When a tract of land fronts on a collector or minor and major arterial street, the developer of a residential subdivision shall be required to have all lots face within the interior of the development as to provide frontage only off of interior collector or local streets. A structural buffer of at least twenty-five feet shall be required along the street frontage and shall consist of either earthen berms with appropriate landscaping, fencing consisting of brick, vinyl, wrought iron, decorative wood or other appropriate screening as approved by the community development director and/or city council. 
C.  Access from a state highway, major or minor city/county public street shall be limited based on visibility safety and design to minimize the amount of ingress and egress points. The number of actual access points off of the state highway into any residential or non-residential development shall be determined by the G.D.O.T. 
D.  Access off of a major or minor city/county public street and the number of access points shall be approved by the county/city engineer and shall be based on the design, safety and best visibility into and out of the development. The county/city engineer shall require that access from major or minor city/county public streets also be provided through an interior public street system to all business, office or industrial sites in order to minimize multiple ingress/egress points. 
E.  Business or office "strip" centers or nonresidential developments that rely on direct access from a major or minor public street, shall be designed as to also limit access to such businesses by providing connecting parking and ingress/egress points. Access to such sites shall be determined by visibility, safety and design. Such sites may be required to provide accel/decel lanes or additional right-of-way to create appropriate turning lanes into such developments. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.059 - Street right-of-way widths. 
The minimum width of street rights-of-way subsequently constructed measured from back of sidewalk to back of sidewalk shall not be less than as shown below. These provisions shall not apply to public streets constructed as of the effective date of this chapter. 
A.  Major arterials: One hundred feet. 
B.  Minor arterials: Eighty feet. 
C.  Collector public streets: Eighty feet (major), sixty feet (minor). 
D.  Local public streets: Fifty feet. 
"T" and "Y" intersections and all other access points not listed here shall follow standard nationally known design standards such as, but not limited to, International Fire Codes, Fire Apparatus Access Public streets. 
The county/city engineer may approve of innovative or contemporary public street designs after review of such techniques and examples of such in other communities. The developer, engineer and/or landscape architect shall provide proof of the functionality of any and all innovative designs not permitted in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.060 - Pavement widths. 
The minimum pavement for streets to be installed by the subdivider shall be at the expense of the subdivider. The city's participation in cost for pavement in excess of the minimum width required, if determined to be necessary by the county engineer shall be determined on a case by case basis with the city council. The required widths are shown below: 

 
•  Four-lane highways should be fifty-two feet wide; two-lane highways should be twenty-eight feet wide. 
•  Residential cul-de-sacs should have eighty-foot diameters. 
•  Commercial, industrial and/or office park cul-de-sacs should have one hundred-ten-foot diameters. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.061 - Speed limits. 
The posted speed limit on all local streets within a subdivision shall be twenty-five miles per hour. The speed limit for all other city streets shall be determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.062 - Curbing. 
Curbs shall be required in all residential and nonresidential developments. Curbs in all subdivisions shall be L-back curbs twenty-four inches long, six inches thick, and an eighteen-inch gutter. Variations for rolled curb may be approved depending on prevailing slope and development type. All curbs shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete. Curbs shall be designed to provide handicapped access at street intersections, wherever sidewalks are constructed. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.063 - Street grades and elevations. 
Grades on major and minor arterials shall not exceed five percent and grades on local residential streets shall not exceed twelve percent. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.064 - Horizontal curves. 
The radius of horizontal curves on local residential streets within subdivision shall be no less than one hundred fifty feet. The horizontal radius for collector and arterial streets or any streets with a design speed of more than twenty-five miles per hour shall comply with AASHTO standards. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.065 - Vertical curves. 
All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves, which are as long as conditions permit and under no circumstances should they be shorter than established minimums prescribed by approved highway design methods. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.066 - Centerline sight distance. 
Minimum street centerline sight distances shall be designed relative to the designed speed of the street and should be measured above the street centerline using a driver-eye height of three and five-tenths feet and an object height of six inches. The minimum stopping sight distance for any street shall not be less than two hundred feet. 
Minimum centerline site distances relative to design speed posted on streets are:* 

 
*  The minimum stopping distance for streets shall not be less than two hundred feet. 
Sight distance for intersections with minor/major arterials use intersection sight distance measured from a driver's eye height of three and five-tenths feet to and object height of four and twenty-five-hundredths feet. 

 
*  Data taken from 1990 AASHTO Guide, A policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.067 - Intersection geometry. 
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. In residential subdivisions no intersection shall be at an angle of less than eighty degrees or more than one hundred degrees. 
A.  Street intersections in commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be at an angle of not less than ninety degrees. 
B.  The minimum curb radius at street intersections shall not be less than twenty-five-foot radius shall be required at intersections with existing collector and arterial public streets maintained by the city. 
C.  The minimum curb radius of street intersections for industrial and commercial subdivisions shall be fifty feet. 
D.  Pedestrian ramps shall be designed for all intersections in accordance with standard drawings for subdivisions and residential developments designed to include sidewalks and shall meet the minimum standards in regards to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The curb shall be depressed to accommodate future installations at the same time as the street. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.068 - Street intersection offset. 
Street intersections shall have a minimum centerline offset of at least one hundred twenty-five feet for local streets. Street intersection offset along a collector street shall be a minimum of three hundred feet. Street intersection offset along an arterial street shall be a minimum of four hundred feet. Street intersection offset along a principal arterial street shall be a minimum of six hundred feet. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.069 - Tangents on reverse curves. 
A tangent of at least one hundred feet long shall be introduced between reversed curves on major and minor arterial streets, or on any street where the posted speed limit will be thirty-five miles per hour or greater. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.070 - Dead-end streets. 
Local streets designed to have one end permanently closed and not connected with any existing street, proposed future street, or not intended to extend to the property line of an adjacent tract, shall be no longer than seven times the lot width provided by the zoning ordinance, unless necessary due to the topographic or other physical conditions of the property. 
A.  Permanent Dead-End Streets. Permanent dead-end streets shall be joined by a cul-de-sac with a paved turnaround having an outside diameter of eighty feet (forty-foot radius) and a right-of-way of at least one hundred ten feet diameter. Dead-end streets designed to be permanent and that exceed more than eight hundred feet in length may be required to have a cul-de-sac turn around midway between the entrance intersection and the end of the street to provide maneuvering for emergency vehicles, when the dead-end street is the only street in a subdivision. 
B.  Temporary Dead-End Streets. Stub streets which are intended to provide access for which are intended to provide access for future development within a tract of land or adjacent tracts shall be required to have a temporary turnaround area having a diameter of at least eighty feet, consisting of six inches of graded aggregate base. 
For developments with a temporary turnaround, it shall be required of the subdivider to provide a bond or letter of credit or letter of surety equal to the cost of permanent cul-de-sac construction, in accordance with the standards of Section 16.04.060, for a period of three years. Failure of the subdivider to extend the street or to construct a permanent cul-de-sac shall result in the city using the bond or letter of credit or letter of surety funds to complete the cul-de-sac construction. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.071 - Private streets and privatization of public streets. 
Acceptance and Abandonment Policy. 
A.  Roadway Abandonment—Legal Compliance. 
1.  Municipal Streets Belong to the General Public. Since the control and general supervision of municipal streets is conferred upon the city, the city holds those streets in trust for the convenience and use of the public at large. It correspondingly becomes the city's duty to keep them in a safe and suitable condition for the passage of persons and transportation of commodities. The basic principles of law regarding streets are pronounced in at least two cases, Jones, et al. v. City of Moultrie, et al. , 196 Ga. 526 (1943); Accord: Soles v. City of Vidalia, 92 Ga. App. 839 (1955): 
A highway is a public way open and free to anyone who has occasion to pass along it on foot or with any kind of vehicle. The streets of a city belong to the public, and are primarily for the use of the public in the ordinary way. The primary object of streets is for public passage. They should be kept open and unobstructed for that purpose. The streets of the city are peculiarly within the police control for the purpose of preserving and protecting their use by the public as thoroughfares. 
B.  Roadway Abandonment is Governed by O.C.G.A. § 32-7-2(c). When it is determined that a section of the municipal street system has for any reason ceased to be used by the public to the extent that no substantial public purpose is served by it or that its removal from the municipal street system is otherwise in the best public interest, the municipality, by certification recorded in its minutes, accompanied by a plat or sketch, and after notice to property owners located thereon, may declare that section of street shall no longer be a part of the municipal street system and the rights of the public in and to that section of street as a public street shall cease. The property may be disposed of by the municipality as provided in O.C.G.A. § 32-7-4. 
1.  Procedure. 
a.  Abandonment is defined as the intentional and permanent relinquishment of claim and title to real property that forms a segment of the city's roadway network or was acquired or held for future use as a portion of the roadway network. 
b.  Abandonment of a road or right-of-way requires that the city council make a finding of one of the following with respect to the roadway in question: 
1.  That no substantial public purpose is served by it; or 
2.  That its removal from the municipal street system is in the best public interest. 
c.  Requests for abandonment of roads within the city roadway network shall be made to the department of public works by a homeowner association (HOA) or, if no HOA exists, an individual or group of individuals whose property adjoins or is accessed by the public right-of-way being considered for abandonment (referred to herein as "applicant"). The department of public works or the city council may initiate abandonment requests. In the event the department of public works or the city council initiate an abandonment request, only those procedural requirements set forth in pertinent state law shall be observed. 
d.  The applicant shall be required to submit documentation establishing the factual basis upon which the request for abandonment is made. The applicant shall be required to provide all necessary information demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this section and all applicable state laws prior to the initial public hearing. 
e.  The department of public works will not support the abandonment of any road that connects two or more collector roads without sufficient supporting documentation to demonstrate that the abandonment will not negatively affect surrounding roadways. For the purposes of this policy, a collector road is defined as any road that the department of public works has given a functional classification of collector or higher. 
f.  The abandonment of any street within the city roadway network should not be inconsistent with any programmed capital projects and should otherwise conform to any approved local, regional or state transportation plans and the city comprehensive plan. Approval by the director of public works and the director of community development is required to indicate conformity. 
g.  Prior to the initial public hearing on abandonment, the applicant shall provide documentation demonstrating contact and coordination with pertinent emergency service providers, utility providers, Henry County Schools, city trash service provider, and the postmaster to ensure that said services can be accommodated and that such vital public services will not be significantly impaired. 
h.  For applicant initiated abandonments, the city will accept input from the community related to their support or opposition to an abandonment. For the purposes of this section, the "community" shall be defined as all of those owners whose property immediately adjoins or whose property is accessed by the right-of-way to be abandoned. Prior to the final public hearing before the mayor and city council to consider an application for abandonment a completed formal petition and all supporting forms and documentation shall be submitted to the department of public works. The formal petition submitted on behalf of the community shall comply with the minimum numerical standards set forth [in] Table 1. 
Table 1. Required Percent Approval to Process Abandonment Petition 

 
** Note: Compliance with the required approval percentage rates is in no way determinative of the city's intent to abandon any right-of-way. The required approval percentage is merely one component of the process, state law considerations shall prevail. 
i.  All property owners in the community shall be contacted by the applicant via certified mail prior to the initial public hearing. Notice must be mailed by the applicant to the community members no less than thirty days prior to the initial public hearing date. In the case where a community association has initiated the petition process no notification will be required for any person who has previously signed the petition in favor of abandonment. 
j.  Each lot within the community shall be given an opportunity to sign a petition, expressing their opinion in favor of or in opposition to the abandonment. Any abstention, nonresponse or indication other than a "yes" by community members will be considered a "no." Signatures on the petition shall not be considered valid after a period of one year from the date of signing. 
k.  Percentages will be calculated based on the number of lots expressing an affirmative or "yes" vote in favor of the abandonment, divided by the total number of lots in the community. Each lot counts as a single unit regardless of the number of owners signing. Where a community has a homeowner association or other legal entity that is authorized to act on behalf of its members and that may utilize percentages different than those in Table 1, such a mechanism shall not replace the petition process. 
l.  Compliance with the application procedures is in no way determinative with respect to the city's authority or decision to abandon a roadway. The city council shall retain full legislative discretion to authorize or deny abandonment based upon controlling legal standards and state law. 
m.  After the final public hearing and an affirmative action by the mayor and city council to abandon any right-of-way, the right-of-way shall be disposed of in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 32-7-3, 32-7-4, and 36-37-6. The applicant will file a revised plat, legal description(s) indicating the new dispensation of the property or any other required documentation. Any expenses or fees incurred in the filing will be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
n.  The applicant will grant the city, county or other utility permanent easements as may be required for the entirety of the existing right-of-way, or as may be needed, at no cost as a condition of abandonment prior to final dispensation of the property. 
o.  Any abandonment request that is denied by the mayor and city council may not be resubmitted for a period of one year following the date of denial. 
p.  After abandonment, the right-of-way shall become privately owned and the city shall no longer maintain the roadway or accept any liability for the roadway or any area within the private right-of-way. Any maintenance, such as, but not limited to, resurfacing, stormwater management, sinkhole repair, shall be the responsibility of the owner(s). 
q.  Any access control, such as a gate, that the property owner(s) wish to install shall conform in design and construction to all relevant city standards, regulations, and processes, and must meet emergency access requirements. All access controls shall conform to city standards as if it was newly constructed. Recent abandonment will not be accepted as a justification for any exemptions or variances to these standards. 
C.  Privatization. For the purposes of this section, privatization of a roadway shall mean the abandonment of the right-of-way to a community for the purposes of converting a public road to a private road while continuing to maintain access to the properties within the community. As a condition of approval for the privatization of any right-of-way the community shall continue to provide access to all properties previously served by the public road. 
In addition to the criteria established for the abandonment of any right-of-way, as outlined in subsections (A)(1) and (2), privatization shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  The department of public works will not support a request for privatization of any local road that connects two or more collector roads without sufficient supporting documentation to demonstrate that the abandonment will not negatively affect surrounding roadways. For the purposes of this section, a local road is defined as those roads built as part of a platted residential development. 
2.  The applicant for any privatization request shall be a homeowner association or other legal entity established with the authority to act on behalf of all of the members of the defined community. The applicant is required to meet all of the application requirements provided by the city including the minimum percentage approval rates established for the formal petition for abandonment prior to the final public hearing. 
3.  In the case of a road privatization the "community" shall be defined as all of those owners whose property adjoins the right-of-way or whose sole access is provided by the right-of-way to be abandoned or that may incur a financial obligation for the maintenance and preservation of the right-of-way should the abandonment resolution be approved. 
4.  The applicant shall file financial statements reflecting assets similar to what is required for a homeowner association to finance a line of credit for capital assets. This information will not be made public to the fullest extent allowed by the Open Records Act and is only to insure solvency and to further demonstrate that the applicant has the financial means to fund those future costs associated with maintaining the asset. 
5.  It is hereby the expressed declaration of the governing authority of the city that obtaining documented support from the community that an abandonment application is supported by a certain percentage of those affected is a material, though not dispositive, component in determining whether an abandonment serves the public interest. At the request of the applicant, an application for abandonment under this section may delay tendering formal petitions until such time as the council has adopted a resolution conditionally approving an abandonment. Any such conditional abandonment shall be for the express purpose of allowing the applicant sufficient time to secure all necessary formal petitions with the knowledge that the council has exercised its discretion and preliminarily sanctioned the abandonment. The resolution of conditional abandonment will expressly provide that upon the applicant tendering a formal petition meeting the percentage requirements in subsection (A)(2), Table 1, the abandonment petition shall be placed upon a future council agenda for final ratification of the abandonment. Upon approval of a resolution of conditional abandonment, the applicant will be notified of same and will be advised that submission of a formal petition meeting the percentage requirements in subsection (A)(2), Table 1 will be the final step in the abandonment process prior to placement on the agenda. The applicant will further be advised that the formal petition must be tendered to the council within six months of the resolution of conditional abandonment having been approved, and that a failure to tender the petitions within this period shall result in the abandonment request being deemed withdrawn. The community development director may grant one extension of up to ninety days in his/her reasonable discretion. The above notwithstanding, at any point during the abandonment process up through and including the point when the abandonment becomes subject to ratification on the consent agenda, the city council shall be authorized to exercise its discretion and determine that a particular abandonment does not serve the public interest and thereby deny same. 
6.  After the public hearing process and an affirmative action by the mayor and city council to privatize any right-of-way, the right-of-way must remain private for a minimum of five years before being eligible to submit for public status again. If, after five years, a right-of-way is submitted for public acceptance the road shall be required to meet the construction and testing standards established by the city. 
D.  Hearing Process. 
1.  Once it has been determined that the initial application is complete and conforms to the requirements of the city, the application will be placed on the city council agenda for initial consideration. At that time, the council will determine whether to accept the application for further processing or to reject the application outright. Acceptance of the application by the council does not constitute final approval of the application or the abandonment of the public road or right-of-way, or any portion thereof. Upon a determination by the mayor and city council to accept the application for further processing, the applicant shall be duly notified. The applicant shall also be required to pay all required fees and comply with the requirements of this article and applicable state law prior to the initial public hearing. Any application that is not accepted for further processing by the council shall not be re-filed for a period of one year from the date that the application was rejected. 
2.  Two public hearings shall be held before the mayor and city council; provided, however, the second public hearing shall not occur on the same day as the first. However, if one hundred percent approval is obtained by the community prior to the initial public hearing, the second public hearing will not be required. 
3.  If, after the final public hearing, the mayor and city council finds that no substantial public purpose is served by the right-of-way or that the removal of the right-of-way from the municipal street system is otherwise in the best public interest, it may approve a resolution authorizing the abandonment of the public right-of-way. Such approval may be conditioned on the submittal of a signed petition meeting the approval percentages provided in subsection Aa)(2), Table 1. If the mayor and city council approve such a resolution then the right-of-way shall be considered surplus property and disposed of in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 32-7-3, 32-7-4, and 36-37-6. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.072 - Alleys. 
Alleys shall be provided at the rear of lots in residential, commercial, and industrial developments when approved by the community development director or as directed by the zoning ordinance or other provision. Alleys shall be a minimum of eighteen feet in width with a minimum paved area of sixteen feet and shall lie within a thirty-foot access easement. Appropriate covenants and easement agreements shall be filed with the final plat to assure of proper maintenance and assessment of the property owners on a perpetual basis. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.073 - General construction requirements. 
A.  Every subdivision developer shall be required to follow the requirements of the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance of the city, to grade and improve streets, alleys and rights-of-way, to install curbs or ditches when required and to install street name signs in accordance with city's specifications. Every subdivider shall be required to comply with the inspection procedures of this chapter. 
B.  All street design and construction and related material shall be in strict accordance with Georgia Department of Transportation "Standard Specifications, Construction of Public Streets and Bridges", 1993 Edition, and all revisions thereto and the requirements of Sections 16.04.074 and 16.04.075. Where circumstances dictate variations from the standard specifications, the governing body may vary the requirements, provided the design of materials accepted is in all ways commensurate with good practice. 
C.  All materials, equipment, labor and other matters related to street construction shall be provided by the developer. The following is a summary of the improvements required: 
1.  Grading. All streets, public streets, and alleys shall be graded to their full width right-of-way by the subdivider so that the pavements and sidewalks, when installed in the future, can be constructed on the same level plane. The preparation of the right-of-way before grading is started and the construction of cuts and fills shall be accomplished according to the specifications of the city (see Sections 16.04.074 and 16.04.075). 
2.  Three copies of an as-built subgrade centerline profile shall be submitted to the Locust Grove Community Development Department. The profile shall include both proposed and as-built centerline elevations at every even station. No curb and gutter or waterlines shall be installed prior to subgrade approval. 
3.  Storm Drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary curb, pipes, culverts, headwalls, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, swale ditches, and detention areas, shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water and prepared by a registered professional engineer or landscape architect. 
4.  Public Streetway Surfacing. After preparation of the subgrade the public streetbed shall have base material and paving applied according to county specifications (see Sections 16.04.074 and 16.04.075). 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.074 - Construction requirements for residential subdivisions streets. 
A.  The design and construction requirements for residential subdivisions shall comply with the minimum standards shown in Table 3-1. 
B.  The grading, base and pavement for residential street construction shall be as follows: 
1.  Grading. All streets shall be graded to the elevations shown on the approved construction plans. 
a.  Clearing and Grubbing. After the development permit has been issued by the Locust Grove Community Development Department, and a pre-construction conference has been held, the development inspector duly notified, and all required silt and erosion control measures installed and approved, the contractor may only clear and grub those lots that have received approval for construction of homes or buildings. All trees, stumps, logs, roots, grass, weeds, poles, and other objectionable matter shall be cleared and grubbed in the areas where utilities, principle buildings, and necessary infrastructure have been permitted to go. All other vegetation, especially trees, shall be maintained on the lot or lots throughout the extent of the development. Removal of required vegetation to meet the city tree ordinance and/or landscape plan shall prohibit continuance of any field or construction work on the site. Replacement of vegetation at an equal portion to that removed or damaged shall occur prior to continuation of the project, or within the construction limits of the project. No rubbish or other material resulting from the clearing and grubbing of the public street way may be buried within a lot or future lot of record. If burning is permitted, all burn pits must be located outside of the public streetway construction limits. 
b.  Excavation. All grading operations shall be planned and executed by the contractor in such a manner as to provide suitable subgrade material in the top twelve inches of the public streetway. In areas where the material in place is not suitable for subgrades, these areas shall be undercut a minimum of twelve inches and back filled with suitable material. All rock and boulders in the public streetbed shall be excavated to a depth of at least twelve inches below the subgrade and the space back filled to the correct grade with suitable material. Any stones, broken rock, or boulders resulting from the grading of the public streetway may not be placed in any public streetway fill area except when approved by a development inspector and then under his supervision. During the construction of the public streetway on a day to day basis, the public streetbed edges shall be kept lower than the center and the grading shall be done so that the surfaces of the excavated areas and fill will be kept reasonably smooth and will drained. Adequate surface ditches shall be cut at the tops of cut slopes, extending to each end of the cuts in order to carry the water from the side hill. Side ditchers or gutters emptying from cuts to fill areas shall be turned outward so as to prevent erosion of the fill slopes. 
c.  Placement of Fill. Fill construction shall not begin until all clearing and grubbing of the fill area has been completed. All depressions in the ground shall be filled level with the adjacent surface using suitable material and compacted to the approximate density to the surrounding soil before placement of the fill is begun. The entire area upon which fill is to be placed shall be plowed, scarified, and finely broken up to a depth of a minimum of six inches. Before the placement of fill material is begun, all loosened soil shall be compacted the approximate density of the underlying soil. Where a depth of fill and surfacing is three feet or less, the original ground shall be compacted a minimum twelve inches deep to at least ninety-five percent of the maximum laboratory dry density as determined from representative samples of the material being compacted. In areas where layers of organic or other unstable materials exists, the existing ground shall be excavated, for the full width of the fill area, to the underlining stable material. The subgrade thus created shall then be compacted to the approximate density of the underlying material. All fill material shall be deposited and spread in uniform horizontal layers, not more than six inches thick, for the full width of the fill area, and these layers shall be kept uniform by the use of graders, bulldozers or other approved equipment. Each layer shall be compacted within the range of optimum moisture content necessary to achieve the compaction required. Material containing too much water shall be dried to the correct moisture content. If the material is too dry, water shall be added and uniformly mixed with the soil before it is compacted. Fills shall be compacted to at least ninety-five percent of the maximum dry density to within the top twelve inches of the fill. The top twelve inches of the fill shall be compacted to at least one hundred percent of the maximum dry density. The entire public streetbed shall be scarified and compacted with a sheep's foot or other approved rollers. While the work is in progress, contractor shall maintain the surface in a manner so that the excavation, fills, subgrade, base course, and ditches always present a smooth and even surface. 
d.  The contractor shall have available on the job at all times at least one motor patrol grader with adequate power to blade and maintain the public streetbed. Suitable scarifies shall also be available for use wherever necessary. 
2.  Final Finishing of Public Streetway. After all excavation has been completed and all fills have been placed, the entire public street bed surface shall be finally shaped with a grading machine supplemented with hand work whenever required, to secure a smooth surface and uniform cross-section specified. When final shaping is finished, the public street surface shall conform accurately to the line, grade and cross section shown of plans, and no roots, sod, grass, stones, or other unsuitable material shall remain in the top twelve inches of the finished public streetbed. All ditches and drains shall be opened to effectively drain the public streetway. 
3.  Placement of Curb and Gutter. After sanitary sewer and water lines have been installed, all storm drainage in place, and the final finishing of the public streetway has been approved by the development inspector, the installation of the concrete curb and gutter may begin, All concrete curb and gutter shall be in accordance with Locust Grove Construction Standard. Any curb and gutter, which does not conform to a true section, texture, line and grade shall be removed and replaced as directed by the development inspector. 
4.  Subgrade. Before placing any pavement base the entire surface of the subgrade shall be plowed, harrower, and mixed to a depth of at least six inches. If a subgrade stabilization material is required it shall be incorporated into the subgrade at this time. After the material has been thoroughly mixed the subgrade shall be brought into a proper line and grade and compacted to one hundred percent of maximum dry density just prior to placing the base material. The centerline profile shall conform to the established elevations with an acceptable tolerance of one-half inch. The acceptance crown tolerance shall be one-half inch. 
5.  Base Construction. The Locust Grove Development Inspector shall be notified twenty-four hours prior to the placing of any base material. After the inspector is satisfied all the equipment necessary for the proper construction of public street base is on the project and the subgrade has been brought to the proper line, grade and crown, and compacted to the required density he may authorize the placing of the base material. After the base material has been placed and compacted to the required density the inspector will check the completed base course. All areas found to be deficient shall be marked and corrected before any asphalt pavement is placed. Areas where the crown is found to exceed that which is specified or the exposed edge of the concrete gutter is less than the minimum depth required, shall be reshaped and rolled to obtain the required cross-section. After the compacted material has been approved, cores shall be taken as directed by the development inspector to determine the thickness of the constructed base course. Areas found to be deficient in thickness shall be corrected as directed by the development inspector. A copy of all delivery tickets for the graded aggregate base material shall be furnished prior to placing any asphaltic concrete paving material. A shortage in the base material used shall require that the asphaltic concrete surface course thickness be increased. All work and materials shall be in accordance with the pertinent graded aggregate construction sections of the Georgia Department of Transportation "Standard Specifications", latest edition. 
a.  In lieu of constructing the previously mentioned paving section, a soil cement base shall be a minimum of five inches in thickness of the surface course shall remain at two inches. All soil cement construction shall be in accordance with the "soil cement construction" sections of the Georgia Department of Transportation "Standard Specifications", latest edition. The preparation of the soil cement base shall be done under the supervision of a professional engineer registered in the state. A letter stamped by the engineer attesting to the construction of the soil cement base shall be submitted to the Locust Grove Community Development Department for approval. 
6.  Paving. After the public street base has been accepted by the development inspector and upon his approval the contractor shall begin the construction of the asphaltic concrete pavement. All asphaltic concrete material and construction shall be in accordance with the "hot mix asphaltic concrete construction" sections of the Georgia Department of Transportation "Standard Specifications", latest edition. After the material has been placed and rolled to the satisfaction of the inspector, he shall check the cross section of the finished pavement. Any area found to be deficient shall be marked and a record of deficiencies made by the development inspector. 
a.  If, in the opinion of the development inspector, the extent of deficiencies will impair the performance of the pavement, he shall direct that an overlay of a minimum thickness of one inch be placed before the public streetway is opened to traffic. A copy of the delivery tickets for the asphaltic concrete material used shall be furnished to the development inspector at the time of completion of the work. If the delivery tickets indicate a shortage in the material used from the quantity estimated the development inspector may require a minimum one-inch overlay of the streets. 
Upon acceptance of the surface course by the development inspector, the developer shall have core tests made as directed by county engineer to verify the thickness of the street base and asphalt pavement. If these indicate a deficiency in thickness of the street base asphalt pavement an overlay shall be required when the following deficiencies occur: 
1.  When the number of cores deficient in thickness within the allowable one-quarter of an inch tolerance exceeds thirty-five percent of the total cores taken on one street. 
2.  When two or more consecutive tests show a deficiency of more than one quarter of an inch allowable tolerance. When a core shows a deficiency in excess of the allowable tolerance additional cores will be taken to delineate the area of the deficient thickness. 
3.  Any required overlay shall extend a minimum of one hundred fifty feet beyond the outer limits of the deficient area for the full width of the street. Smooth, neat joints shall be cut normal to the public streetway for full depth of asphalt pavement, removing the original pavement for a minimum of ten feet at each end of the overlay. The thickness of the overlay shall be determined by the depth of the deficient area and shall not be less than one inch in compacted thickness. The type of material used in the overlay shall be specified by the city. 
7.  Shoulder and Drainage Improvements. After the paving has been inspected and approved, the pavement edges or behind the curb and gutter shall be back filled and compacted and the ditches and back slopes properly graded, shaped, seeded and mulched. An eighty percent stand of grass must be obtained. All swales and ditches excavated below required depth shall be back filled and compacted to ninety-five percent of maximum dry density. 
Table 3-1 Residential Subdivision Street Development Standards 

 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.075 - Construction requirements for industrial and commercial subdivision streets and arterial roads. 
The design and construction requirements for subdivision developments for industrial, commercial, or office use and streets which are to be city arterial public streets shall comply with the minimum standards shown on Table 3-2, industrial and commercial subdivision streets and arterial public streets and shall be required to have concrete curb and gutter along each side in accordance with Locust Grove Construction Standard. 
All grading, subgrade, base and pavement for industrial commercial and arterial street construction shall be in accordance with Section 16.04.074 and Table 3-2. 
Table 3-2 Non-residential Developments and Arterial Roads 

 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.076 - Improvement to existing streets and rights-of-way. 
Every development shall have frontage on a paved city or county public street. The existing public streets upon which a development has frontage and access shall be widened, resurfaced, or paved to city specifications (Sections 16.04.094 and 16.04.095) for the full length of the frontage of the development if found necessary due to the existing public street being deficient relative to city specifications. 
A.  Existing Unpaved Public Street. Any unpaved public street upon which a development has frontage and access shall be paved and widened, according to the functional class of the public street (Section 16.04.079, street pavement widths) along the frontage of the development to the nearest intersection with a paved city or county public street. The minimum right-of-way required according to Section 16.04.077 shall be dedicated along the entire frontage of the subdivision. 
B.  Existing Paved Public Street. Any existing paved city or county public street upon which a development has frontage and access and which is deficient relative to city specifications (Sections 16.04.094 and 16.04.095) shall be resurfaced and widened as determined by the city's appointed engineer. The minimum right-of-way required according to Section 16.04.059 shall be dedicated along the entire frontage of the development. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.077 - Development access control. 
Any development, which has an entrance onto a state highway, major arterial, minor arterial, or collector county public street shall provide lanes for deceleration, ingress, and egress in accordance city and state standards. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.078 - Marginal access streets. 
Where a development abuts or includes a major arterial street, marginal access streets may be required to be parallel to and on each side of the major arterial right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the use of the intervening lands for landscaped buffer areas. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.079 - Street names. 
Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with other already existing and named streets, shall bear the names of the streets in which they align with. The names of proposed streets shall not duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the words; street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc., in the naming of the street. 
All proposed street names within the city for new public streets or public streets within commercial, industrial or residential developments must be approved by the city community development director during the preliminary plat review process. Any request to change the name of an existing public street must be submitted to the city community development director for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.080 - Street signs. 
The utility department director shall determine the need and location of street signs within a development. The location of the street signs shall be determined during the review of the preliminary plat. The city's standard steel street posts or wooden four-inch posts with horizontal reflectorized street name-plates with four-inch letters shall be furnished and installed by city at the cost of the developer. 
A.  The cost of street signs and their installation shall be paid by the developer to the community development department during the final plat approval meeting. 
B.  The request for an invoice and the ordering of signs shall come from the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.081 - Mailboxes. 
A.  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this section. 
1.  "Mailbox" shall mean any free-standing or detached structure, container, or receptacle for the delivery of the United States Postal Service mail. 
2.  "Masonry" shall mean brick, stone, concrete, and all other substances or materials having like properties of weight or immobility. 
B.  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Any pre-existing mailbox; or 
2.  Any mailbox upon which substantial work has been begun as of the effective date of this chapter. 
C.  Location. Mailboxes shall be located so as to comply with the rules and regulations of the United States Postmaster General. On public streets without a curb, mailboxes shall be set back eight feet from the edge of the public street so as to allow the mail carrier to pull a postal delivery vehicle completely off the travel lanes of the public street to deliver the mail. Where shoulder width does not allow for such a distance, the public street shall be set back the maximum distance possible from the roadway. On public streets with a curb, mailboxes shall be set so that they are accessible to a postal carrier without any portion of the mailbox extends over the public street. Under no circumstances may the location of the mailbox interfere with the safe use of a public street by the traveling public. Any mailbox which fails to conform to the location requirements provided herein shall be unlawful and deemed a public nuisance. 
D.  Construction and Composition of Mailboxes. 
1.  It shall be unlawful to construct and/or maintain a mailbox which fails to meet the construction specifications enumerated in this subsection (D). 
2.  In order to safeguard the health and welfare of the traveling public and to ensure uniform standards of function and aesthetics within the city, mailboxes shall be constructed as follows: 
a.  The support structure or post of the mail box shall not be constructed with masonry material or of any material that will not readily yield upon impact with a vehicle. 
b.  The encasement or housing for the mailbox itself shall not be made of a masonry material or of any material that will not readily yield upon impact with a vehicle. 
c.  All posts shall have a maximum width of four inches by four inches or, if round, the post shall have a diameter no greater than four inches. If a metal post is used to support the mailbox, such post shall be hollow. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.082 - House numbers. 
Building numbers for individual and multi-use residential and nonresidential buildings shall be assigned by the community development director prior to the approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.083 - Traffic signs. 
The community development department shall determine the need and location of traffic signs within a development and throughout the city and shall approval of all signs styles. Generally, all signs shall follow a MUTCD and shall consist of a uniform, standard concept as approved by the utility department director. Any innovative designs or styles must be approved by the utility department director and/or the community development director prior to installation of such signs. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.084 - Subdivision point of entry signs. 
All signs shall comply with the city's sign ordinance standards. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.085 - Street surface drainage specifications. 
The size, length, and location of all surface drainage pipe or structures shall be shown on all preliminary plats. All storm drain pipes or culverts carrying stormwater from the street and adjacent property or through lots in the subdivision shall be extended to at least thirty feet behind the rear of the structure to be located on the lot. Stormwater shall be released into a channel or swale without causing scouring, erosion, or resulting in sedimentation of the receiving channel. The outlet channel shall include structural and vegetative measures to assure non-erosive velocities of stormwater. 
A.  Installations, back filling, and compaction around drainage pipes shall be in accordance with GDOT specifications. All pipes shall have a minimum cover of eighteen inches from the bottom of the public street base and headwalls or inlet basins constructed at the ends of the pipes. 
B.  All cross drain pipes within public rights-of-way for the purpose of providing storm drainage shall be coated metal pipe, concrete, or other material approved by the county. Ninety-five percent compaction shall be required around all pipes. 
C.  The design of drainage structures shall be based on recognized hydrological formulae. 
D.  Piped collection systems for public streets (catch basins, inlets, cross drains, longitudinal piping), shall be designed for the fifty-year storm. 
E.  Public street culverts, which carry live streams, and off site drainage, shall be designed for the one hundred-year storm. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.086 - Storm drainage detention structures on site. 
The city may require on-site storm drainage and detention facilities for any subdivision, planned development, or commercial or industrial development project. The rate of run-off from any development shall not exceed the rate that existed prior to the development. On-site detention facilities shall be constructed for a one hundred-year storm, and may include permanent retention basins, underground storage of stormwater, roof system retention, rip-rap around drainage structures parking lot design for controlled release of stormwater, or other structures approved by the city's designated engineer and community development department. Plans for stormwater detention facilities shall be accompanied with storm water runoff calculations based on recognized formulas, and shall conform to the requirements of the Locust Grove Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.087 - Blocks. 
A.  Layout. Subdivision blocks shall have sufficient width, to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth and length. The length, widths, and shapes of block shall be determined with regard to: 
1.  Zoning requirements for lot sizes and dimensions; 
2.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
3.  Convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and 
4.  Topographic condition. 
B.  Length. Blocks shall be no more than eleven hundred feet in length, except where topographic or other conditions of the site make such dimensions impractical. 
C.  Mid-block Pedestrian Easements. For blocks over eight hundred feet in length, the community development and zoning board may require one or more public crosswalks of not less than ten feet wide near the center and entirely across the full width of the block, when necessary for access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
D.  Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots with adequate depth relative to the width of lots, except where fronting on a major or minor arterial public street, or prevented by topographic conditions, or by the size and shape of the property. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.088 - Lots. 
A.  Generally: The size, shape, width, depth, orientation and minimum building setbacks of lots in residentially or non-residentially zoned properties shall be in accordance with the applicable zoning districts. 
1.  Side Lot Lines. Where practical on a standard lot, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight lines or radial to curved street right-of-way lines. 
2.  Frontage on Public Streets. All lots that are part of a residential or non-residential subdivision/development shall front upon a public street. All lots must have the minimum amount of frontage required by the applicable zoning district. Lots along a collector or arterial street shall be reverse-frontage, with lots gaining access via interior streets. Variations may be permitted by the community development director utilizing other access control techniques to minimum excessive curb cuts, such as marginal access streets, shared driveways with adequate spacing. 
3.  Radial Lots. Any lot, which has frontage on a cul-de-sac or along a street curve, should have at least fifty percent of the required frontage of said lots, in accordance with the minimum frontage as determined by the applicable zoning district. All lots shall meet their minimum setback at the minimum front building setback line. 
4.  Corner Lots. Corner lots for residential and non-residential lots shall have side yard frontage on a public street equal to that of the front yard frontage as specified in the appropriate zoning district. The community development director may require additional property before a lot can be properly developed if the initial lot is too narrow to provide the proper infrastructure, parking, landscaping or overall development standards for such lot(s). 
a.  In the case of an individual site that is not part of a planned or unified development, or that is part of a "strip" development and not having interior lots; the side and front setbacks of nonresidential lots may be equal in distance depending on the design of the overall proposed development and/or the surrounding buildings. 
b.  All setbacks shall be flexible for lots/buildings within a planned development. Such setbacks shall be proposed by the developer and approved by the community development director during the preliminary plan meeting and preliminary plan review process. 
5.  Through Lots. Through lots or double frontage lots in residential developments shall be prohibited except where one of the thoroughfares is an alley is and is used only for the purpose of accessing the homes of such lots. 
a.  Through lots or alleys that provide separation of residential developments or individual homes from non-residential uses shall provide at a minimum a twenty-foot buffer along the through public street that will provide shade and screening trees in order to protect the privacy of adjacent residential homes. 
b.  The ingress and egress of nonresidential parcels adjacent to residential parcels should be designed as to minimize access into such nonresidential lots in order to prevent unwarranted traffic and noise for adjacent residential homes. 
6.  Flag Lots. Flag lots shall be prohibited in subdivisions. 
7.  Public Facilities. Subdividers of any lot shall connect with public sewer and water facilities within a development or as an individually developed parcel. Where public sewer and water are not available, the developer/subdivider shall provide all infrastructure needs to the development at his/her own expense. Alternative methods of sewerage treatment may be proposed to the city and approved by the council upon a recommendation from the utility department and county and/or state health department. All developments must comply with the zoning ordinance regarding utilities. 
8.  Landscaping. All developments must comply with the zoning ordinance regarding utilities. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.089 - Easements and widths. 
A.  All lots within a development shall provide easements for stormwater drainage, detention systems, future/potential sanitary sewer installations to adjoining undeveloped lands, as well as, for gas, electric, telephone, cable and other utilities necessary to properly develop a site proposing living or working facilities. 
B.  Parcels of land containing easements shall so indicate on the preliminary and final plans of the site being developed as to the exact location of each easement and their purpose. Easements and their infrastructure/utilities should be located as to minimize the need for land disturbance as well as the amount of infrastructure (piping, cable, etc.,) that must be installed. This does not prevent the developer/subdivider from installing the necessary amount of utilities or infrastructure for proper development of a project. All easement shall be a minimum of twenty feet wide, centered ten feet on center of the lot line, pipes, drainageways, or swales. 
C.  Where a development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater drainage easement, sanitary sewer easement or drainage easement along each side of the watercourse for the purpose of widening deepening, relocating, improving or protecting such easement. A fifty-foot undisturbed buffer or if necessary, a buffer of greater size shall be required along any watercourse for protection of such watercourse. 
D.  Proposed lots for developments that are traversed by easements shall contain the minimum buildable area defined by the zoning district, exclusive or outside of areas occupied by such easements, unless otherwise approved by the community development director. 
E.  All stormwater detention facilities shall be accessible from a public street by way of a twenty-foot easement to a designated entrance to the facility and by way of a twenty-foot easement around the facility. 
F.  The city shall have the right to access any property, both public and private for the purpose of repairing public utilities and infrastructure. The city shall have the right to excavate, dig up or remove any vegetation or obstructions that may be near easements for the purpose of repairing such utilities. The city shall replace any grass or shrubs damaged or removed for this purpose but not trees or other organic or inorganic items that may have caused damage to such utilities/infrastructure. Utilities damaged by natural causes shall be replaced by the city at the city's expense unless such repairs are still under bond or unless such damage was caused by property owners or other causes not of a natural element nature. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.090 - Permanent reference monuments. 
A.  Concrete cylinders or rectangular prisms not less than four inches in diameter or square and forty-two inches in length shall be set at the extreme corners of developments. 
B.  Steel pins not less than one-half inch in diameter and thirty inches long, with a survey marker cap showing the land surveyors registration number shall be set at the following locations: 
1.  All points where street lines intersect the boundary lines. 
2.  All angle points and points of curve on each street. 
3.  All lot corners. 
C.  Any monument disturbed by construction or grading shall be reset. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.091 - Development standards for design and installation of water and sewerage systems. 
The "City of Locust Grove Water and Sewer Department Development Standards for Design and Installation of Water and Sewerage Systems", adopted May, 1996, as hereafter amended, is incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.092 - Sidewalks. 
A.  Generally. Sidewalks shall be constructed within a single-family, multifamily, commercial, industrial and/or office development/subdivision on both sides of all streets within the public right-of-way and along the frontage of a "strip" commercial/office development. 
B.  Sidewalks shall be constructed along the entire perimeter of a development where such perimeters/parcel boundaries run or front along a city/county public street(s), or along the entire extent of the parcel boundaries where access to adjacent lots may or are possible as a part of existing or future developments. 
C.  Construction Specifications. Sidewalks shall be four feet wide and at least three to four inches thick and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete. Sidewalks may also be constructed of brick or stone pavers. Any other materials proposed for sidewalks shall be approved by the community development department and/or city council upon review of development plans. 
D.  Sidewalks shall be installed no closer than four feet to the back of curb. Placement of utilities under sidewalks or within the area between the sidewalk and back of curb (usually a grass/landscape area) are permissible but such placements must be approved by the city as part of the preliminary and final plan review process. Sidewalks and curbs shall be designed to be handicap accessible. Planting of trees, shrubs or ground covers as described in the landscape ordinance of this chapter shall be required within the area of between the back of curb and sidewalks. 
E.  Installation. Typically, sidewalks shall be installed by the developer/builder before the issuance of any building permits. However, all sidewalks are required to be complete throughout the subdivision in proportion to the construction of homes or buildings built within a development. The three-year bond on sidewalks shall take effect upon completion of the final portion of installed sidewalks. Broken curbing or gutter or sidewalks during the three-year period shall be repaired by the developer/builder before the release of such affective bond. The bond shall indicate the responsible party for repairs to all infrastructure covered by the bond. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.093 - Gas, electric and communication utilities. 
A.  Responsibility. The subdivider shall make the necessary arrangements with the appropriate utility companies for the installation of utilities to assure that all lots have adequate gas, electrical and telephone communications services. 
B.  Enforcement. No occupancy permit shall be issued for structures in a subdivision or developments unit or phase until all necessary utilities have been installed. 
C.  Exemptions. The following specific facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter: 
1.  Poles used exclusively for street lighting. 
2.  Poles, overhead lines, and associated overhead structures owned by a utility company crossing over any portion of an area from which overhead wires are allowed. 
3.  Overhead lines attached to the exterior of a building by means of a bracket or similar device and extending from one location on the building, or to an adjacent building without crossing any street or right-of-way. 
4.  Radio antennae and associated structures and equipment used for furnishing communications service. 
5.  Service terminals and necessary pad-mounted electric transformer equipment installed above ground, used to distribute communications and electric service in underground systems. 
D.  Electrical Transformer Substations. Transformer substations shall be allowed within subdivision developments to serve the proposed developments and a larger area. These facilities shall be fenced with a chain link security fence and shall be landscaped with tree plantings and shrubs. The utility company shall obtain an easement (or other necessary property rights) for these installations which shall be clearly indicated on the development's preliminary and final plats. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.094 - Cemeteries and grave sites. 
Knowledge of or suspicion of a grave site, burial ground, cemetery and/or other archeological or historical site on a proposed site of development shall require professional and careful identification and delineation of such a site. Identification of such a site during grading, excavation or development of a site without previous knowledge of such historical significant elements, shall constitute stoppage of land disturbance or construction related activities until release for further activity by the city council, community development director, state agencies specializing in historically significant elements of the state or any combination thereof. 
Prior to land disturbance, grading or any aspect of development, where a site contains or borders a cemetery or gravesite, the developer shall clearly delineate the area on all site plans and construction drawings and install protective fencing. A fifty-foot undisturbed buffer shall be maintained around the perimeter of the gravesite or cemetery. If a natural buffer does not exist, than a fifty-foot wide area shall be delineated around the perimeter of the site and a permanent fence (with an eight-foot wide gate) shall be installed around the perimeter to protect the grave site. 
•  Access shall be provided from either a major or minor arterial public street or from a local/collector public street, at least twenty feet in width, to provide vehicular and pedestrian access to the site. 
•  The buffer and/or fence shall be maintained by the owner, or adjacent owners of the land closest to or as a part of the adjacent lands to the grave site or cemetery. 
•  The grave site or cemetery shall be delineated on the preliminary and final plats. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, § 8, 11-2-15) 
16.04.095—16.04.109 - Reserved. 
Article V - Public Dedication and Reservation 

16.04.110 - Public sites—Generally. 
When a site or area of land within a development is proposed, requested, needed and/or offered to or by the city for the purpose of public use; such as a park, school, fire station, water/sewer facilities, water reservoir, public works, or other public need, the necessary land shall be reserved for such use as is deemed necessary by the city council and so indicated on the preliminary and final plat of the development or made a part of the land use plan of the city. The city council shall determine the department or committee responsible for the development and maintenance of such property. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 9, 10, 11-2-15) 
16.04.111 - Dedication. 
When a site is proposed, requested, needed and/or offered to or by the city for the purpose of public use, the land shall be transferred by a deed and dedicated plat and recorded by the clerk of superior court following acceptance by the council at a public hearing. The public hearing shall follow the same requirements as that of a rezoning, as specified in the city zoning ordinance. A separate dedication plat is not required if the proposed property is part of a planned residential/nonresidential development, all other requirements shall apply. 
1.  Land dedicated to the board of education shall be reviewed by the board prior to the city council deciding if such location is appropriate for the needs of the school board. The decision by the board to accept this site shall be the final decision of the board but such dedications and overall zoning should be coordinated with the city council. The school board shall have sixty days to decide if they will accept the property. If the board choices to accept the property for future school use, than the school board shall notify the city mayor or manager of its intent. Coordination of required documentation, deed, plats, etc., shall be coordinated through the community development director, as part of the development process. 
•  No property shall be declared dedicated to the school board during a rezoning or preliminary plan review phase without first having been reviewed and decided upon by the board of education and the city council. 
•  The city council shall amend the land use plan upon acceptance of such land for school use, within one year of such accepted amendment to the city's capital improvements element of the land use plan. 
•  A preliminary plan is required to be reviewed by the school board and city council indicating the general location and layout of the proposed school site. 
2.  Parks, fire stations, water/sewer facilities, libraries, schools or other lands and/or buildings or funds proposed for dedication to the city for public uses shall be reviewed by the community development director and recommendations made to the city council for their review and considerations prior to any rezoning or approval of a preliminary plan proposal. The council shall make a decision in a public hearing meeting that such lands, buildings or funds are or are not in the best interest of the community. A deed and dedication plat shall accompany such proposal to the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 9, 10, 11-2-15) 
16.04.112 - Dedication/reservation of lands. 
When a site, zoning or funds are determined necessary for public purposes by the city council, then such lands shall be noted as such as part of city public record. The council on dedications shall make no change in the use of such land(s) or zoning(s) (i.e. rezoning, variances, etc.,) or take action without the action/decision taking place at a public hearing. The public hearing shall determine the final use of the land, the estimated budget for the project as well as a resolution from the community development department as to the impact this change or changes will have on the land use plan and/or surrounding neighborhoods. The city council shall then make the dedicated land, zoning or funds a part of the land use plan with appropriate amendments made within the year that such lands/buildings or funds are accepted by the council. The council shall also consider the cost and benefit such dedications will have on or for the general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 9, 10, 11-2-15) 
16.04.113—16.04.129 - Reserved. 
Article VI - Subdivision Construction Inspection 

16.04.130 - Pre-construction review and approval. 
A.  All developments shall construct and install all improvements in accordance with the requirements of Article IV. The steps for pre-construction review and approval and required inspections shall be followed as indicated below. 
B.  Prior to beginning development of the subdivision the subdivider shall first obtain the following approvals: 
1.  Preliminary Plat Approval Required. The subdivider must first have a preliminary plat approved by the city. 
2.  Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. The subdivider must have a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan in compliance with the Locust Grove Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. The plan shall be reviewed and coordinated by the city community development director. No development permit shall be issued by the community development department for any development, which does not meet the standards of this chapter. 
3.  Pre-construction Conference. Prior to grading, the subdivider shall contact the community development department to arrange a pre-construction conference. The pre-construction meeting shall include a review of the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, street cross sections and profiles, construction specifications, procedures for inspections and testing, stormwater drainage and detention facilities, water/sewer service, and any other matters concerning the development. The subdivider shall provide a list of names, telephone numbers, addresses, and business license numbers of all contractors and subcontractors employed on a job. 
4.  Development Permit Required. A development permit shall be issued by the city community development department only after the approval of the construction improvements plans and soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. Site grading shall be limited only to those areas clearly define on the approved plans. Any site grading which is done without an approved soil erosion control plan and development permit is a violation of this chapter and shall result in enforcement penalties as provided by Article VIII. In instances where grading has exceeded the area approved according to the approved plans and development permit, the permit fee amount shall be doubled. Any violations of the conditions or limitations imposed by the development permit shall also be subject to penalties provided by Article VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 11, 12, 11-2-15) 
16.04.131 - Inspection procedures. 
The subdivider is responsible for making requests for inspections before beginning any of the stages indicated below. No grading shall commence without approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and a development permit. Soil erosion prevention measures shall be installed prior to grading as required by the Locust Grove Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control ordinance. 
A.  Inspection Notification. The subdivider shall notify the city community development department at least twenty-four hours before any stage of construction begins. If construction during any phase is stopped or delayed due to inclement weather or other reasons, the subdivider shall notify the community development department twenty-four hours before commencing construction activity again. 
B.  Clearing and Grubbing. After providing the required notice to the Locust Grove Community Development Department, clearing of the right-of-way may begin. All work is to be in accordance with Section 16.04.074 of this chapter. 
C.  Street Grading. Following inspection and approval of the street clearing and grubbing by the development inspector, and street grade stakes have been set by the project's engineer, the contractor may proceed with the grading of the streets. All work is to be in accordance with Section 16.04.074 of this chapter. Compaction tests shall be made as required by the development inspector to determine that the required ninety-five percent maximum dry density is being achieved. At least one test shall be made over each storm drain pipe when it has been covered with eighteen inches of back fill material. 
D.  Subgrade Compaction. Following the completion and approval of the street grading and installation of curb and gutter the contractor may proceed with the preparation of the subgrade in accordance with Section 16.04.074 of this chapter. Compaction tests shall be made at the direction of the development inspector to determine that the required one hundred percent maximum dry density is being achieved. 
E.  Curb and Gutter. Following the installation of all proposed sanitary sewer and water lines and acceptance of the street grading the contractor may proceed with the construction of the curb and gutter. All work and materials shall be in accordance with Section 16.04.074. 
F.  Base Preparation. After the street subgrade has been inspected and approved, the contractor may proceed with the construction of the street pavement base. All work and materials shall be in accordance with Section 16.04.074 and Table 3-1 or Table 3-2. Compaction tests shall be made as directed by the county to assure that the required one hundred percent maximum dry density has been achieved. Cores shall be taken as directed by the county to determine the constructed thickness of the base course. 
G.  Paving. After the public street base has been approved and accepted by the development inspector, the contractor may proceed with the construction of the asphaltic concrete binder and/or surface courses. All work and materials shall be in accordance with Section 16.04.074 and Tables 3-1 and 3-2 of this chapter. Compaction tests shall be made as directed by the county engineer to assure that the required ninety-eight percent maximum has been achieved. 
H.  Street Core Tests. Street core test results shall be submitted and approved by the county engineer prior to the recording of a final subdivision plat. These cores shall be taken as directed by the development inspector immediately upon completion of the surface course. Refer to Section 16.04.074 of this chapter. 
I.  Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control. During all of the stages of inspection, soil erosion, and sedimentation control measures shall be inspected. The development shall be subject to soil erosion sedimentation control inspection at any other times determined necessary to assure compliance with the approved plan. The subdivider is responsible for continued maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control measures as required by the Locust Grove Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
J.  Work Stoppage. A stop work order may be issued at any time if it is determined to be necessary due to failure of the subdivider to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter, the zoning ordinance or, the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. A stop work notice shall be posted on the site and the subdivider shall be notified in writing concerning the reasons for the stop work order. Any work which proceeds in violation of a stop order shall subject the subdivider to penalties as prescribed in Article VIII of this chapter. 
K.  Work Delays. If construction during any phase of development is delayed due to inclement weather or for other reasons, the subdivider shall notify the Locust Grove Community Development Department prior to resuming construction activity. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 11, 12, 11-2-15) 
16.04.132 - Minimum inspection requirements. 
The following inspections shall be made and documented by the city: 
A.  Street Improvement: 
1.  Check results of subgrade, base, and embankment compaction tests and depth. 
2.  Inspect for compaction around all drainage pipes and drainage structures. 
3.  Inspect and document the alignment and condition of curb and gutter equipment. 
4.  Check fill material before authoring use. 
5.  Inspect and document concrete pours for curbs and headwalls. 
6.  Inspect and document paving machine adjustments. 
7.  Inspect and document the placement of asphalt pavement for compliance with material and weight specifications. Check core-testing results. 
8.  Obtain from the subdivider all records of asphalt mix and materials quantities. 
9.  Require at graded street profiles and review for compliance to the approved construction plans prior to installing any curb and gutter or base material. 
B.  Storm Drainage Improvements: 
1.  Inspect cross drain pipes to assure that metal pipe is properly coated and sized according to plans. 
2.  Reject any defective pipe and assure that it is not used on the job. 
3.  Observe pipe-laying operations to assure that pipes are true to line and grade, properly located and bedding and back rill is compacted according to specifications. Document the depth and type of bedding, trench conditions, and back filling operations. 
4.  Inspect rip-rap or concrete head walls for proper installation; ensure that drainage catch basins and manholes are installed properly. 
5.  Inspect drainage ditches within the street right-of-way and drainage easements within the subdivision to assure proper embankment slope and grade according to specifications. 
6.  For enclosed storm drainage systems, inspect to ensure that pipes are true to line and grade. Storm drain sewer pipes on steep slopes, greater than twelve percent should be checked to see that they are properly anchored. Inspect pipe materials and document pipe manufacturer, class and size. Pipe materials for storm sewers shall be reinforced concrete, asphalt-coated corrugated steel or other approved materials. Inspect to ensure that sewers are laid with uniform slope between structures and have straight alignments between structures. 
7.  Inspect stormwater detention facilities to assure compliance with approved plans capacity volumes and county construction standards. 
C.  Sanitary Sewer and Water Main Improvements. The city water and sewer department shall inspect the following: 
1.  Pipe material, manufacturer, class, and size for conformance with water and sewerage authority specifications. 
2.  Reject any defective materials to assure that they will not be used on the job. 
3.  Observe pipe-laying operation to ensure that all joints are properly made, pipes are true to line and grade, compaction and back fill are done according to specifications. 
4.  Document the depth and type of bedding, trench conditions, compaction, the location of all service stub outs and connections, back filling and location of all utilities. 
5.  Perform and document all final acceptance testing according to water and sewerage authority specifications. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 11, 12, 11-2-15) 
16.04.133 - Developer's responsibilities. 
A.  Generally. The subdivider shall be responsible for maintaining documentation of all construction activity. It is recommended that the subdivider retain a professional engineer to supervise, document, and inspect all construction of the subdivision. 
B.  Construction Materials Records. The subdivider shall maintain all records of all construction materials and quantities used to construct the public streets for the subdivision. Asphalt tickets and other material records shall be made available to the Locust Grove Inspectors when requested. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 11, 12, 11-2-15) 
16.04.134—16.04.149 - Reserved. 
Article VII - Legal Status 

16.04.150 - Conflict with other laws. 
When the provisions of this chapter are in conflict with any other ordinance of the city, the most restrictive standards as adopted by the city shall apply until amendments to existing ordinances or new ordinances resolving the conflict(s) are adopted by the council. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 13, 14, 11-2-15) 
16.04.151 - Appeal provisions. 
Any appeal of a decision by the community development director, mayor, city manager or other department managers regarding this chapter, shall be presented in writing to the city clerk within fifteen days of the decision of such city officials. The city clerk shall review the application and schedule the appeal at the next possible city council meeting. The council shall review the appeal on the basis of the request complying with the intent of the applicable zoning district, land use plan and the standards of this chapter. The council shall consider a deviation from these standards under the procedures of the variance section of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 13, 14, 11-2-15) 
16.04.152—16.04.159 - Reserved. 
Article VIII - Administration and Enforcement 

16.04.160 - Administration. 
The community development director shall administer the process for residential and non-residential preliminary and final plans. The director shall be responsible for coordination of plans with city and county agencies/departments and any state agencies. The director shall present to the city council all final plans as a matter of record that such plans comply with or exceed the standards of this chapter. 
The community development director or his/her designee may authorize enforcement action if the developer/subdivider or any contractor/subcontractor fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable ordinances dealing with land development. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 15, 16, 11-2-15) 
16.04.161 - Penalties for violations. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements including violation of conditions in connection with granted variances, rezoning, conditional use or other specially permitted uses, shall be punished by a fine of one thousand per day of violation and/or by imprisonment of not more than sixty days. A violation that goes unattended or fixed by the developer/subdivider within five working days or less shall be grounds for stoppage of any and all work started or permitted to be started until such violations are made. The violator shall also be required to pay any court costs that are lawfully imposed. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue but the city shall require that the violation be fixed, amended or altered to meet the requirements of this chapter. Each day such violation continues, it shall be considered a separate violation. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking other legal action as determined necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 15, 16, 11-2-15) 
16.04.162 - Administrative variances. 
The community development director may grant the following types of variances, without jeopardizing the intent and integrity of this chapter and all applicable or related ordinances to a development: 
The director shall have the authority to approve a ten-percent variance in regards to front, side and rear setbacks. A ten-percent variance on dimensions of a lot or lots may also be granted on no more than twenty percent of all the lots of a development, exclusive of any amenity area dimensions. Variances on open space or other dedicated space shall require city council approval. Variances shall be granted upon the following principles: 
A.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district. 
B.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties within the city or within a similar zoning or overlay district. 
C.  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties within the city or within a similar zoning or overlay district. 
D.  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this article, the specific zoning of the property and the land use plan and will not be injurious to the general welfare of the community. 
E.  The special circumstances or justifications for the variance are not the result or cause of the self-imposed actions or misfortunes of the applicant. 
F.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings or structures which is not permitted by right in the overlaying zoning district or scheme of the land use plan. 
G.  The variance requested is the minimum reasonable variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
Minor variances may be authorized by the community development director, utilities director, city manager, mayor or designated civil engineer of the city concerning the layout of streets, lots and blocks in situations where physical characteristics of the property create practical difficulty or hardship by strict compliance of the regulations of this chapter. A consultation with at least three of these individuals, the developer and appropriate inspectors shall be required as part of the review process of granting a deviation in street, lot and block standards. A written report shall be followed detailing the reasons why the variance was need and why it was or was not granted. Such report shall be filed with the preliminary and final plat of the development. 
All other variance requests above and beyond those mentioned in this section shall require approval from the city council at a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 15-11-047, §§ 15, 16, 11-2-15) 
Chapter 16.08 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE 
Sections: 
Article I. - Short Title, Authority and Applicability 

16.08.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of the City of Locust Grove, Georgia," or, for brevity, the "Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 1 (part)) 
16.08.020 - Authority. 
A.  This chapter has been prepared and adopted by the mayor and council of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia, in accordance with the authority provided by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq., as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia, to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this chapter. 
C.  This chapter shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia, and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 1 (part)) 
Article II. - Findings, Purpose, and Intent 

16.08.210 - Findings. 
The mayor and council of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia, find and declare: 
A.  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Locust Grove; 
B.  That certain public facilities as herein defined have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development; and 
C.  That it is fair and equitable that new growth and development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 2 (part)) 
16.08.220 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to impose impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined. 
B.  It is also the purpose of this chapter to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in the city of Locust Grove and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 2 (part)) 
16.08.230 - Intent. 
This chapter is intended to implement and be consistent with the city of Locust Grove comprehensive plan, as it may be adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 et seq.); and the minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning and the development impact fee compliance requirements, both as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 2 (part)) 
Article III. - Rules of Construction and Definitions 

16.08.305 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 3 (part)) 
16.08.310 - Rules of construction. 
Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this chapter: 
A.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between words or phrases as used in this chapter and as used in other codes, regulations or laws of the city of Locust Grove, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this chapter. 
B.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
C.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
D.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
E.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other legal or similar entity. 
F.  The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
G.  The conjunction "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
H.  The use of "either... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
I.  The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
J.  The article, section, and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this chapter are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 3 (part)) 
16.08.320 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below: 
"Administrator" means the city manager of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia, or the city manager's designee, who is charged with implementation and enforcement of this chapter. 
"Building permit" means the permit required for new construction, completion of construction, or an interior finish pursuant to the applicable building code. As used in this chapter, the term shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase in the demand placed on those public facilities as defined in this chapter. 
"Capital improvement" means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
"Capital improvements element" means that portion of the city of Locust Grove comprehensive plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement, as most recently adopted or amended by the mayor and council. 
"City" means the city of Locust Grove, a legal subdivision of the state of Georgia. 
"Commencement of construction," for private development, means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project. 
"Completion of construction" means the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy by the appropriate governmental jurisdiction. The date of completion is the date on which such certificate is issued. 
"Comprehensive plan" means the city of Locust Grove plan or planning elements as adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 et seq.) and the minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs. 
"Day" means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
"Developer" means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
"Development" means any action which creates demand on or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; any change in use of land, a building, or structure; or the connection of any building or structure to a public utility. 
"Development approval" means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, approval for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction. 
"Development impact fee" means the payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
"Encumber" means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
"Excess capacity" means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
"Feepayor" means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his or her legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this chapter has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. 
"Individual assessment determination" means a finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this chapter or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
"Individual assessment study" means the engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
"Level of service" means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by the city of Locust Grove, Georgia in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
"Mayor and council" means the mayor and city council of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
"Present value" means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of "net present value." 
"Project" means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or other development approval, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
"Project improvements" mean site specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by the city of Locust Grove, Georgia shall be considered a project improvement. 
"Property owner" means that person or entity that holds legal title to property. 
"Proportionate share" means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
"Public facilities" mean: 
1.  Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; 
2.  Public safety facilities, including police, fire, and related facilities; and 
3.  Libraries and related facilities. 
"Service area" means a geographically defined area as designated in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
"System improvement costs" mean costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three percent of the total of all other costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
"System improvements" mean capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
"Unit of development" means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc. 
"Unused or excess impact fee" means any individual impact fee payment from which no amount of money or only a portion thereof has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 3 (part)) 
Article IV. - Imposition of Development Impact Fees 

16.08.405 - Development impact fees required. 
Any person who after the effective date of this chapter engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 4 (part)) 
16.08.410 - Construction not subject to impact fees. 
The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this chapter, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
A.  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development as defined in this chapter that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property. 
B.  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
C.  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
D.  Placing or replacing a manufactured home on an established lot or prepared manufactured home pad in a manufactured home park or subdivision in operation prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
E.  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
F.  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential housing unit that does not increase the number of housing units. 
G.  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 4 (part)) 
16.08.420 - Grandfathered projects. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 4 (part)) 
16.08.430 - Method of calculation. 
A.  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, shall be calculated on the basis of the establishment of service areas, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of the present value of ad valorem tax or other revenues. Such revenues shall be as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan, and are those which: 
1.  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new development; and 
2.  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category and in the same service area for which an impact fee is imposed. 
C.  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this chapter shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia, and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
D.  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee may also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities. 
E.  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 4 (part)) 
Article V. - Fee Assessment and Payment 

16.08.510 - Fee schedule. 
A.  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule at the end of this chapter as Attachment A for a property located inside of the city of Locust Grove, shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. 
C.  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
1.  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee. 
2.  In making such determination, the administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
3.  If a land use designation is not in a category contained in this chapter, then an appropriate new category may be added by the administrator and an appropriate fee established under the city's current impact fee methodology, subject to annual confirmation by the mayor and council. 
4.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the mayor and council within thirty days of the administrator's decision. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 5 (part)) 
16.08.520 - Timing of assessment and payment. 
A.  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of application for a building permit as to the amount to be collected. 
B.  All development impact fees shall be collected no earlier than the time of issuance of a building permit, and no later than as a prerequisite to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building. 
C.  For projects that qualify as "development" as defined herein but do not involve issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction or to commence use of a property. 
D.  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the actual use prior to issuance of an interior finishes permit or approval of a certificate of occupancy. An adjustment may result in a refund to the feepayor or payment of the marginal increase of the adjusted fee over the amount already paid. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any future change in demand for public facilities created by a development project in excess of the demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the building permit shall be assessed such additional fee as would otherwise have been due. The additional assessment shall be payable by the original feepayor, current or original property owner, or other appropriate responsible party. Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined herein), or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 5 (part)) 
16.08.530 - Individual assessment determinations. 
Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
A.  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project. 
B.  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. Each individual assessment study shall: 
1.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or 
2.  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in the city of Locust Grove or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and 
3.  Provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. 
C.  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this chapter. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the mayor and council within thirty days for a final decision. 
D.  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for one hundred eighty days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 5 (part)) 
16.08.540 - Fee certification. 
Upon application to the administrator, a developer may receive a certified schedule of development impact fees for categories of development or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. Such certified schedule or fee shall establish the development impact fee due for a period of one hundred eighty days from the date of certification, even if new or revised rate schedules are adopted in the interim. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 5 (part)) 
Article VI. - Exemption Policy 

16.08.610 - Exemption policy. 
The city of Locust Grove recognizes that certain educational, office, retail trade and industrial development projects provide extraordinary benefit in support of the economic advancement of the city's citizens over and above the access to jobs, goods and services that such uses offer in general. To encourage such development projects, the mayor and council may consider granting a reduction in the impact fee for such a development project upon the determination and relative to the extent that the business or project represents extraordinary economic development and employment growth of public benefit to the city of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 6) 
Article VII. - Deposit and Expenditure of Fees 

16.08.710 - Maintenance of funds. 
A.  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until encumbered or expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. 
B.  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements within each service area wherein fees are collected. 
C.  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 7 (part)) 
16.08.720 - Expenditures—Restrictions. 
A.  Expenditures from the impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements within the service area for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
B.  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
C.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the following shall be considered general revenue of the system, and may be expended accordingly: 
1.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
2.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by the city of Locust Grove for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and 
3.  Any portion of the impact fee (but not to exceed three percent of the total) collected and allocated by the administrator for administration of the impact fee ordinance, and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 7 (part)) 
16.08.730 - Annual report. 
A.  The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the mayor and council as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility and service area. 
B.  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), and submitted to DCA in conjunction with the annual update of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 7 (part)) 
Article VIII. - Credits 

16.08.805 - Credits. 
When eligible, feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 8 (part)) 
16.08.810 - Credits—Restrictions. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his or her predecessor in title or interest) for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the city of Locust Grove comprehensive plan, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of the city of Locust Grove, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
C.  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements, or for system improvements not included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 8 (part)) 
16.08.820 - Granting of credits. 
A.  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
1.  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the city of Locust Grove comprehensive plan; 
2.  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the capital improvements element; and 
3.  The mayor and council shall have explicitly approved such improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
B.  The credit allowed pursuant to this article shall not exceed the impact fee due for such system improvement unless a greater credit is allowed under a private agreement executed under the provisions of this chapter. In the event that a developer enters into such a private agreement with the city of Locust Grove, Georgia to construct, fund, or contribute system improvements such that the amount of the credit created is in excess of the impact fee which would otherwise have been paid for the development project, the developer shall be reimbursed for such excess construction, funding, or contribution from impact fees paid by other development located in the service area which is benefited by such improvements. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 8 (part)) 
16.08.830 - Guidelines for credit valuation. 
Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
A.  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the administrator of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
B.  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
C.  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that the city of Locust Grove, Georgia would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
D.  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest accepted by the city, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
E.  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned on a state of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the mayor and council in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 8 (part)) 
16.08.840 - Credits—Application. 
A.  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the administrator. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the administrator at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
B.  The administrator, in his or her sole discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
C.  Any credit approved by the administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 8 (part)) 
16.08.850 - Credits—Abandoned building permits. 
In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the city, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 8 (part)) 
16.08.860 - Transfer of credits—Generally. 
(A)  Credit or a portion of credit assigned to a person or entity for paid development impact fees may be transferred or collateralized only upon strict compliance with the terms of this section and the terms of an applicable private agreement as defined in Article X of this chapter. To the extent the terms of such development agreement conflict with this section, the terms of this section shall control. Credit may be transferred within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city of Locust Grove. No transfer or collateralization of credit is permitted without first obtaining a certification in accordance with this section, and no transfer or collateralization is valid without filing an affidavit of transfer or collateralization in accordance with this section. 
(B)  The administrator shall maintain and update a record of all credits held, transferred and collateralized. 
(C)  Prior to the transfer or collateralization of credit, an application shall be filed with administrator, providing information requested pursuant to the forms used by that department. Such information shall include at a minimum the following: 
1.  The value of the credit to be transferred or collateralized based upon the value at the time the credit was approved by action of the mayor and city council, or at the time of payment of the impact fee, if no value was assigned by the mayor and city council. 
2.  The name, address, telephone number, electronic mail address and tax identification number of the current holder of the credit affected by the application and the person or entity to whom such credit will be transferred or for whom such credit will serve as collateral. (The applicant shall be the holder of the credit.) 
3.  A signed and sealed survey by a Georgia registered land surveyor and legal description of the property to which the credit applied at the time of application. 
4.  In the case of a transfer of credit to be used for a particular parcel, a signed and sealed survey by a Georgia registered land surveyor and legal description of the property to which the credits are intended to be applied. 
5.  An affirmation by the applicant that the credit stated in the application is not a duplication or misrepresentation of the value of credit actually held by the applicant to be transferred or collateralized. 
6.  Authorization by both the applicant and recipient/creditor that the city may record such information to reflect the transfer or collateralization in the Henry County property records. 
7.  The signatures of the applicant and recipient/creditor. 
8.  Payment of an administrative fee established pursuant to this section. 
9.  Any additional information requested by the administrator regarding the credits or the transaction involving said credits. 
(D)  The administrator shall review the application and the credit records to verify the value of credits to be affected by an application. After verification, the administrator shall certify in writing the value of credits held by the applicant and transmit or mail said certification to both the applicant and recipient/creditor. 
(E)  Within ten calendar days after the transfer or collateralization of the credit, the applicant shall file with the administrator an affidavit executed by the applicant specifying the value of credit actually transferred or collateralized, to whom and when the credit was transferred or collateralized, and any other information required by the administrator consistent with this code section. The transfer or collateralization shall not exceed the value certified by the administrator. 
(F)  To administer this section, the administrator may collect a minimum application fee of twenty-five dollars plus any amount in excess of said fee for recording notice of the transaction in the Henry County property records. 
(G)  Failure to strictly follow any of the procedures set forth in this section renders the transfer or collateralization of credits automatically null and void, without effect against the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-02-007, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Article IX. - Refunds 

16.08.910 - Eligibility for a refund. 
A.  Upon the request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
1.  Capacity is available in the public facility for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or 
2.  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
B.  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 9 (part)) 
16.08.920 - Notice of entitlement to a refund. 
When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in the city of Locust Grove within thirty days after the expiration of the six-year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." No refund shall be made for a period of thirty days from the date of such publication. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 9 (part)) 
16.08.930 - Filing a request for a refund. 
All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within the time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to such funds. Such funds together with the accrued interest thereon shall be transferred to the general revenue account of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 9 (part)) 
16.08.940 - Payment of refunds. 
A.  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within sixty days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than thirty days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
B.  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
C.  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 9 (part)) 
Article X. - Private Contractual Agreements 

16.08.1010 - Private agreements—Authorized. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the city and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project, provided that: 
A.  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the city of Locust Grove comprehensive plan; and 
B.  The amount of any credit granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 10 (part)) 
16.08.1020 - Private agreements—Provisions. 
A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
A.  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the city to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
C.  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this chapter, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do business within the state of Georgia, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 10 (part)) 
16.08.1030 - Private agreements—Procedure. 
A.  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the mayor and council. 
B.  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the mayor and council of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
C.  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 10 (part)) 
Article XI. - Periodic Review and Amendments 

16.08.1110 - Amendments. 
A.  This chapter may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. Any such amendment to this chapter, including an amendment to the development impact fee schedule at the end of this chapter as Attachment A, shall follow the procedures for adoption of an ordinance imposing a development impact fee as set out and required under the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq., as amended). 
B.  As part of its annual capital improvement program process or as part of any other planning process, the mayor and council may review the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, and may amend the capital improvements element, fee calculation methodology, or development impact fee schedule as deemed appropriate and necessary. 
C.  Interim amendments to the impact fee schedule regarding the establishment of new land use categories by the administrator under Section 16.08.510(C)(3) of this chapter are expressly authorized, and shall be confirmed by the mayor and council when this chapter is subsequently amended. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 11 (part)) 
16.08.1120 - Capital improvements element update. 
A.  Update. The mayor and council may update the capital improvements element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The capital improvements element update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The capital improvements element update shall be submitted to the Regional Development Center for their review, in accordance with the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the board of community affairs of the state of Georgia. 
B.  Amendment. In conducting a periodic review of the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, the mayor and council may determine to amend the capital improvements element. Amendments to the capital improvements element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the board of community affairs of the state of Georgia, and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: 
1.  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; 
2.  Add new public facility categories for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas or make changes to system improvement projects; 
3.  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area; or 
4.  Make any other revisions needed to keep the capital improvements element up to date. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 11 (part)) 
16.08.1130 - Continuation of validity. 
Failure of the mayor and council to undertake a periodic review shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to periodically review such data shall not invalidate this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 11 (part)) 
Article XII. - Administrative Appeals 

16.08.1210 - Eligibility to file an appeal. 
Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the city or who have already received a written determination of refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 12 (part)) 
16.08.1220 - Appeals process. 
A.  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor must file a written appeal with the administrator within fifteen days of the receipt of written determination of the amount of the development impact fee due, or entitlement to an amount of a refund or credit, such written appeal to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought. 
B.  Within fifteen days after receipt of the appeal, the administrator shall make a written decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. 
C.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the mayor and council within thirty days of the administrator's decision. The mayor and council shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time for a hearing on the appeal, give written notice thereof to the applicant or feepayor, and decide the issue within a reasonable time following the hearing. Any party making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 12 (part)) 
16.08.1230 - Payment of impact fee during appeal. 
A.  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. 
B.  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a development approval, and by making such payment shall not be estopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 12 (part)) 
Article XIII. - Enforcement and Penalties 

16.08.1310 - Enforcement authority. 
A.  The enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel as the administrator may designate from time to time. 
B.  The administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this chapter and shall have the right to issue cease and desist orders and citations for violations. Refusal of written notice of violation under this chapter shall constitute legal notice of service. 
C.  The administrator may suspend any building permit or withhold the issuance of other development approvals if the provisions of this chapter have been violated by the developer or the owner or their assigns. 
D.  For any violation, the administrator shall have the authority to issue a citation. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within thirty days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. If the required corrective action is not taken within the time allowed, the administrator may use any available civil or criminal remedies to secure compliance, including revoking a permit. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 13 (part)) 
16.08.1320 - Violations. 
A.  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this chapter shall constitute an actionable violation. 
B.  Proceeding with construction of a project that is not consistent with the project's impact fee assessment, such as the use category claimed or units of development indicated, shall constitute an actionable violation. 
C.  A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the mayor and council shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this chapter, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this chapter and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 13 (part)) 
Article XIV. - Repealer, Severability, and Effective Date 

16.08.1410 - Repeal of conflicting laws. 
Any and all ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict with this chapter are repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 14 (part)) 
16.08.1420 - Severability. 
If any sentence, clause, part, paragraph, section, or provision of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any other part of this chapter shall not be affected. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 14 (part)) 
16.08.1430 - Incorporation by reference of Georgia Law. 
It is the intent of the mayor and council that the development impact fee ordinance of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia comply with the terms and provisions of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq., as amended). Therefore, such Chapter 36-71 of the Official Code of Georgia is incorporated by reference into this chapter. To the extent that any provision of this chapter is inconsistent with the provisions of such Chapter 36-71, the latter shall control. Furthermore, to the extent that this chapter is silent as to any provision of such Chapter 36-71 that is otherwise deemed mandatory by law, such provision shall control and shall be binding upon the city. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 14 (part)) 
16.08.1440 - Effective date. 
A.  This chapter shall take effect upon its adoption. 
B.  Any building for which a valid and complete application for a building permit has been received prior to the effective date of this chapter may proceed without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this chapter, provided that: 
1.  All fees and development exactions in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be or have been paid in full; and 
2.  Such construction shall be commenced, pursued and completed within the time established by the building permit, or within one hundred eighty days, whichever is later. 
(Ord. 05-06-047 § 14 (part)) 
Attachment A  Fee Schedule—The City of Locust Grove, GA 

 
Other Uses:  Impact fees for other uses not included shall be determined in accordance with the methodologies contained in the capital improvements element of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia, or other methodologies as approved by the city. 
Title 17 - ZONING 
Chapters: 
Chapter 17.04 - ZONING CODE ADOPTED 
Sections: 
Article I - In General 

17.04.010 - Zoning code adopted. 
The zoning ordinance of Henry County, Georgia, adopted by the Henry County board of commissioners on July 3, 1986, as amended through June 20, 1995, which has been codified by Henry County in Chapter 3-7 of the Code of Henry County as reprinted in 1991 by Municipal Code Corporation of Tallahassee, Florida, except Sections 3-7-31, 3-7-53, 3-7-79, 3-7-105, 3-7-147, 3-7-149, 3-7-151, 3-7-152, 3-7-154, and 3-7-271 through 3-7-320 is incorporated by this reference and adopted by the city of Locust Grove and made the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 08-02-011 § 1) 
(Ord. No. 05-07-059, § 2, 7-5-05; Ord. 11-10-053, § 1, 10-3-11) 
17.04.020 - 3-7-31 Zoning map adopted; seal. 
(a)  The city is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(b)  The official zoning map shall be the GIS map and kept and maintained by the community development department. The department will keep an original copy from the date of approval of this chapter with the signature of the mayor stating: "This is to certify that by official action of the City Council, that this is a copy of the Official Zoning Map of the City of Locust Grove, Georgia, as adopted August 1, 2016. Subsequently, the official map shall be maintained and updated by the community development department as stated in the zoning ordinance of the city." 
(c)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in land use, zoning district boundaries, and/or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official copy kept in the community development department. 
(d)  No changes or alterations of any nature shall be made to the official zoning map except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(e)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map; the official zoning map as signed as adopted by the mayor and city council and subsequently updated by the community development department in accordance with this chapter, shall be the governing and final authority as to the current zoning status of the city. 
(f)  Errors or omissions to the official zoning map may be corrected only by presentation of an ordinance by the city (or, prior to annexation, by the Henry County Board of Commissioners) for the prior amendment, which shall cause the director to correct the map accordingly. 
(Ord. 99-1.11B § 3) 
(Ord. No. 12-10-078, § 1, 10-1-12; Ord. No. 16-08-045.1, § 1, 8-1-16) 
17.04.025 - Section 3-7-53—Road frontage adopted as amended. 
Section 3-7-53 of the Code of Henry County, Georgia, is adopted as amended, so that it shall read as follows: 
Frontage on public street, where required. In all residential districts, each lot or parcel of land on which a principal building is to be erected shall have the following minimum frontage on a public street: 
1.  For R-1, R-2, R-3, and RD residential districts, each lot shall have a minimum of the either (1) the required street frontage of the district or (2) a minimum of thirty feet where lots are located on cul-de-sacs or otherwise approved as part of a preliminary or final plat per Chapter 16.04. 
2.  For the RA residential district, lots or parcels shall have the minimum street frontage of the following: 
a.  For tracts or parcels of over two acres in size, the minimum frontage shall be either (1) the required minimum frontage of the district or (2) a minimum of at least thirty feet where lots are located on cul-de-sacs or otherwise approved where size, shape, orientation or natural features warrant as part of approval of a preliminary or final plat per Chapter 16.04. 
b.  For tracts or parcels of land less than two acres in size, the minimum frontage shall be either (1) the required minimum frontage of the district or (2) a minimum of sixty feet where lots are located on cul-de-sacs or otherwise approved where size, shape, orientation or natural features warrant as part of a preliminary or final plat per Chapter 16.04. 
3.  For RM, RMH, OI, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-l, M-2 and PD, each lot shall have the minimum of either (1) the required street frontage of the underlying zoning district; (2) a minimum of a fifty-foot fee simple strip as approved by the mayor and city council. In certain cases of lot size, shape, orientation, natural features and other particular instances the following frontage may be accepted by the mayor and city council in lieu of the above state frontage requirement, a permanent access easement of a minimum of thirty feet and maximum of fifty feet to a platted public street where such permanent access is recorded as part of the lot division or plat provided said easement lies along an accessible route to the lot or tract. 
4.  In all cases there shall be enough frontage for proper driveway construction as determined by the city engineer or their respective designee for actual installation of the driveway cut(s). Any permanent and/or temporary construction easements must be obtained and placed on file for any construction to begin. 
(Ord. No. 11-11-060, § 1, 11-7-11) 
17.04.030 - Wetland protection standards. 
A.  Findings of Fact. The wetlands within the city of Locust Grove, Georgia are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the state of Georgia. 
Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
It is, therefore, necessary for the city of Locust Grove, Georgia to ensure maximum protection for wetlands by discouraging development activities that may adversely affect wetlands. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. The objective of this section is to protect wetlands from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic nature and wildlife habitat. 
C.  Wetland Protection District. This section shall apply to all lands within wetlands located within the jurisdiction of the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. The U.S. Department of the Interior, National Wetland Inventory Maps (NWI Maps), adopted as part of this section, shows the general location of wetlands and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands. The NWI Maps, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The NWI Maps shall be on file in the office of the Henry County planning and development department. 
D.  Wetland Protection District Boundaries. The NWI Maps are general reference documents, and wetland boundaries indicated on the map are approximations. The purpose of the NWI Maps is to alert developers/landowners if they are within proximity to a wetland, which means that there is a high likelihood of the presence of a jurisdictional wetland and a need for the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers guidance as to whether a Section 404 permit will be required prior to any activity. The NWI Maps do not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city of Locust Grove and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this ordinance does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
E.  Buffer Requirements. A natural or enhanced vegetative buffer shall be maintained for a distance of twenty-five feet along the wetland as measured from the delineated boundary to provide an area of protection between the wetland and all permissible uses. 
F.  Relationship to Zoning. The wetland protection district is hereby established. The wetland protection district shall comprise an overlay zone that supplements and is indicated on the Official City of Locust Grove Zoning Map. 
G.  Issuance of Permits. No local permit should be issued on a project that appears to contain wetlands until a determination has been made by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers on whether jurisdictional wetlands exist on the site. If there are jurisdictional wetlands on the site that will be disturbed by the proposed development, the applicant must first obtain wetlands alteration Section 404 Permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
1.  To find out whether your proposed activity requires a Section 404 Permit, or to request a Jurisdictional Determination from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, mail inquiries to: 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers  Regulatory Branch  P.O. Box 889  Savannah, GA 31402-0889  1-800-448-2402 
H.  Permissible Uses (Uses as of Right). The following uses shall be allowed as of right within a wetland to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill draining or dredging except as provided herein: 
1.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit; 
2.  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing; 
3.  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act; 
4.  The continuation cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture; 
5.  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed; 
6.  Education, scientific research and nature trails; 
7.  Temporary Emergency Permit. A temporary emergency permit can be issued by the city or its designee for the following reasons: 
a.  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged and written notice prior to the commencement of work has been given to the city or its designee and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized; 
b.  Temporary water level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations; 
c.  Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided that the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provisions of subsection (H)(4) of this section; 
d.  Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses or other similar water-related structures, provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
8.  All other uses that comply with Army Corps of Engineers' Nationwide Permits 12, 14, 39, 42, or 43 with proper documentation being submitted to and approved by the city or its designee, including the Henry County building department's engineering staff. 
I.  Unacceptable Uses. 
1.  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
2.  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
3.  Other uses not approved by the city of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. 02-07.01A §§ 1 and 2; Ord. 01-07.06E § 1) 
17.04.040 - Watershed districts. 
A.  Findings and Purpose. 
1.  Findings of Fact. In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the city of Locust Grove, Georgia (hereinafter referred to as "city") and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted urban and suburban development. Land-disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxicants, nutrients, and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
2.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of the city; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply; and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This section shall apply to the portions of the following watersheds, which occur within the jurisdiction of the city and are hereinafter identified as water supply watersheds. 
B.  Definitions. Except as specifically described herein, all words in this section shall have their usual and customary meanings. The use of the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular; the present tense includes the future; the use of shall means the action is mandatory, the use of may or should means the action is optional. 
Authority. The use of the word "authority" shall mean the Henry County water and sewerage authority. 
"Best Management Practices Plan" (BMP plan) means a plan consisting of a wide range of management procedures, activities, and prohibitions or practices which control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with the planned land use. 
"Buffer" means a natural or enhanced vegetated area located adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
City. The use of the word "city" shall mean the city of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
"Confined Animal Feeding Operation" means a building or fenced enclosure designed and used for holding or fattening of animals in preparation for market. It does not include the pasturing of animals at densities recommended by the best management practices of the Georgia Department of Agriculture as follows: horses—one per forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet (one acre); cows—one per forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet; sheep or goats—one per twenty thousand square feet; fowl—twenty per forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet. 
"Corridor" means all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
County. The use of the word "county" shall mean the board of commissioners of Henry County. 
Department. The use of the word "department" shall mean the Henry County planning and zoning department and any subsequent name they become known as. 
"Development or Single Development" means any project or group of related projects constructed or planned for construction on a single parcel or on contiguous parcels under single ownership. 
Enforcer. The enforcer is defined as the city or its designee. 
"Hazardous material" means any substance defined as "hazardous waste" by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. as hereafter amended. 
"Hazardous waste" means any solid waste which has been defined as "hazardous waste" in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Federal Act which are in force and effect on February 1, 1991, codified as 40 C. F. R. Section 261.3 as hereafter amended and any designated hazardous waste. Also any substance defined as "hazardous waste" by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. as hereafter amended. 
"Impervious surface" means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples include, but are not limited to, buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools or patios. 
"Large quantity generator of hazardous waste" means any person, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity that is defined as a "large quantity generator" by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. as hereafter amended and that is regulated by the state of Georgia under that section. 
"Natural vegetated area" means an undeveloped area largely free from human disturbance where naturally occurring vegetation is allowed to remain undisturbed or is enhanced and maintained by human intervention. Activities specifically allowed in such an area include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish and other wildlife. 
2.  Outdoor recreational activities, including hunting, fishing, trapping, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, swimming, canoeing, skeet and trap shooting. 
3.  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
4.  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, structures and utilities used in the service of the public, provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that negative effects on the previous nature of the land shall be minimized. 
5.  Limited excavating, filling and land disturbance necessary for the repair and maintenance of structures necessary to the uses permissible in the area as above. 
"Net acreage" means the total acreage of any parcel or combined parcels of land to be developed as a single project, less the sum of the following: total number of acres contained in the one hundred-year flood hazard area, total number of acres contained in rights-of-ways, and the total number of acres contained in detention or retention ponds to be constructed. 
"Net density" means the total number of dwelling units divided by the net acreage within the boundaries of any parcel or combined parcels of land to be developed as a single project. 
"Nonconforming use" means a land use activity, building or structure legally established prior to adoption of this ordinance, or subsequent amendment to it, that would not otherwise be permissible under the provisions of this section. 
"Open space" means undisturbed lands or otherwise properties set aside for recreational uses, buffers, common areas, landscape areas, as well as other uses defined under the "open space categories" described below. Buffers and wetlands, if located on lots to be conveyed to private property owners, shall not be considered as "open space." Land contained within the one hundred-year flood zone shall not be considered as "open space" if located on lots that are to be conveyed to private property owners. Land designated as "open space" is divided into five categories (the "open space categories" or, singularly, an "open space category"): 
1.  Category A - wetland stream buffers; one hundred-year flood hazard areas, undisturbed buffers between various land uses, roadside buffers, wildlife sanctuaries, and other forms of buffers, if owned by the developer or a property owners association; 
2.  Category B - improved and revegetated areas utilized for active recreation, such as ball fields, parks and golf courses; 
3.  Category C - improved, active recreation areas, such as swimming pools, tennis courts and playgrounds; 
4.  Category D - state waters, including wetlands, ponds, lakes, if owned by a developer or a property owners association; and 
5.  Category E - land donated to a governmental entity for public use, provided such land is not located in a wetland or one hundred-year flood zone. 
In order to calculate the total "open space," the total acreage contained within each open space category is multiplied by its respective factor, as set forth below: 
Category A factor = 1.0  Category B factor = 0.7  Category C factor = 0.2  Category D factor = 0.5  Category E factor = 2.0 
"Overlay district" means a district that applies supplementary regulations to land previously classified as belonging to a specific zoning district or land-use category. 
"Perennial stream" means a stream which flows throughout the year, as indicated by a solid blue line on United States Geological Survey (USGS) seven-minute topographic series maps (scale of 1/24,000 ). 
"Reservoir boundary" means the edge of a reservoir, defined by its normal pool level (elevation above mean sea level). 
"Utility" means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads. 
Water Quality Critical Area. The water quality critical area is defined as follows: (a) All land that lies adjacent to the normal pool level of a reservoir and extending either to the ridge line boundary of the watershed or five hundred feet whichever is shorter; and (b) All land extending a distance of three miles upstream from the normal pool level of the reservoir that is adjacent to each perennial stream upstream from the reservoir and extending either to the ridge line boundary of the watershed on each side of the perennial stream or five hundred feet, whichever is shorter. 
"Water supply watershed" means the drainage area (watershed) of lands upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake or water supply reservoir or a proposed public drinking water intake or water supply reservoir. 
C.  Establishment of Watershed Districts, Descriptions, Maps, Critical Areas and Limited Development Areas. 
1.  Designation of Water Supply Watershed Districts. The following watershed district is hereby established and designated. 
a.  Towaliga River; 
b.  Indian Creek; 
c.  Tussahaw Creek. 
2.  Description of the Water Supply Watershed District. 
a.  Towaliga River. The Towaliga River Watershed District is defied as follows: All land that lies on each side of the Towaliga River and each perennial stream that flows into the Towaliga River to the ridge line from Steel Mills Dam located just north of Locust Grove-Griffin Road to the beginning points of the Towaliga River and each perennial stream that drains into the Towaliga River in said area. 
b.  Indian Creek. The Indian Creek Watershed District is defined as follows: All land that lies on each side of Indian Creek and each perennial stream that flows into Indian Creek to the ridge line from the S.H. Gardner Reservoir Dam located on Indian Creek just north of Indian Creek Road to the beginning points of Indian Creek and each perennial stream that drains into Indian Creek within said area. Indian Creek is a tributary to the Towaliga River and is contained within the Towaliga River Watershed District. 
c.  Tussahaw Creek. The Tussahaw Creek Watershed District is defined as follows: All land that lies on each side of Tussahaw Creek and each perennial stream that flows into Tussahaw Creek to the ridge line from the west right of way line of Finchersville Road located in Butts County, Georgia, to the beginning points of Tussahaw Creek and each perennial stream that drains into Tussahaw Creek in said area. The main perennial streams that flow into the Tussahaw Creek at the location of the proposed reservoir site are Peeksville Creek and its tributaries, Wolf Creek and its tributaries, Malholms Creek and its tributaries. All of said creeks are located in the Tussahaw Watershed District. 
3.  Watershed District Map. A map of the water supply watershed district will be maintained by the county and the authority. The county's district map will overlie the official city zoning map and each of said maps are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this section by reference. 
4.  Water Quality Critical Area. 
a.  Water quality critical area for the above-stated watershed districts is: (a) All land that lies adjacent to the normal pool level of a reservoir and extending either to the ridge line boundary of the watershed or five hundred feet whichever is shorter; and (b) All land extending a distance of three miles upstream from the normal pool level of the reservoir that is adjacent to each perennial stream upstream from the reservoir and extending either to the ridge line boundary of the watershed on each side of the perennial stream or five hundred feet, whichever is shorter. 
b.  The normal pool level elevation of the existing reservoirs of the authority are as follows: 
i.  Lower Towaliga River Reservoir contour line El. 658.0; 
ii.  Upper Towaliga River Reservoir contour line El. 720.0; 
iii.  Indian Creek Reservoir contour line El. 728.0; and 
iv.  Tussahaw Creek Reservoir contour line El. 600.0. 
Elevations are based on U.S. Geological Survey Datum. 
5.  Limited Development Area. A limited development area is established for the remaining part of the watershed district that is located outside of the water quality critical area to the ridge line of each watershed district. 
D.  Permit Required. 
1.  Permit Requirements. Within the water supply watershed district, no land-disturbing activity, construction or other development, other than certain exempted activities identified within, may be conducted without a permit from the county and must be in full compliance with the terms of this chapter, and other applicable regulations, including but not limited to, the City Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance and Stormwater Runoff Ordinance. All activities that are not permissible as of right or as conditional use shall be prohibited. 
2.  Exemptions. The following land-use activities are exempted from the development review and permit requirements of this section: 
a.  Agriculture and Forestry. Normal agricultural and forestry activities involving planting and harvesting of crops are exempted if they conform to best management practices established by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. Silvicultural activities must conform to best management practices by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
b.  Mining Activities. All mining activities that are permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the Georgia Surface Mining Act, as amended, are exempted. 
3.  Enforcement. The city and county, their agents, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this section and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the county deems necessary. Enforcement procedures shall be as provided in section 3-7-252 (Enforcement) of the Henry County Zoning Ordinance, under Article XIII (Administration and Enforcement). 
a.  The Henry County planning and zoning department is hereby designated as the administrator and enforcement authority of this section. 
b.  All applications for building permits shall be first submitted to the building department. When there is a need of interpretation and enforcement of specific sections of this section, the building department shall submit applications for review by the planning and zoning department when there is a need of interpretation and enforcement of specific sections of this section. 
c.  Agents and employees of the city and county and the authority and law enforcement officials of the county and other law enforcement officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the enforcer in enforcement of this section. 
d.  Any person who commits, takes part in, or assists in any violation of any provision of this section shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars for each offense. Each violation of this act shall be a separate offense, and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
e.  The enforcer shall have the authority to enforce this section; to authorize issuance of permits thereunder; to address violations and to refer violations to the code enforcement department of the county; to issue citations for violation of this section; to issue administrative orders; and to commence civil and criminal actions. 
f.  The enforcer or his designee shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this section. Cease and desist orders may be appealed under subsection K of this section. 
g.  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator shall be required to remove the structure. 
h.  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, in compliance with the City Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
i.  All costs, attorney's fees, expert witness fees and other expenses incurred by the city and county in connection with the enforcement of this section shall be recovered from the violator. 
E.  Permit Review. Applications for a development permit within the above-stated watershed districts shall include the following: 
1.  Existing Ordinances. Each application shall comply with all existing ordinances, amendments thereto and subsequent amendments. Said ordinances include but are not limited to the City Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, Flood Prevention Ordinance, and the Stormwater Runoff Ordinance. 
2.  Additional Requirements for Development of Property Located in the Watershed Districts. In addition to the requirements of each of the above referenced ordinances, site plans or construction improvements plans for development of property shall contain the following additional information: 
a.  The total square feet and acres of property to be developed; 
b.  Location, dimensions, and area (in square feet) of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site; 
c.  The distance of each impervious structure and surface to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream and reservoir; 
d.  The location of each perennial stream that crosses or abuts the site; 
e.  The location of each public reservoir that abuts the site; 
f.  The location, elevation and orientation of the one hundred-year floodplain on the site. 
g.  The site plan submitted shall contain a certification issued by a registered land surveyor or registered engineer verifying the location of the site as being located either within the water quality critical area, the limited development area or outside of both areas. 
h.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purposes of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
3.  Additional requirements for building permits. In addition to the requirements of each of the above referenced ordinances, the following information shall accompany each building permit requested: 
a.  The total square feet and acres of property to be developed. 
b.  Location, dimensions, and area (in square feet) of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
c.  The site plan shall contain a certification issued by a registered land surveyor, landscape architect, or registered engineer verifying the impervious surface calculations of the proposed development. 
d.  The distance of each impervious structure and surface to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream and reservoir. 
e.  The location of each perennial stream that crosses or abuts the site. 
f.  The location of each public reservoir that abuts the site. 
g.  The location and orientation of the one hundred-year floodplain on the site. 
h.  The site plan submitted shall contain a certification issued by a registered land surveyor or registered engineer verifying the location of the site as being located either within the water quality critical area, the limited development or outside of both areas. 
i.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
4.  Activities to Comply with Site Development Plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said approved plans. Significant changes to the site plan, that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction, or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the Henry County planning and zoning department. Any such amendments shall also comply with all other applicable ordinances and laws. 
5.  Exemptions from Site Development Plan Requirements. 
a.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
b.  Accessory structures such as barns, sheds, or additions to single-family dwellings. 
6.  Duration of Permit Validity. 
a.  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within twelve months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
b.  If construction described in the development permit is suspended after work has commenced, the permit shall expire twelve months after the date the work ceased. In cases of permit expiration due to abandonment or suspension of work, the landowner shall be required to restore topography to its original contours and restore vegetation as far as practicable. 
F.  Land Use Restrictions. The following limitations on permissible uses together with the limitations on land use prescribed under the ordinances of the city, the laws of the state of Georgia, the regulations of the regulatory agencies of the state of Georgia, laws of the United States of America and the regulations of the regulatory agencies of the United States of America shall apply. 
1.  Within the Water Quality Critical Area. The following limitations on permissible uses shall apply to the water quality critical area: 
a.  Agricultural Land Use. No confined animal feeding operations may be conducted within the water quality critical area. 
b.  Commercial Establishments. No commercial activity may be conducted within the water quality critical area. 
c.  Fuel and Chemical Storage Tanks. No above ground or underground fuel or chemical storage tanks shall be allowed in the water quality critical area. 
d.  Industries. No industrial activity may be conducted within the water quality critical area. 
e.  Landfills and Waste Disposal. No landfills or wastewater disposal facilities of any kind (except for septic tanks approved by the Henry County health department and wastewater disposal facilities owned and operated by the authority) shall be allowed within the water quality critical area. 
f.  Office. Offices are not permissible within the water quality critical area, except for a home occupation office. 
g.  Residential Land Use. Single-family residential lots are permissible if acreage requirements hereinafter set forth are met. Residential lots having no less than two acres when served by a septic tank system and no less than one and one-half acres when served by a public sewer system. The minimum lot width permissible for development with septic tank systems when using a public water system is one hundred fifty feet. 
h.  Toxic and Hazardous Materials. No facility that stores or disposes of underground fuel or chemical storage tanks shall be allowed in the water quality critical area. No industry or business that generates hazardous waste may be located within the water quality critical area. 
2.  Within the Limited Development Area. The following limitations on permissible uses shall apply to the limited development area. 
a.  Agriculture. There are no additional limitations on the type of agricultural land use permissible within the limited development area. 
b.  Commercial Establishments. Commercial establishments shall only be permissible on land parcels of no less than one and one-half acres if served by a septic tank system and no less than one acre if served by a public sewer system. 
c.  Fuel and Chemical Storage Tanks. Underground fuel and chemical storage tanks will be allowed if they meet all of the requirements set forth by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
d.  Industries. No industry that manufactures toxic or hazardous materials may be located in the limited development area. Only those industries that are not large quantity generators of hazardous waste may be located within the limited development area. Permitted industries must be located on land parcels of no less than ten acres if served by a septic tank system and no less than four acres if served by a public sewer system. Within the watershed protection district, industrial developments shall not exceed twenty-five acres in an area unless a variance is granted by the city after taking into consideration the size, shape, topography, geology and location of the land sought to be developed. 
e.  Landfills and Waste Disposal. No landfills shall be allowed within said area. Septic tanks approved by the County health department and sewage disposal facilities owned and operated by the public entity will be allowed in this area. 
f.  Office. Offices shall be permissible on land parcels of no less than one and one-half acres if served by a septic tank system and no less than one acre if served by a public sewer system, except for home occupation office. 
g.  Residential. Single-family residential lots are permissible if acreage requirements hereinafter set forth are met. Residential lots served by a septic tank system shall be a minimum of one acre. Residents lots served by public sewer system will have the density authorized under the zoning provision for which the property is zoned, however, the total impervious area of all residential developments shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the total development. All residential developments shall maintain at least twenty percent of the development as open space. 
h.  Toxic and Hazardous Materials. No facilities that dispose of toxic or hazardous waste may be located within the limited development area. No facility that manufactures, stores or disposes of toxic or hazardous waste may be located within the limited development area. 
3.  Property Abutting Perennial Streams and Perennial Streams Crossing Property Located in Limited Development Area. If a perennial stream abuts or crosses any property upon which an industrial facility, office facility, commercial facility, service facility or residential building is located, the following minimal lot sizes will be required: 
a.  If served by a septic tank system: 
i.  Industrial lots: Ten acres. 
ii.  Office lots: Two acres. 
iii.  Commercial establishments: Two acres. 
iv.  Residential: One and one-half acres. 
b.  If served by public sewer system: 
i.  Industrial lots: Two acres. 
ii.  Office lots: One and one-half acres. 
iii.  Commercial establishments: One and one-half acres. 
iv.  Residential: The density will be that as set forth in each of the zoned residential districts; provided, however, no lot abutting said stream shall have any more than twenty percent impervious structures located thereon. 
G.  Impervious Surface Limitations. 
1.  Percentage Allowed. The percentage of impervious area allowed in the water quality critical area and the limited development area are set forth below. The percentages set forth below shall be determined by the addition of all land areas to be covered by impervious structures during the development of the property (i.e., roads, streets, driveways, houses, buildings, parking areas). Compliance with the impervious area percentages set forth below shall be certified by a licensed surveyor, engineer, landscape architect, or any other professional authorized to render similar services under state law. 
a.  Water Quality Critical Area. No more than twenty percent of the total land area of any parcel on which a new development is placed may be covered by impervious surface within the water quality critical area. 
b.  Limited Development Area. No more than twenty-five percent of the total land area of any parcel on which a new development is placed may be covered by impervious surface within the limited development area. 
c.  The city reserves the right, on a case by case basis, to increase the twenty-five percent impervious surface limitation for industrial, commercial, office, institutional, and public developments provided the following structural stormwater controls are taken. However, the city shall not increase the impervious surface limitations to more than thirty-five percent. 
i.  Stormwater Management Plan Detailing the Stormwater Control Structures Proposed for the Development shall be Required. Said plan shall be in conformity with the requirements of the City Stormwater Management Ordinance as amended from time to time. The preferred structure control is wet detention pond which shall be located on site, or, as part of a regional pond where available. The design standards for detention ponds intended for watershed protection shall be found in the Henry County Construction Standards Manual, as amended from time to time. The construction of all stormwater controls designed for watershed protections shall be completed and have received final inspection approval from the Henry County building department prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for buildings or final plat approval if developed as an industrial, business, or office park. 
ii.  Channelization of perennial streams shall be prohibited, except for road crossings, erosion and sedimentation control, or stormwater management control devices. 
iii.  All permanent stormwater control structures and easements for maintenance and access shall be recorded in the final plat of the property in accordance with the City Subdivision Ordinance and Stormwater Management Ordinance. The developer shall submit a detailed, long-term schedule for inspection and maintenance of stormwater control structures. The schedule shall include a legal agreement for maintenance responsibility between the local government and property owner. No final plat approval or building occupancy permit shall be issued until a fully executed maintenance agreement has been executed and accepted by the city. Inspections can include, but are not limited to: 
(A)  Initial review of stormwater management plan which must occur prior to issuance of development permit or building permit. 
(B)  Inspection prior to burial of any underground drainage structure. 
(C)  Erosion and sedimentation control inspections, as required on the approved project soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, and, the City Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
(D)  A final inspection when all work, including installation of drainage facilities, has been completed. 
(E)  Inspection prior to final subdivision plat approval for acceptance of public improvements (streets, stormwater management and drainage facilities). 
(F)  Subsequent inspections, measurement, and enforcement actions as necessary to insure continued functioning of the facilities for stormwater management and watershed protection. 
iv.  A development may participate in a regional wet detention pond program which has been established by one or more public or private entities subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  Runoff from the development drains into a regional stormwater management control facility approved by the county. 
(B)  An agreement between the city and the landowner has been executed which guarantees participation in the regional stormwater arrangement of the property and the detention pond. 
(C)  Construction of a regional detention pond meets or exceeds the design requirements of the City Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
v.  A development may provide an alternative method for stormwater control other than a wet detention pond provided that it is in compliance with the City Stormwater Management Ordinance, and design criteria for pollutant removal equivalent to those associated with wet detention ponds included in the Henry County Construction Standards Manual, as amended. 
d.  Additional Requirements for Rezoning Request Applications. In addition to the requirements of each of the above-referenced ordinance, the following information shall accompany each rezoning application: 
i.  Location, dimensions, and area (in square feet) of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
ii.  The site plan submitted shall contain a certification issued by a registered land surveyor, landscape architect, or registered engineer verifying the impervious surface calculations of the proposed development. 
2.  Impervious Surface Setbacks. 
a.  Water Quality Critical Area. No impervious structure shall be constructed within two hundred feet of the normal pool level of the reservoir or of any perennial stream located in the water quality critical area. 
b.  Limited Development Area. No impervious surface shall be constructed within a one hundred fifty feet setback area on both sides of a perennial stream as measured from the stream banks in the limited development area. 
3.  Vegetative Setbacks/Buffers. 
a.  Stream Buffers within Water Quality Critical Area. A natural or enhanced vegetative buffer shall be maintained for a distance of one hundred fifty feet from the normal pool level of a reservoir and one hundred feet on both sides of a perennial stream as measured from the banks. 
b.  Stream Buffers within the Limited Development Area. A natural or enhanced vegetative buffer shall be maintained for a distance of one hundred feet on both sides of a perennial stream as measured from the stream's banks. 
c.  Silvicultural BMPs. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, forestry practices, in accordance with a forest management plan that incorporates best management practices (BMPs) approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission, shall be permissible in the buffer areas. However, no trees or vegetation shall be removed any closer than twenty-five feet on each side of any perennial stream. 
d.  Agricultural BMPs. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the continued cultivation of agricultural crops and the occasional pasturing of livestock shall be permissible within the buffer area, provided that the best management practices of the Georgia Department of Agriculture are followed. 
4.  Septic Tank Drainfield Restrictions. Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the setback areas established in subsections (G)(2) and (G)(3). 
5.  Hazardous Materials Handling. New facilities located within the water supply watershed district that handle hazardous materials of a type and amounts requiring a permit from the Department of Natural Resources or that require disposal by a hazardous materials handler permitted or licensed by the Department of Natural Resources at a hazardous materials facility, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems. Such spill and leak collections systems shall be shown on the site plan in detail and must be approved, as part of the site plan, by the enforcer. 
6.  Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control. All developments and land disturbing activity within the watershed districts shall comply fully with the City Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
H.  Nonconforming Uses. 
1.  Previous Uses Preserved Generally. The lawful use of any building, structure, or land use existing at the time of the enactment of this section may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this section except that the nonconforming structures of use shall not be: 
a.  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
b.  Reestablished after discontinuance for one year; 
c.  Extended except in conformity with this section; or 
d.  Structurally altered, except for repairs necessary for the continuation of the existing use. 
2.  Replacement of Nonconforming Uses. The replacement of nonconforming uses shall be in compliance with Article 7 of the City Zoning Ordinance as hereinafter amended. 
3.  Application to Projects Partially Complete. For any development which has received, before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, either preliminary plat approval, site plan approval, building permit or other relevant permits provided by the county and for which substantial work has been completed or substantial investment made in reliance upon such a permit, any future work included in said plat or plan may be completed without being subject to the additional regulations imposed in this section. Any significant additions, expansions, or phases that deviate significantly from said plat or plan or that have not yet received a permit shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
I.  Preexisting Conditions. All parcels of land within the watershed districts that do not conform to the space requirements or come within the permitted uses or the minimum standards hereinafter set out shall be governed by the City Zoning Ordinance as it relates to nonconforming use activities. No property owner within said district or area, nor successors in title, who is engaged in a use which is rendered nonconforming by this section, shall be required to limit, restrict, amortize, or discontinue such use within the boundaries of his property. Nothing in this section shall require any change in development or proposed use of properties which are presently under development or preliminary plat has been submitted and approved as of the effective date of this section. All parcels of tracts of land within said district or area shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the Henry County health department. 
J.  Variances. 
1.  When Issued. The city may authorize upon appeal in individual cases, such variances from the terms of this section as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this section will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this section shall be observed. Such variance may be granted in such individual cases of practical difficulty or hardship only upon a finding by the city that a majority of the following conditions apply: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The application of this section to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the water quality of the watershed district or impair the purposes and intent of this section; 
d.  The special circumstances surrounding the request for a variance are not the result of acts by the applicant; 
e.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings or structures which is not permissible in the district involved; and, 
f.  The variance will not result in an increase of the impervious surface of the development beyond that prescribed according to subsection G. 
2.  Conditions. The city may, as a condition of variances to certain provisions of this section, require alternative measures to be taken by the applicant such that the purpose of this chapter may be achieved through alternative means. 
3.  Stormwater Treatment. To the extent any project or development receives a variance under the requirements of this section, the preparation of a stormwater best management practices plan (BMP plan) and treatment of stormwater may be required. 
If it is determined by the city that the proposed variance or the development may result in the degradation of water quality, a stormwater best management practices (BMP's) plan will be required. The BMP plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer and shall be designed to provide water quality treatment for the first inch of water runoff from all proposed impervious areas disturbed by the proposed project. This plan must be approved by the city, and the Henry County water and sewerage authority prior to approval of the request for variance. The BMP plan shall be included in and made a part of the stormwater management report (SWMR) that is required under all other applicable ordinances of this city. 
Elements of the BMP plan may include but are not limited to: 
a.  Check Dams. Dams constructed across a drainage swale or ditch to minimize erosion by reducing stormwater velocity. 
b.  Energy Dissipation Devices. Paved or riprapped channel sections placed below storm drain outlets to reduce flow velocity. 
c.  Water Quality Inlets. Specially constructed stormwater inlets designed to remove sediment, debris, oils, and greases from stormwater. 
d.  Such other water treatment facilities that are deemed necessary to treat the runoff water before said water enters the streams of the drainage district. 
e.  Buffer Zones. Strips of undisturbed, original land or vegetation surrounding the land-disturbed site to reduce stormwater velocities and filter pollutants. 
f.  Grass Swales and Filter Strips. Vegetative drainage conveyances, used in lieu of storm drains, designed to reduce flow rates and provide filtering/infiltration of stormwater. 
g.  Dry Detention Ponds. Dry surface storage areas designed to collect and store stormwater runoff and to provide settling of pollutants. 
h.  Wet Detention Ponds. Wet storage ponds designed to collect and store stormwater runoff and to provide settling of pollutants. 
i.  Wetland Plantings. Areas designed to collect, store, and treat stormwater runoff using appropriate wetland vegetation. 
The SWMR and the BMP plan shall be submitted to the city and Henry County water and sewerage authority ("authority") for its review. The authority's report shall determine whether or not the SWMR and the BMP plan meet the requirements of this section. No development or building permit shall be issued until the SWMR and the BMP plan has been approved by the city. If, during the course of the development the city finds that the developer is in violation of the SWMR or the BMP plan, the city issue a stop work order. Upon the issuance of the stop work order, all development and construction on the project shall immediately cease until the developer is in full compliance with the terms of this section. 
K.  Appeals. Decisions made by the enforcer may be appealed to the city council. Notice of the appeal must be filed with the city within ten days of the decision rendered by the enforcer. The notice of appeal shall contain a written statement specifying the errors made by the enforcer and the specific relief requested by the party appealing. A public hearing will be conducted by the mayor and city council at either a regular or special called meeting of the mayor and city council. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the party appealing at least three days prior to the date of the hearing. 
L.  Amendments. These regulations and the watershed district map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes. 
M.  Assessment Relief. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
N.  Separability and Abrogation. All sections and subsections of the ordinance codified in this section are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this section be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph or part of this section. 
(Ord. 03-03.03D § 1) 
17.04.050 - R-3 medium/high-density single-family residential district. 
A.  Purpose. It shall be the purpose of this R-3 district dwellings of a medium- to high-density character on individual lots when served by adequate public water and public sewer facilities. Areas available for development in accordance with the standards of this district shall be designated for medium-high density development in the Henry County/Cities Joint Comprehensive Development Plan. Residential subdivisions in this district shall have access onto a major arterial street, a minor arterial street, or a collector street. 
1.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meaning prescribed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
"Amenities" shall mean the area(s) set aside for active and passive recreation for the residents inside the development (or for the general public) according to the standards set forth herein. Recreation areas may include passive areas, such as trails picnics, or parks with landscaping providing no facilities for active sports and active areas, with ball fields, soccer facilities, swimming areas, and other facilities for sports activities. 
"City" shall mean the city of Locust Grove or its designee. 
"Classification" shall mean the R-3 district referred to herein. 
"County" shall mean Henry County or its designee. 
"Facade" shall mean and exterior wall, or face, of a building. The front facade of a building contains the building's main entrance, the rear facade is the building's rear exterior wall, and the side facades are a building's side exterior walls. The term "facade" shall not apply to eves, soffits and gables unless otherwise noted herein. 
"Impervious cover" or "impervious surface" shall mean any roads, driveways, parking areas, buildings, swimming pools, concrete, pavement, rooftop landscapes and other impermeable construction covering the natural land surface which impedes the free passage of water, air, or nutrients through the soil to the natural watershed aquifer, or water zone located below the surface. Except as otherwise provided in this section, impervious cover is total horizontal area of covered spaces, paved areas, walkways and driveways in a proposed development. Impervious cover excludes ponds and areas with gravel placed over covered surfaces that are used only landscaping or by pedestrians. For an uncovered wood deck that has drainage spaces between the deck boards and that is located over a pervious surface, fifty percent of the horizontal area of the deck is included in the measurement of impervious cover. 
"Master development plan" shall mean a written and graphic submission for a development in this district which represents a tract of land; proposed subdivision; the location and bulk of structures; density of development; streets, sidewalks, and multiuse paths; parking facilities; common recreation areas, amenities, and open space; public facilities; impervious cover; and all conditions, covenants, and restrictions relating to use thereof. The master development plan is submitted in conjunction with a rezoning application for the R-3 district. 
"Maximum allowable net density" shall mean the total number of dwelling units or housing structures per net useable acre. The maximum allowable net density shall not exceed the density established by this section as applicable law. 
"Net useable acre" (n.u.a.) shall mean an acre of land which residential structures may be built but exclusive of streets, rights-of-way; one hundred-year floodplains or flood hazard areas; detention or retention ponds; land used solely for commercial, office, institutional, or industrial uses, and public lands. Easements for drainage, sanitary sewer, etc. shall not be excluded from a net usable acre. 
"Open space" shall mean land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common ownership and use by the residents of the developments and may include complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for recreation or other complementary activities. Acreage within the one hundred-year floodplain and wetlands under common ownership shall also be included in open space. 
"Owner" shall mean all parties applying for rezoning, including, but not limited to, the property owner and his agents or assigns. 
"Residential parking garage" shall mean an enclosed structure attached to or part of the principal dwelling used for housing at least two vehicles and has the following minimum dimensions: Vehicular entrance height, eight feet interior height, ten feet; vehicular entrance width, sixteen feet and overall garage width and depth, twenty feet. The floor shall be constructed of concrete. Concrete floors shall be reinforced, where appropriate and a minimum of four inches in thickness with appropriate fill and base. Where residential parking garages are constructed, such structures shall not be enclosed for living space, storage purposes or any other purpose without first obtaining a variance from the city and constructing an attached residential parking garage. 
"Streets" shall include land between the right-of-way lines; whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, curb and gutters, sidewalks, drainage ditches and structures and other areas within the street right-of-way lines. Streets shall be classified as follows: 
a.  Expressway. The expressway system includes high volume limited access thoroughfares through the city, the county, and region beyond. These include I-75 and S.R. 42. 
b.  Major arterial. An arterial street which is designed or intended for moderate to high levels of traffic flow for the city, the county, and region beyond and is designated on the future thoroughfare plan in the Henry County/Cities Joint Comprehensive Development Plan, and also includes the state and federal highway system for the city and county. 
c.  Minor arterial. An arterial street similar in function to a major arterial but which is intended to provide moderate levels of traffic flow and greater access to abutting properties. Minor arterials serve as traffic feeders to major arterials and for cross-country and regional travel. 
d.  Collector street. A street which carries traffic from local streets to minor and major arterial streets, and may include the principal entrance of a development. 
e.  Local street. A street designed to provide access to adjoining properties within a subdivision or other development. 
"Useable acre" shall mean an acre of land in development less any portion thereof located in the one hundred-year floodplain. 
"Water table" shall mean a masonry architectural feature that consists of a projecting course, applied at a consistent height that deflects water running down the face of a building away from lower courses or the foundation. The intent of water tables is to serve as an ornamental transition between facade materials. 
In addition, all other definitions set forth in chapter 17.04 and chapter 3-7 of the Henry County Code of Ordinances are incorporated by reference to the extent they are not inconsistent with terms. 
B.  Permitted Uses. 
1.  Those permitted uses common to all single-family residential districts. 
C.  Accessory Uses. 
1.  Those accessory uses common to all single-family residential districts. 
D.  Conditional Uses. Upon application to, and recommendation by the director of community development and a favorable decision thereon by the mayor and council, the following conditional uses are permitted in this district: 
1.  Those conditional uses common to all single-family residential districts. 
E.  Conditional Exceptions. Those conditional exceptions common to all single-family residential districts, with the exception of taxidermy, are permitted in this zoning district. 
F.  Development Standards. Except as otherwise provided for herein, the following standards shall apply in this zoning district. 
Any applicant who shows that compliance with any standard marked with an asterisk (*) would be impossible or would constitute an undue hardship may, upon due application, be granted an administrative variance by the director of community development. An administrative variance for a standard marked with an asterisk shall not vary more than ten percent from the applicable criteria. 
1.  Maximum Acreage Size: A development under an R-3 zoning classification shall not exceed fifty acres; 
2.  Minimum Lot Area: Twelve thousand square feet; 
3.  Minimum Lot Width(*): Eighty feet; 
4.  Minimum Front Yard(*): Forty feet; 
5.  Minimum Side Yard(*): Ten feet; 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard(*): Thirty feet; 
7.  Maximum Height: Forty feet; 
8.  Minimum Floor Area: One thousand seven hundred fifty heated square feet for single story dwelling units and two thousand two hundred heated square feet for multi-story dwelling units (for lots with a size equal to or smaller than twelve thousand square feet included in a city approved subdivision plat recorded in the Henry County real property records on or before August 1, 2016, front a paved street, and is served by installed stormwater, water and sewer utility infrastructure as of August 1, 2016, the minimum floor area shall be one thousand six hundred fifty heated square feet for dwelling units with an overall average of two thousand heated square feet within the development; unless, the minimum heated square footage requirement on the city approved subdivision plat is greater or the plat has expired); 
9.  Curb and Gutter: Required; 
10.  Paved Driveway: Required; 
11.  Sidewalk: Required, on both sides of all streets within any development developed under the standards of this district. Sidewalks must be made of concrete a minimum of four inches in depth and four feet in width and located at least two feet from the backside of the curb so as to provide a buffer between the street and sidewalk. A multiuse path, as described in subsection (15), may be substituted for a sidewalk; 
12.  Streetlights: Required (decorative post-top or similar, LED cutoff fixture); 
13.  Underground Utilities: Required; 
14.  Residential Parking Garages: Required; however, the maximum coverage of the front facade of any dwelling unit by the garage may be no greater than forty percent; Use of side-loading garages where possible is encouraged; 
15.  Multiuse Paths: 
a.  Multiuse paths are required in all developments developed under the standards of this district. Such paths shall be constructed to connect each residential lot with all the amenity areas of the development and those commercial, office, and industrial areas inside and outside the development as prescribed under subparagraph (15)(b). Multiuse paths may not be constructed in lieu of streets, nor may streets constitute any portion of multiuse paths except where such paths cross over the width of a street. Multiuse paths shall be a minimum of four inches in depth, ten feet in width with demarcations, either by different shaded surfaces or a solid or dashed line, to designate that at least four feet of the width of the path is solely for pedestrian use and the remaining portion of the width of the path may be used for bicycles and golf carts. Multiuse paths shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt, semi-pervious material as approved by the city or a combination thereof. If semi-pervious material is used, it shall not be a loose material (wood chips, gravel, sand, or dirt), and it shall have a life span comparable to or better than that of asphalt. 
b.  In addition, the landowner or developer shall extend the multiuse path along the main right-of-way line of a street leading from the development to the nearest commercial area (or future commercial center as depicted on the future land use map), if said development lies within one-quarter of a mile (0.25 mi.) of that commercial area. Upon application by the owner or developer, however, the city reserves the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify this requirement if: (i) the landowner or developer tenders to the city or its designee funds, equal to the amount which would be expended by the developer to design and construct the multiuse path extension required under this subsection; (ii) the city or its designee confirm that the funds deposited will be used for design and construction of a multiuse path benefiting the public at large, consistent with applicable law; (iii) the city or its designee votes to accept such funds and exercise the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify the multiuse path requirement in this subsection in a manner and a degree acceptable to the landowner or developer; (iv) the city or its designee places such funds in escrow to be used solely for the purposes outlined in this section; and (v) all documents necessary to satisfy this section executed, subject to approval by the city attorney as to form. In determining whether to reduce, eliminate, or modify the multiuse path requirement under this subsection, the city its designee shall consider whether doing so will promote public health, safety, and welfare by enabling the public at large to receive a higher quality multiuse path in a more cost-efficient manner; 
16.  Residential Facades, Concurrency Requirement, Roof Design: Residential facades. Within a development developed under these standards, structures shall be comprised of any combination of stone, brick, cement board on all exterior facades, with rear elevation of structures comprised of brick or stone to the gables or eaves where facade fronts along a public road. When a rear facade fronts along a public road where an earthen berm and/or masonry wall provides an effective screen, the architectural review board may reduce or waive the brick or stone requirement. Front elevations shall be at least fifty percent brick or stone, with remaining elements consisting of cement fiberboard siding (i.e., HardiePlank and equivalent brands). All side elevations shall consist of brick, stone or cement fiberboard siding with a minimum water table of brick or stone at height of thirty inches or greater. Use of stucco is strictly limited to exterior accents such as keystones, arches, and quoining unless otherwise approved by the architectural review board, where stucco is hard-coat only. Vinyl or aluminum siding shall not be permitted, other than for use in soffits and fascia board, except by variance. Roof design. Typical roof styles of gable and hip roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 7:12 or greater above areas containing heated space. Use of other roof styles (mansard, gambrel, etc.) shall require the review and approval of the architectural review board; 
17.  Landscape requirements: See the City of Locust Grove Landscaping Ordinance; 
18.  Recreation/Open Space: A minimum of fifteen percent, with at least ten percent of this requirement consisting the net useable acres, of any development developed under the standards of this district must be set aside as open space and/or useable recreational areas; 
19.  Sewerage System: Public sanitary sewer required; 
20.  Water System: City or Henry County Water Authority water system required. 
21.  Phased Development: Fifty percent of recreational facilities and amenities shall be constructed prior to issuance of certificates of occupancy for fifty percent of the houses. The remaining recreational facilities and amenities shall be completed prior to issuance of certificates of occupancy for eighty percent of the houses. A sworn certificate shall be submitted to the city or its designee prior to issuance of certificates of occupancy for eighty percent of the houses confirming compliance with this section and all requirements imposed by the Locust Grove Watershed District Ordinance. 
23.  Required Amenities: 
a.  Except as otherwise provided for herein, all developments under this section shall provide one or more of the following amenities: 
•  A clubhouse of one thousand three hundred minimum square feet. 
•  A minimum sized adult pool of twenty feet by forty feet. 
•  A wading pool for children, in addition to the adult sized pool, consisting of a minimum of two hundred square feet. 
•  Tennis courts - One lighted and enclosed facility featuring a minimum of two playing courts. 
•  Walking trails - At least two thousand feet, three feet in width. Multiuse paths can constitute walking trails so long as they are appropriately demarcated to designate that at least four feet of the width is solely for pedestrian use. 
•  A baseball field - (reg.) Regulation size. 
•  A baseball field - (LL) Little league size. 
•  A softball field - Regulation size (adult). 
•  A soccer field regulation size. 
•  A multiuse field - Football and soccer. 
•  A multiuse field - Football and baseball. 
•  A football field - Regulation size. 
•  A lake with access to trails. 
•  A regulation-sized basketball court with two backboards, hoops, and net structures. 
The amenities required shall depend on the number of dwelling units included in each development, as follows: 

 
For developments featuring more than two hundred dwelling units; one amenity shall be required for each additional fifty or fraction thereof. 
b.  City-Provided Amenities. Upon application by the owner or developer, however, the city reserves the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify this requirement if: 
(1)  The landowner or developer tenders to the city or its designee funds, equal to the amount which would be expended by the developer to design and construct the amenities required under this subsection; 
(2)  The city or its designee confirm that the funds deposited will be used for design and construction of amenities benefiting the public at large, consistent with applicable law; 
(3)  The city or its designee votes to accept such funds and exercise the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify the amenities requirement in this subsection in a manner and to a degree acceptable to the landowner or developer; 
(4)  The city or its designee places such funds in escrow to be used solely for the purposes outlined in this section; and 
(5)  All documents necessary to satisfy this section are executed, subject to approval by the city attorney as to form. 
In determining whether to reduce, eliminate, or modify the amenities requirement under this subsection, the city or its designee shall consider whether doing so will promote public health, safety, and welfare by enabling the public at large to receive higher quality amenities in a more cost-efficient manner than would be provided by the developer. Land that would have been necessary to construct the amenities shall be maintained as open space within the development. 
G.  Miscellaneous Provisions. 
1.  Maximum allowable net density shall not exceed three and one-quarter dwelling units per net usable acre (du/acre), with city or county water and public sanitary sewer systems, and this shall be reflected on the master development plan. 
2.  Impervious Cover Requirements. The master development plan shall demonstrate that the development will comply with all impervious cover requirements set forth in the city zoning ordinance, watershed district ordinances, wetland ordinance, soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance, and stormwater runoff ordinance, as applicable. Compliance with the impervious requirements shall be certified by a licensed surveyor, engineer, architect, landscape architect or any other professional authorized to render services under state law. 
3.  To the extent common areas, recreational facilities, and amenities are constructed by a landowner or developer pursuant to this ordinance, they shall ultimately be transferred to, owned by, and maintained by a mandatory property owner's association, as established in accordance with state law, and restrictive covenants and bylaws consistent with this requirement shall be recorded prior to receiving a building permit for any dwelling unit located in this classification. 
4.  In the event of a conflict between this ordinance and any other ordinance or development agreement provision, the terms of this ordinance shall control. 
5.  Failure to comply with any of the requirements set forth herein will entitle the city or its designee to suspend any and all permits issued concerning the development, including building permits, to issue a stop work order, and to take other measures designed to ensure compliance with this section, to the extent provided by law. 
(Ord. 03-03.03B §§ 1—7; Ord. 02-12.30A §§ 1—9; Ord. 02-11.25A §§ 1—9; Ord. 02-06.03G § 1) 
(Ord. No. 16-07-043, § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 16-11-051, §§ 1—7, 11-7-16) 
17.04.060 - Multi-family residence district. 
A.  Purpose. It is the intent of this district to provide for the development of multiple-family residences at moderate to high densities on lots where public water and sewer systems are provided. 
B.  Definitions. For purposes of this entire section, the following terms shall have the meaning prescribed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
"Active adult residential multifamily development" means multiple family housing units designed for adults fifty-five and older in accordance with the Fair Housing Act that do not include or provide any type of supportive services such as medical care, food preparation or other services normally a course of business for an assisted living facility and/or a personal care home. 
"Amenities" means the area(s) set aside for active and passive recreation for the residents inside the development according to the standards set forth herein. Recreation areas may include passive areas, such as trails, picnic areas, or parks with landscaping providing no facilities for active sports; and active areas, with ball fields, soccer facilities, swimming areas, and other facilities for sports activities. 
"Carport" means a covered structure used for housing at least two vehicles and has the following minimum dimensions: vehicular entrance height, eight feet; interior height, eight feet; vehicular entrance width, sixteen feet; and overall carport width and depth, twenty-four feet. The floor shall be constructed of concrete. Concrete floors shall be reinforced, where appropriate, and a minimum of four inches in thickness with appropriate fill and base. Where carports are constructed, such structures shall not be enclosed for living space, storage purposes or any other purpose without first obtaining a variance from the city and constructing an attached residential parking garage. 
"Central park" means a park for active or passive recreational use consisting of buildable land. The total area of a central park shall be equal to one acre. A central park must be located in the approximate center of the development relative to the residential buildings located therein. 
"City" means the city of Locust Grove or its designee. 
"Classification" means the RM1, RM2 or RM3 district referred to herein. 
"Commercial area outside the development" means an area not associated within or part of the development in which at least three of any of the following operating commercial establishments are located: retail, office, industrial, or manufacturing industrial. 
"County" means Henry County or its designee. 
"Development plan" means a written and graphic submission for a development which represents a tract of land, proposed development, the location and bulk of buildings and other structures, the calculation of all impervious surfaces, density of development, public and private streets, parking facilities, common open space, sidewalks and multiuse paths, and all amenities. 
"Dwelling unit" means one room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for tenant occupancy, for rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent living, sleeping, toilet and single cooking facilities. 
"Facade" means all exterior faces of a building except eaves and corners. 
"Fair Housing Act" means Section 800 [42 USC 3601] through Section 901 [42 USC 3631] of United States Code, more particularly Section 807 [42 USC 3607] pertaining to "housing for older persons", as may be amended. 
"Impervious cover" or impervious surface means any roads, driveways, parking areas, buildings, swimming pools, concrete, pavement, rooftop landscapes and other impermeable construction covering the natural land surface which impedes or blocks the free passage of water, air, or nutrients through the soil to the natural watershed, aquifer, or water zone located below the surface. Surface materials which have been tested and marketed as providing some level of perviousness (e.g. such as pavers) and have a life span comparable to or better than that of asphalt may be used and its rated perviousness may be factored into the calculation of impervious cover after review and approval of the rating by the city or its designee. Except as otherwise provided in this section, impervious cover is the total horizontal area of covered spaces, paved areas, walkways, and driveways in a proposed development. Impervious cover excludes ponds and areas with gravel placed over pervious surfaces that are used only for landscaping or by pedestrians. For an uncovered wood deck that has drainage spaces between the deck boards and that is located over a pervious surface, fifty percent of the horizontal area of the deck is included in the measurement of impervious cover. 
"Maximum allowable net density" means the total number of dwelling units or housing structures per unit of land based on the net useable acres. The maximum allowable net density shall not exceed the density established by this section and applicable law. 
"Multiple family dwellings" means apartment buildings and other multiple family dwellings other than fee simple town homes and fee simple condominiums. 
"Net useable acres" (nua) means the total acreage of a proposed development under this classification, less any streets, rights-of-way, and public lands. 
"One-hundred year flood plain" means any land susceptible to being flooded or inundated by water during a storm or other weather event with accumulated precipitation of a measured amount which occurs, on average, once every one hundred years. This definition shall include, without limitation, any land identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as being within a delineated zone of special flood hazard. 
"Open space" means land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common ownership and use by the residents of the developments and may include complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for recreation or other complementary activities. Acreage within the one hundred year flood plain and wetlands under common ownership shall also be included in open space. 
"Owner" means all parties applying for rezoning, including but not limited to the property owner and his agents or assigns. 
"Parking space, off-street" means any off-street parking space consisting of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room. 
"Pocket park" means a park for active or passive recreational uses consisting of buildable land. The total area of the pocket park shall be one acre. This area requirement for pocket parks may be divided in half where the development will provide two or more pocket parks. Where required, pocket parks shall be located in those parts of the development which are the greatest walking distance from the highest amenities based upon the area occupied by that amenity. 
"Private alleyway" means an alley located in the rear of apartments, townhouses or condominiums in RM-1, RM-2 or RM-3 districts, respectively, that provides residents with vehicular access. Private alleyways shall be maintained pursuant to the rules, regulations and policies of the city at the expense of the adjoining property owners, homeowners' associations, or condominium associations. The developer or landowner shall grant the appropriate easement so that the public may use the private alleyway. Private alleyways shall be constructed to meet the following requirements: private alleyways shall be a minimum of eighteen feet in width and sixteen feet thereof shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. Concrete alleyways shall be reinforced and have a minimum depth of six inches with appropriate base. Asphalt alleyways shall consist of a minimum of two inches of type "E" or "F" asphalt topping, binder, and six inches of graded aggregate base. Private alleyways, at a minimum, shall be constructed so as to provide adequate turning radii onto public streets, driveways, residential parking garages and carports for full-size, non-commercial, two-axle vehicles. Curbs and gutters should be provided, but are not required. Private alleyways shall not have dead-ends. 
"Residential parking garage" means an enclosed structure attached to or part of the principal dwelling used for housing at least two vehicles and has the following minimum dimensions: vehicular entrance height, eight feet; interior height, ten feet; vehicular entrance width, sixteen feet; and overall garage width and depth, twenty-four feet. The overall garage width and depth of a residential parking garage for a townhome unit can be twenty feet. The floor shall be constructed of concrete. Concrete floors shall be reinforced, where appropriate, and a minimum of four inches in thickness with appropriate fill and base. Where residential parking garages are constructed, such structures shall not be enclosed for living space, storage purposes or any other purpose without first obtaining a variance from the city and constructing an attached residential parking garage to the main residential structure. The residential parking garage shall be kept clear so that a minimum of one vehicle may be parked in the garage at all times. 
C.  Multi-family residential districts are divided into three categories: apartments (RM1), fee-simple town homes (RM2), and condominiums (RM3). 
D.  Multi-Family Residential District-Apartments - RM1. 
1.  Permitted Uses: 
a.  Multiple-family dwellings, excluding fee-simple townhouses and fee-simple condominiums; 
b.  Local, state and federal governmental buildings; 
c.  Publicly owned and operated parks and recreation areas; 
d.  Temporary buildings and storage of materials in conjunction with construction of a building on a lot or adjacent lots where residential construction is taking place. 
2.  Accessory Uses. None. 
3.  Conditional Uses: 
a.  Mixed-use buildings consisting of commercial buildings with apartments constructed above; 
b.  This conditional use is permitted only in the old-town district which is designated as those properties which currently and in the future front on Highway 42 within the city limits and have a minimum road frontage of thirty-five feet. 
4.  Conditional Exceptions. There are no conditional exceptions. 
5.  Development Standards. The following development standards shall apply except to the extent permitted under subsection (D)(9) of this section: 

 
q.  Multiuse Paths. Multiuse paths are required in all developments developed under the standards of this district. Such paths shall be constructed to connect residential lots with all the amenity areas of the development below. 
i.  To ensure the greatest practicable connectivity, multiuse paths shall be located in accordance with either or a combination of both of the following plans: (1) multiuse paths constructed along the perimeter of the development shall be accessible to residents within the interior of the development via sidewalks, streets, or alleys and/or (2) multiuse paths constructed in the interior of the development shall run along at least one side of each street in the development so as to be accessible to residents living along those streets. The final placement of the multiuse paths under either or a combination of the above plans shall be approved during the review and approval process for the final plat or each final plat if the development is developed in phases. 
ii.  The land owner or developer shall extend the multiuse path from the development to the nearest commercial area outside the development or to the nearest existing multiuse path that provides such connectivity. Upon application by the owner or developer, however, the city reserves the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify this requirement if: (1) the landowner or developer tenders to the city or its designee funds, equal to the amount which would be expended by the developer to design and construct the multiuse path extension required under this subsection; (2) the city or its designee confirm that the funds deposited will be used for design and construction of a multiuse path benefitting the public at large, consistent with applicable law; (3) the city or its designee votes to accept such funds and exercise the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify the multiuse path requirement in this subsection in a manner and to a degree acceptable to the landowner or developer; (4) the city or its designee places such funds in escrow to be used solely for the purposes outlined in this section; and (5) all documents necessary to satisfy this section are executed, subject to approval by the city attorney as to form. In determining whether to reduce, eliminate, or modify the multiuse path requirement under this subsection, the city or its designee shall consider whether doing so will promote public health, safety, and welfare by enabling the public at large to receive a higher quality multiuse path in a more cost-efficient manner than would be provided by the developer. 
iii.  Multiuse paths may not be constructed in lieu of streets or alleyways, nor may streets or alleyways constitute any portion of multiuse paths except where such paths cross over the width of a street or alleyway. An alleyway may constitute a multiuse path where it is at least twenty-two feet in width with demarcations, either by different shaded surfaces or a solid or dashed line, to designate that at least four feet of the width of the path is solely for pedestrian use, and it connects to all areas of the development. At least twenty feet of such an alleyway shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. 
iv.  The developer or land owner shall grant the appropriate easement so that the public may use the multiuse paths or dedicate the multiuse path to the city for public use. 
v.  Multiuse paths shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt, some pervious material approved by the city or a combination thereof. If pervious material is used, it shall not be a loose material (e.g., wood chips, gravel, sand, or dirt) and it shall have a life span comparable to or better than that of asphalt. Multiuse paths shall be a minimum of four inches in depth, ten feet in width with demarcations, either by different shaded surfaces or a solid or dashed line, to designate that at least four feet of the width of the path is for pedestrian use while the remaining portion of the width of the path may be used for bicycles and motorized carts. 
r.  Central Garbage Facility. Required; development shall provide centralized garbage facilities for garbage and refuse collection. Individual residential garbage pickup per unit shall not be permitted. 
s.  School Children Waiting Area. A covered structure to have school-aged children waiting for transportation to school is required at the main entrance in all developments developed under the standards of this district. 
i.  The structure must be the built of sufficient size to have all children of school-age residing within the development. 
ii.  The main entrance to all developments must also provide a turnaround area with a minimum turning radius of forty feet to allow any Henry County school bus to turn around in one continuous movement. 
6.  Amenities. 
a.  Required Amenities. Except as otherwise provided for herein, all developments under this section shall feature a clubhouse consisting of a minimum of one thousand three hundred square feet, a junior-size olympic pool, and a children's play area. If subject to the requirements in subsection (D)(9) of this section, additional amenities shall be required. The developer of the property shall satisfy this requirement prior to the completion of fifty percent of the development. When additional amenities are required, the developer of the property shall select from the following list the additional required amenities, or such other amenities of equal or greater value as the city council may approve: 
i.  A wading pool for children, in addition to the adult sized pool, consisting of a minimum of two hundred square feet. 
ii.  Tennis courts - one lighted and enclosed facility featuring a minimum of two playing courts. 
iii.  Walking trails - at least two thousand feet, three feet in width; Multiuse paths can constitute walking trails so long as they are appropriately demarcated to designate that at least four feet of the width is solely for pedestrian use. 
iv.  A central park or pocket park; unless approved by city council, only one of either type of park may be counted towards satisfaction of the amenity requirement. 
v.  A baseball field - (reg.) regulation size. 
vi.  A baseball field - (LL) little league size. 
vii.  A softball field - regulation size (adult). 
viii.  A soccer field - regulation size. 
ix.  A multiuse field - football and soccer. 
x.  A multiuse field - football and baseball. 
xi.  A football field - regulation size. 
xii.  A lake with fishing dock and boat access. 
xiii.  A regulation-size basketball court with two backboards, hoops, net structures, and enclosed with wire fencing eight feet in height. 
b.  City Provided Amenities. Upon application by the owner or developer, however, the city reserves the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify this requirement if: (1) the landowner or developer tenders to the city or its designee funds, equal to the amount which would be expended by the developer to design and construct the amenities required under this subsection; (2) the city or its designee confirm that the funds deposited will be used for design and construction of amenities benefitting the public at large, consistent with applicable law; (3) the city or its designee votes to accept such funds and exercise the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify the amenities requirement in this subsection in a manner and to a degree acceptable to the landowner or developer; (4) the city or its designee places such funds in escrow to be used solely for the purposes outlined in this section; and (5) all documents necessary to satisfy this section are executed, subject to approval by the city attorney as to form. In determining whether to reduce, eliminate, or modify the amenities requirement under this subsection, the city or its designee shall consider whether doing so will promote public health, safety, and welfare by enabling the public at large to receive higher quality amenities in a more cost-efficient manner than would be provided by the developer. Land that would have been necessary to construct the amenities shall be maintained as open space within the development. 
c.  Multi-District Development. Where a development developed under these standards includes any combination of RM-1, RM-2, or RM-3 districts, the amenity package required can be consolidated. The city shall determine the required amenity package at the time of zoning. 
d.  Alternative Amenities for an Active Adult Residential Multifamily Development. A multifamily development constructed for occupancy for those adults fifty-five years and older in accordance with the Fair Housing Act shall provide amenities in areas centrally located to all residential units where feasible and will be required to design such feature for those residents age fifty-five and older. Amenities shall be approved by the mayor and city council during site plan approval and shall incorporate at a minimum the following three amenities: 
i.  Clubhouse and/or community room with a minimum of one thousand two hundred square feet of heated space and exterior covered porch is strongly encouraged and should be centrally located to the main building(s). Activities such as arts and crafts are strongly encouraged for use in such facility. 
ii.  Pocket park of no more than a quarter-acre in size where activities such as lawn bowling or croquet may occur in addition to passive seating areas. A covered pavilion with picnic/barbeque facilities is strongly encouraged to provide cover from the elements while in the park. 
iii.  Walking trail or pathway - at least one thousand three hundred twenty lineal feet, four feet in width. 
iv.  Elevator for access to upper floors that are three stories in height or greater or where topography does not permit ground-level entry. 
To achieve a density greater than four units per net acre, the following additional amenities may be used in lieu of those noted in (6)(a) subject to approval by city council: 
v.  A junior Olympic-sized swimming pool 
vi.  Resistance swimming area of a minimum of two hundred square feet. 
vii.  Tennis courts - one lighted and fenced facility featuring a minimum of two playing courts. 
viii.  Fenced community garden area not to exceed one-quarter of an acre. 
ix.  Furnished and equipped library with computer center that incorporates broadband Internet service. May be added to the clubhouse/community room with an additional two hundred fifty square feet of space. 
x.  Shuffleboard court of regulation size. 
xi.  Movie theatre featuring a minimum of a forty-six-inch (diagonal) screen television or projection system, a minimum of ten seats, and sound/media player featuring DVD, BluRay, or new Internet-delivered technologies such as On Demand, NetFlix, etc. 
xii.  Furnished and equipped wellness/fitness center. 
xiii.  Beauty parlor with a minimum of two chairs. 
xiv.  Fishing pond of at least a quarter acre in size, with walking trails and dock and benches along trail. 
xv.  Golf putting green of regulation size. 
xvi.  Upper story interior gathering areas in elevator lobbies or central corridors of a minimum of two hundred fifty square feet of space that are furnished. 
xvii.  Other - any other amenity similar in nature and size to those listed above that is approved by the city council at the time of zoning or site plan review. 
7.  Residential Facades. Within a development developed under the standards of this district, building facades shall consist of no less than fifty percent brick. The remaining facades shall consist, in any ratio the developer chooses, of stucco, stone, hardiplank or other masonry siding approved by the council, wood, or any combination thereof. Vinyl or aluminum siding shall not be permitted, except by variance. 
8.  Maximum Density. Except as otherwise provided for in subsection (D)(9) of this section, the maximum permissible density for a multiple-family development shall be four apartment dwelling units per acre. 
9.  Increased Density Provisions. 
a.  Apartment developers may request an increase in density up to eight apartment dwelling units per usable acre. 
b.  If an applicant seeks increased density under this subsection, the following rules shall apply: 
i.  Applicant must establish, with multiple surveys and calculations certified by a registered engineer, that increasing the maximum height of the structures to be constructed in a manner not to exceed four stories will permit the increased number of dwelling units to occupy land equal to or less than the amount of land which would be otherwise occupied by the number of multi-family units that could ordinarily be constructed on the property under the provisions of this section. 
ii.  Applicant shall construct the required amenities under subsection (D)(6) of this section. 
iii.  Applicant shall construct the additional amenities based upon the number of apartment units included in each development, as follows: 

 
One additional amenity for each fifty units, or part thereof, above fifty. 
iv.  None of the facilities referred to in this section may be used jointly for purpose of complying with the foregoing requirements. 
v.  All areas that are not transferred as provided under the definition of net useable acres, used for the construction of amenity packages, parking and other non-residential components required under the ordinance, or used for the apportioned dwelling units themselves, shall be left in their natural state and shall remain part of the title to the zoned property and shall not be conveyed as a separate tract of land. 
vi.  A notice shall be filed of record in the office of the clerk of the Henry County Superior Court sufficient to give notice of these restrictions to subsequent owners of the property. 
vii.  Building Facades. Building facades shall consist of no less than seventy percent brick or rock. The remaining facade shall consist of hardiplank, stucco or other masonry siding approved by the council. 
viii.  Applicant shall provide, for units without a residential parking garage, two off-street parking spaces for each one-bedroom apartment and three off-street parking spaces per apartment with two or three bedrooms and one additional off-street parking space per apartment with over three bedrooms. Where residential parking garages are provided, driveways shall not count as off-street parking spaces in satisfaction of this provision. 
ix.  Applicant shall maintain a thirty foot planted buffer along the proposed development where it abuts adjoining properties and public roadways. Where vegetation is limited in density, the developer shall plant trees consistent with existing vegetation and the approved buffer plan. 
10.  Maximum Acreage. The maximum permissible acreage for a multiple-family development shall be thirty acres, unless the development is part of a planned development district as defined by ordinance of the city. 
11.  Miscellaneous Provisions. 
a.  Any portion of a multiple-family site that is located in the one hundred year flood plain area or consists of a wetland will not normally be included in the density calculation. However, the city reserves the right to issue a variance on the method of calculation of maximum permissible density as it applies to areas designated as flood plain or wetland on a case by case basis, consistent with this section. Fifty percent of the acreage within the one hundred year flood zone, or wetlands may be included in the computation of the nua if such acreage has been deeded, in accordance with the procedures under this definition, in fee simple to the city, some other public entity, or a non-profit organization, any of which will maintain such land in its natural, undeveloped state in perpetuity. The deeding process of land in the one hundred year flood zone or wetlands shall be as follows: (1) such land must be offered first to the city, (2) if the city declines to accept the deed to such land, then it may be offered to some other public entity; (3) if no other public entity accepts the deed to such land, then it may be offered to a nonprofit organization after such organization has been approved by the city to accept the deed to such land. Easements for drainage, sanitary sewer, buffers, etc. shall not be excluded from the calculation of net usable acres. 
b.  Impervious Cover Requirements. The development plan shall demonstrate that the development will comply with all impervious cover requirements set forth in the City Zoning Ordinance, Watershed Ordinances, Wetland Ordinance, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, Stormwater Ordinance, and Groundwater Recharge Ordinance, as applicable. Under no circumstances, however, shall impervious cover exceed twenty-five percent of the land area of any parcel on which a new development is placed that is located in a watershed protection district. The impervious requirement shall be certified by a licensed surveyor, engineer, landscape architect, or any other professional authorized to render similar services under state law. 
c.  If the property is developed as a gated community, the gate must be maintained and monitored by the owners of the property at their expense. 
d.  Final plans of the development showing lot dimensions, buffers, landscaping, amenities and all calculations required by this section shall be reviewed and approved by the city or its designee prior to building permits being issued. 
e.  All yards referenced in this code section shall be sodded yards. 
f.  In the event of a conflict between this section and any other code provision, the terms of this section shall control. 
E.  Multiple Family Residence District - Townhouses - RM2. 
1.  Purpose. It is the intent of this district to provide for the development of fee simple townhouses at moderate to high densities on lots where public water and sewer systems are provided. 
2.  Definitions. These definitions will apply to this subsection E only. 
"Lot" means that parcel of land used to develop more than one townhouse unit as part of a common development, rather than each individual parcel of real property owned in fee simple by the individual town house owner. 
"Townhouse" means fee simple townhome and the land upon which it is located, which is a type of dwelling unit normally having two, but sometimes three stories; connected to another townhome by a common wall that entirely adjoins the dwelling units, and commonly sharing ownership in the surrounding grounds. 
3.  Permitted uses: 
a.  Fee-simple townhouses; 
b.  Local, state and federal governmental buildings; 
c.  Publicly owned and operated parks and recreation areas; 
d.  Temporary buildings and storage of materials in conjunction with construction of a building on a lot or adjacent lots where residential construction is taking place. 
4.  Accessory Uses: None. 
5.  Conditional Uses. Upon application to and recommendation by the planning commission, and favorable decision thereon by the city council, the following conditional uses are permitted in this district. There may be an exception to the definition townhome granted where, for instance, the contour, shape, size, location, geology and topography of the land does not allow the adjoining common walls to be connected in their entirety. If any such exception is granted, the units shall be one hundred percent brick or stone on all exterior facades. There are no other conditional uses. 
6.  Conditional Exceptions. There are no conditional exceptions. 
7.  Development Standards. The following development standards shall apply except to the extent permitted under subsection (E)(11) of this section: 

 
r.  Multiuse Paths. Multiuse paths are required in all developments developed under the standards of this district. Such paths shall be constructed to connect residential lots with all the amenity areas of the development below: 
i.  To ensure the greatest practicable connectivity, multiuse paths shall be located in accordance with either or a combination of both of the following plans: (1) multiuse paths constructed along the perimeter of the development shall be accessible to residents within the interior of the development via sidewalks, streets, or alleys and/or (2) multiuse paths constructed in the interior of the development shall run along at least one side of each street in the development so as to be accessible to residents living along those streets. The final placement of the multiuse paths under either or a combination of the above plans shall be approved during the review and approval process for the final plat or each final plat if the development is developed in phases. 
ii.  The land owner or developer shall extend the multiuse path from the development to the nearest commercial area outside the development or to the nearest existing multiuse path that provides such connectivity. Upon application by the owner or developer, however, the city reserves the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify this requirement if: (1) the landowner or developer tenders to the city or its designee funds, equal to the amount which would be expended by the developer to design and construct the multiuse path extension required under this subsection; (2) the city or its designee confirm that the funds deposited will be used for design and construction of a multiuse path benefitting the public at large, consistent with applicable law; (3) the city or its designee votes to accept such funds and exercise the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify the multiuse path requirement in this subsection in a manner and to a degree acceptable to the landowner or developer; (4) the city or its designee places such funds in escrow to be used solely for the purposes outlined in this section; and (5) all documents necessary to satisfy this section are executed, subject to approval by the city attorney as to form. In determining whether to reduce, eliminate, or modify the multiuse path requirement under this subsection, the city or its designee shall consider whether doing so will promote public health, safety, and welfare by enabling the public at large to receive a higher quality multiuse path in a more cost-efficient manner than would be provided by the developer. 
iii.  Multiuse paths may not be constructed in lieu of streets or alleyways, nor may streets or alleyways constitute any portion of multiuse paths except where such paths cross over the width of a street or alleyway. An alleyway may constitute a multiuse path where it is at least twenty-two feet in width with demarcations, either by different shaded surfaces or a solid or dashed line, to designate that at least four feet of the width of the path is solely for pedestrian use, and it connects to all areas of the development. At least twenty feet of such an alleyway shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. 
iv.  The developer or land owner shall grant the appropriate easement so that the public may use the multiuse paths or dedicate the multiuse path to the city for public use. 
v.  Multiuse paths shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt, some pervious material approved by the city or a combination thereof. If pervious material is used, it shall not be a loose material (e.g., wood chips, gravel, sand, or dirt) and it shall have a life span comparable to or better than that of asphalt. Multiuse paths shall be a minimum of four inches in depth, ten feet in width with demarcations, either by different shaded surfaces or a solid or dashed line, to designate that at least four feet of the width of the path is for pedestrian use while the remaining portion of the width of the path may be used for bicycles and motorized carts. 
s.  Central Garbage Facility. Required; development shall provide centralized garbage facilities for garbage and refuse collection. Individual residential garbage pick up per unit shall not be permitted. 
t.  School Children Waiting Area. A covered structure to have school-aged children waiting for transportation to school is required at the main entrance in all developments developed under the standards of this district: 
i.  The structure must be the built of sufficient size to have all children of school-age residing within the development. 
ii.  The main entrance to all developments must also provide turnaround area with a minimum turning radius of forty feet to allow any Henry County school bus to turn around in one continuous movement. 
8.  Required Amenities. 
a.  Except as otherwise provided for herein, all developments under this section shall feature a clubhouse consisting of a minimum of one thousand three hundred square feet, a junior-size olympic pool, and a children's play area. If subject to the requirements in subsection (E)(11) of this section, additional amenities shall be required. The developer of the property shall satisfy this requirement prior to the completion of fifty percent of the development. When additional amenities are required, the developer of the property shall select from the following list the additional required amenities or such other amenities of equal or greater value as the city council may approve: 
i.  A wading pool for children, in addition to the adult sized pool, consisting of a minimum of two hundred square feet. 
ii.  Tennis Courts - one lighted and enclosed facility featuring a minimum of two playing courts. 
iii.  Walking Trails - at least two thousand feet, three feet in width; Multiuse paths can constitute walking trails so long as they are appropriately demarcated to designate that at least four feet of the width of the path is solely for pedestrian use. 
iv.  A central park or pocket park; unless approved by city council, only one of either type of park may be counted towards satisfaction of the amenity requirement. 
v.  A baseball field - (reg.) regulation size. 
vi.  A baseball field - (LL) little league size. 
vii.  A softball field - regulation size (adult). 
viii.  A soccer field - regulation size. 
ix.  A multiuse field - football and soccer. 
x.  A multiuse field - football and baseball. 
xi.  A football field - regulation size. 
xii.  A lake with fishing dock and boat access. 
xiii.  A regulation-size basketball court with two backboards, hoops, net structures, and enclosed with wire fencing eight feet in height. 
b.  City Provided. Upon application by the owner or developer, however, the city reserves the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify this requirement if: (1) the landowner or developer tenders to the city or its designee funds, equal to the amount which would be expended by the developer to design and construct the amenities required under this subsection; (2) the city or its designee confirm that the funds deposited will be used for design and construction of amenities benefitting the public at large, consistent with applicable law; (3) the city or its designee votes to accept such funds and exercise the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify the amenities requirement in this subsection in a manner and to a degree acceptable to the landowner or developer; (4) the city or its designee places such funds in escrow to be used solely for the purposes outlined in this section; and (5) all documents necessary to satisfy this section are executed, subject to approval by the city attorney as to form. In determining whether to reduce, eliminate, or modify the amenities requirement under this subsection, the city or its designee shall consider whether doing so will promote public health, safety, and welfare by enabling the public at large to receive higher quality amenities in a more cost-efficient manner than would be provided by the developer. Land that would have been necessary to construct the amenities shall be maintained as open space within the development. 
c.  Multi District Development. Where a development developed under these standards includes any combination of RM1, RM2, or RM3 districts, the amenity package required can be consolidated. The city shall determine the required amenity package at the time of zoning. 
9.  Residential Facades. Within any development developed under the standards of this district, a minimum of twenty percent of the townhome units shall be brick on all exterior facades and twenty percent of the townhome units shall be stucco, stone, brick or any combination thereof on all exterior facades. In addition, thirty percent of the townhome units shall have a front facade consisting entirely of stucco, stone, brick or any combination thereof. The remaining thirty percent of the townhome units shall consist, in any ratio the developer chooses, of stone, brick, stucco, hardiplank or other masonry siding, wood or any combination thereof. Of the twenty percent of the townhome units required to be brick on all exterior facades, no less than fifty percent must be units on the end of a building. The remaining facade shall consist of hardiplank, stucco, or other masonry siding approved by the city council. Vinyl or aluminum siding shall not be permitted, except by variance. 
10.  Maximum Density. Except as otherwise provided for in subsection (E)(11) of this section, the maximum permissible density for a multiple-family development shall be five townhouse dwelling units per acre. Impervious area for any development shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the land developed. 
11.  Increased Density Provisions. 
a.  Townhouse developers may request an increase in density up to eight townhouse dwelling units per usable acre. 
b.  If an applicant seeks increased density under this subsection, the following rules shall apply: 
i.  Applicant must construct the required amenities under subsection (E)(8) of this section. 
ii.  Applicant must construct the additional amenities based upon the number of townhouses included in each development, as follows: 

 
One additional amenity for each fifty units, or part thereof, above fifty. 
iii.  None of the facilities referred to in this section may be used jointly for purpose of complying with the foregoing requirements. 
iv.  All areas that are not transferred as provided under the definition of net useable acres, used for the construction of amenity packages, parking and other non-residential components required under the ordinance codified in this section, or used for the townhomes themselves, shall be left in their natural state and shall remain part of the title to the zoned property and shall not be conveyed as a separate tract of land. 
v.  A notice shall be filed of record in the office of the clerk of the Henry County Superior Court sufficient to give notice of these restrictions to subsequent owners of the property. 
vi.  No less than thirty-five percent of all townhome units shall be brick on all exterior facades and thirty-five percent of the townhome units shall be stucco, stone, brick or any combination thereof on all exterior facades. Of those thirty-five percent townhome units required to be brick on all exterior facades, no less than fifty percent must be units on the end of a building. The remaining thirty percent of the townhome units shall consist, in any ratio the developer chooses, of stone, brick, stucco, hardiplank or any other masonry siding, wood or any combination thereof. The remaining facade shall consist of hardiplank, stucco or other masonry siding approved by the city council. 
vii.  Applicant shall maintain a thirty foot planted buffer along the proposed development where it abuts adjoining properties and public roadways. Where vegetation is limited in density the developer shall plant trees consistent with existing vegetation and the approved buffer plan. 
12.  Maximum Acreage. The maximum permissible acreage for a multiple-family development shall be twenty acres, unless the development is part of a planned development district as defined by ordinance of the city. 
13.  Miscellaneous Provisions. 
a.  Any portion of a multiple-family site that is located in the one hundred year flood plain area or consists of a wetland will not normally be included in the density calculation. However, the city reserves the right to issue a variance on the method of calculation of maximum permissible density as it applies to areas designated as flood plain or wetland on a case by case basis, consistent with this section. Fifty percent of the acreage within the one hundred year flood zone, or wetlands may be included in the computation of the nua if such acreage has been deeded, in accordance with the procedures under this definition, in fee simple to the city, some other public entity, or a non-profit organization, any of which will maintain such land in its natural, undeveloped state in perpetuity. The deeding process of land in the one hundred year flood zone or wetlands shall be as follows: (1) such land must be offered first to the city, (2) if the city declines to accept the deed to such land, then it may be offered to some other public entity; (3) if no other public entity accepts the deed to such land, then it may be offered to a nonprofit organization after such organization has been approved by the city to accept the deed to such land. Easements for drainage, sanitary sewer, buffers, etc. shall not be excluded from the calculation of net usable acres. 
b.  Impervious Cover Requirements. The development plan shall demonstrate that the development will comply with all impervious cover requirements set forth in the City Zoning Ordinance, Watershed Ordinances, Wetland Ordinance, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, Stormwater Ordinance, and Groundwater Recharge Ordinance, as applicable. Under no circumstances, however, shall impervious cover exceed twenty five percent of the land area of any parcel on which a new development is placed that is located in a Watershed Protection District. The impervious requirement shall be certified by a licensed surveyor, engineer, landscape architect, or any other professional authorized to render similar services under state law. 
c.  If the property is developed as a gated community, the gate must be maintained and monitored by the owners of the property at their expense. 
d.  Final plans of the development showing lot dimensions, buffers, landscaping, amenities and all calculations required by this section shall be reviewed and approved by the city or its designee prior to building permits being issued. 
e.  All yards referenced in this code section shall be sodded yards. 
f.  In the event of a conflict between this section and any other code provision, the terms of this section shall control. 
F.  Multiple Family Residence District - Condominiums - RM3. 
1.  Purpose. It is the intent of this district to provide for the development of fee simple condominiums at moderate to high densities on lots where public water and sewer systems are provided. 
2.  Definitions. These definitions will apply to this subsection F only. 
"Lot" means that parcel of land used to develop more than one condominium unit as part of a common development. 
"Condominium" means a system of separate ownership of individual units connected to another condominium by a common wall that adjoins the dwelling units in a multiple unit building whereby ownership of individual units is in fee simple, together with an undivided (or shared) ownership interest in certain common property referred to as common elements. 
3.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Fee-simple condominiums. 
b.  Local, state and federal governmental buildings. 
c.  Publicly owned and operated parks and recreation areas. 
d.  Temporary buildings and storage of materials in conjunction with construction of a building on a lot or adjacent lots where residential construction is taking place. 
4.  Accessory Uses. None. 
5.  Conditional Uses. 
a.  Mixed-use buildings consisting of commercial buildings with apartments constructed above. 
b.  This conditional use exception is permitted only in the old-town district which is designated as those properties which currently and in the future front on Highway 42 within the city limits and have a minimum road frontage of thirty-five feet. 
6.  Conditional exceptions: There are no conditional exceptions. 
7.  Development Standards. The following development standards shall apply except to the extent permitted under subsection (F)(9) of this section: 

 
q.  Multiuse Paths. Multiuse paths are required in all developments developed under the standards of this district. Such paths shall be constructed to connect residential lots with all the amenity areas of the development below: 
i.  To ensure the greatest practicable connectivity, multiuse paths shall be located in accordance with either or a combination of both of the following plans: (1) multiuse paths constructed along the perimeter of the development shall be accessible to residents within the interior of the development via sidewalks, streets, or alleys and/or (2) multiuse paths constructed in the interior of the development shall run along at least one side of each street in the development so as to be accessible to residents living along those streets. The final placement of the multiuse paths under either or a combination of the above plans shall be approved during the review and approval process for the final plat or each final plat if the development is developed in phases. 
ii.  The land owner or developer shall extend the multiuse path from the development to the nearest commercial area outside the development or to the nearest existing multiuse path that provides such connectivity. Upon application by the owner or developer, however, the city reserves the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify this requirement if: (1) the landowner or developer tenders to the city or its designee funds, equal to the amount which would be expended by the developer to design and construct the multiuse path extension required under this subsection; (2) the city or its designee confirm that the funds deposited will be used for design and construction of a multiuse path benefitting the public at large, consistent with applicable law; (3) the city or its designee votes to accept such funds and exercise the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify the multiuse path requirement in this subsection in a manner and to a degree acceptable to the landowner or developer; (4) the city or its designee places such funds in escrow to be used solely for the purposes outlined in this section; and (5) all documents necessary to satisfy this section are executed, subject to approval by the city attorney as to form. In determining whether to reduce, eliminate, or modify the multiuse path requirement under this subsection, the city or its designee shall consider whether doing so will promote public health, safety, and welfare by enabling the public at large to receive a higher quality multiuse path in a more cost-efficient manner than would be provided by the developer. 
iii.  Multiuse paths may not be constructed in lieu of streets or alleyways, nor may streets or alleyways constitute any portion of multiuse paths except where such paths cross over the width of a street or alleyway. An alleyway may constitute a multiuse path where it is at least twenty-two feet in width with demarcations, either by different shaded surfaces or a solid or dashed line, to designate that at least four feet of the width of the path is solely for pedestrian use, and it connects to all areas of the development. At least twenty feet of such an alleyway shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. 
iv.  The developer or land owner shall grant the appropriate easement so that the public may use the multiuse paths or dedicate the multiuse path to the city for public use. 
v.  Multiuse paths shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt, some pervious material approved by the city or a combination thereof. If pervious material is used, it shall not be a loose material (e.g., wood chips, gravel, sand, or dirt) and it shall have a life span comparable to or better than that of asphalt. Multiuse paths shall be a minimum of four inches in depth, ten feet in width with demarcations, either by different shaded surfaces or a solid or dashed line, to designate that at least four feet of the width of the path is for pedestrian use while the remaining portion of the width of the path may be used for bicycles and motorized carts. 
r.  Central Garbage Facility. Required; development shall provide centralized garbage facilities for garbage and refuse collection. Individual residential garbage pickup per unit shall not be permitted. 
s.  School Children Waiting Area. A covered structure to have school-aged children waiting for transportation to school is required at the main entrance in all developments developed under the standards of this district: 
i.  The structure must be the built of sufficient size to have all children of school-age residing within the development. 
ii.  The main entrance to all developments must also provide a turnaround area with a minimum turning radius of forty feet to allow any Henry County school bus to turn around in one continuous movement. 
8.  Amenities. 
a.  Required Amenities. Except as otherwise provided for herein, all developments under this section shall feature a clubhouse consisting of a minimum of one thousand three hundred square feet, a junior-size olympic pool, and a children's play area. If subject to the requirements in subsection (F)(11) of this section, additional amenities shall be required. The developer of the property shall satisfy this requirement prior to the completion of fifty percent of the development. When additional amenities are required, the developer of the property shall select from the following list the additional required amenities, or such other amenities of equal or greater value as the city council may approve: 
i.  A wading pool for children, in addition to the adult sized pool, consisting of a minimum of two hundred square feet. 
ii.  Tennis courts - one lighted and enclosed facility featuring a minimum of two playing courts. 
iii.  Walking trails - at least two thousand feet, three feet in width; Multiuse paths can constitute walking trails so long as they are appropriately demarcated to designate that at least four feet of the width of the path is solely for pedestrian use. 
iv.  A central park or pocket park; unless approved by city council, only one of either type of park may be counted towards satisfaction of the amenity requirement. 
v.  A baseball field - (reg.) regulation size. 
vi.  A baseball field - (LL) little league size. 
vii.  A softball field - regulation size (adult). 
viii.  A soccer field - regulation size. 
ix.  A multiuse field - football and soccer. 
x.  A multiuse field - football and baseball. 
xi.  A football field - regulation size. 
xii.  A lake with fishing dock and boat access. 
xiii.  A regulation-size basketball court with two backboards, hoops, net structures, and enclosed with wire fencing eight feet in height. 
b.  City Provided. Upon application by the owner or developer, however, the city reserves the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify this requirement if: (1) the landowner or developer tenders to the city or its designee funds, equal to the amount which would be expended by the developer to design and construct the amenities required under this subsection; (2) the city or its designee confirm that the funds deposited will be used for design and construction of amenities benefitting the public at large, consistent with applicable law; (3) the city or its designee votes to accept such funds and exercise the right to reduce, eliminate, or modify the amenities requirement in this subsection in a manner and to a degree acceptable to the landowner or developer; (4) the city or its designee places such funds in escrow to be used solely for the purposes outlined in this section; and (5) all documents necessary to satisfy this section are executed, subject to approval by the city attorney as to form. In determining whether to reduce, eliminate, or modify the amenities requirement under this subsection, the city or its designee shall consider whether doing so will promote public health, safety, and welfare by enabling the public at large to receive higher quality amenities in a more cost-efficient manner than would be provided by the developer. Land that would have been necessary to construct the amenities shall be maintained as open space within the development. 
c.  Multi District Development. Where a development developed under these standards includes any combination of RM1, RM2, or RM3 districts, the amenity package required can be consolidated. The city shall determine the required amenity package at the time of zoning. 
9.  Residential Facades. Within any development developed under the standards of this district, building facades shall consist of no less than fifty percent brick. The remaining facades shall consist, in any ratio the developer chooses, of stucco, stone, hardiplank or other masonry siding approved by the council, wood, or and combination thereof. Vinyl or aluminum siding shall not be permitted, except by variance. 
10.  Maximum Density. Except as otherwise provided for in subsection (F)(11) of this section, the maximum permissible density for a multiple-family development shall be six condominium dwelling units per acre. Impervious area for any development shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the land developed. 
11.  Increased Density Provisions. 
a.  Condominium developers may request an increase in density up to eight condominiums dwelling units per usable acre. 
b.  If an applicant seeks increased density under this subsection, the following rules shall apply: 
i.  Applicant shall construct the required amenities under subsection (F)(8) of this section. 
ii.  Applicant shall construct the additional amenities based upon the number of condominium units included in each development, as follows: 

 
One additional amenity for each fifty units, or part thereof, above fifty. 
iii.  None of the facilities referred to in this section may be used jointly for purpose of complying with the foregoing requirements. 
iv.  All areas that are not transferred as provided under the definition of net useable acres, and used for the construction of amenity packages, parking and other non-residential components required under the ordinance, or used for the condominium units themselves, shall be left in their natural state and shall remain part of the title to the zoned property and shall not be conveyed as a separate tract of land. 
v.  A notice shall be filed of record in the office of the clerk of the Henry County Superior Court sufficient to give notice of these restrictions to subsequent owners of the property. 
vi.  Building facades shall consist of no less than seventy-five percent brick or rock. The remaining facade shall consist of hardiplank, stucco or other masonry siding approved by the city council. 
vii.  Applicant shall maintain a thirty foot planted buffer along the proposed development where it abuts adjoining properties and public roadways. Where vegetation is limited in density, the developer shall plant trees consistent with existing vegetation and the approved buffer plan. 
12.  Maximum Acreage. The maximum permissible acreage for a multiple-family development shall be ten acres, unless the development is part of a planned development district as defined by ordinance of the city. 
13.  Miscellaneous Provisions. 
a.  Any portion of a multiple-family site that is located in the one hundred-year floodplain area or consists of a wetland will not normally be included in the density calculation. However, the city reserves the right to issue a variance on the method of calculation of maximum permissible density as it applies to areas designated as floodplain or wetlands on a case by case basis, consistent with this section. Fifty percent of the acreage within the one hundred-year flood zone, or wetlands may be included in the computation of the nua if such acreage has been deeded, in accordance with the procedures under this definition, in fee simple to the city, some other public entity, or a nonprofit organization, any of which will maintain such land in its natural, undeveloped state in perpetuity. The deeding process of land in the one hundred-year flood zone or wetlands shall be as follows: 
(1)  Such land must be offered first to the city; 
(2)  If the city declines to accept the deed to such land, then it may be offered to some other public entity; 
(3)  If no other public entity accepts the deed to such land, then it may be offered to a nonprofit organization after such organization has been approved by the city to accept the deed to such land. Easements for drainage, sanitary sewer, buffers, etc., shall not be excluded from the calculation of net usable acres. 
b.  Impervious Cover Requirements. The development plan shall demonstrate that the development will comply with all impervious cover requirements set forth in the City Zoning Ordinance, Watershed Ordinances, Wetland Ordinance, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, Stormwater Ordinance, and Groundwater Recharge Ordinance, as applicable. Under no circumstances, however, shall impervious cover exceed twenty-five percent of the land area of any parcel on which a new development is placed that is located in a watershed protection district. The impervious requirement shall be certified by a licensed surveyor, engineer, landscape architect, or any other professional authorized to render similar services under state law. 
c.  If the property is developed as a gated community, the gate must be maintained and monitored by the owners of the property at their expense. 
d.  Final plans of the development showing lot dimensions, buffers, landscaping, amenities and all calculations required by this section shall be reviewed and approved by the city or its designee prior to building permits being issued. 
e.  All yards referenced in this code section shall be sodded yards. 
f.  In the event of a conflict between this section and any other ordinance or code provision, the terms of this section shall control. 
(Ord. 03-03.03C § 2) 
(Ord. No. 10-02-006, §§ I—IV, 2-1-10) 
17.04.070 - Section 3-7-150—RMH: manufactured home development. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this district to create a classification and to provide for the development of manufactured home developments and subdivisions of medium density on lots where public water and sewer systems are provided. 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of this entire section, the following terms shall have the meaning prescribed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
"City" means the City of Locust Grove or its designee. 
"Classification" means the RMH: manufactured home development district referred to herein. 
"Industrialized building" means any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the Industrialized Buildings Act, Georgia Law 1981 pp 1637—1643 (O.C.G.A., § 8-2-2(1)). 
"Manufactured home - Class A" means a manufactured home constructed after July 1, 1976, that is transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. and that satisfies the additional development standards listed herein. 
"Manufactured home - Class B" means all other manufactured homes, constructed after July 1, 1976, that do not meet the requirements of a manufactured home - Class A as defined herein. 
"Manufactured home subdivision" means a parcel of land that is used, designated, maintained or held out for sale of lots to accommodate Class A manufactured homes. A manufactured home subdivision shall meet the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
"Mobile home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
"Mobile home park" means a parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for living or sleeping purposes, or where spaces or lots are set aside and offered for rent for use by mobile homes for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building or structure or facility used by occupants of mobiles homes on such premises. 
"Modular building" means a factory-built commercial structures installed for temporary use, not upon a permanent foundation. 
"Modular home" means homes that are built in sections in a factory and then transported to a building site on truck beds, then joined together by local contractors. Modular homes are built to conform to all state, local or regional building codes at their destinations. 
"Single-family dwelling" means a structure, or a portion of a structure, designed, arranged and used for occupancy by one or more persons living as a singling housekeeping unit or family. 
"Stick built (also site built) home" means a home that is constructed on the building site, piece by piece and must comply with all applicable building and trade codes within the jurisdiction. Manufactured and modular homes are not classified as stick-built because they are made mostly in the factory and then transported to the site. 
C.  Permitted Uses. 
1.  Class A manufactured homes on individual lots for use as a single-family dwelling. 
2.  Class A manufactured home subdivisions. 
3.  Modular homes. 
4.  Stick built homes. 
5.  Local, state and federal governmental buildings. 
6.  Industrialized buildings. 
7.  Home occupations when conducted wholly with the principal structure. 
D.  Accessory Uses. Those accessory uses common to all single-family residential districts. 
E.  Conditional Uses. 
1.  Mobile home park. 
2.  Modular buildings. 
3.  Class B manufactured homes. 
F.  Conditional Exceptions. None. 
G.  Development Standards. Manufactured home subdivision: 
1.  Minimum lot area: Eighteen thousand square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width: One hundred twenty-five feet. 
3.  Minimum front yard: Sixty feet from right-of-way line. 
4.  Minimum rear yard: Forty feet. 
5.  Minimum side yard: Ten feet. 
6.  Maximum height: Thirty-five feet. 
7.  Minimum floor area (heated): One thousand two hundred square feet. 
8.  Minimum roof pitch: 4:12, with the exception of attached patio covers. 
9.  Curb and gutter: Yes. 
10.  Paved driveway: Yes. 
11.  Sanitary sewer system: Public sewer system required. 
12.  Water system: Public water system required. 
H.  Development Standards. Mobile home park: 
1.  Minimum site area: Twenty-five acres. 
2.  Minimum site width: Two hundred feet of frontage on a street having a minimum road classification of arterial 
3.  Minimum lot area: Fourteen thousand five hundred twenty square feet. 
4.  Minimum lot width at pad location: Sixty feet. 
5.  Minimum front yard: Forty feet. 
6.  Minimum side yard: Ten feet. 
7.  Minimum rear yard: Twenty feet. 
8.  Maximum height: Thirty-five feet. 
9.  Minimum floor area (heated): Seven hundred forty square feet. 
10.  Curb and gutter: Yes. 
11.  Paved driveway: Yes. 
12.  Sanitary sewer system: Public sewer system required. 
13.  Water system: Public water system required. 
I.  Miscellaneous Provisions. 
1.  Prior to permit issuance, the city shall conduct a compatibility review, in accordance with [Henry County Code §] 3-7-39, shall be conducted to verify that a proposed manufactured home meets or exceeds standards set by existing development in the area with regards to size, exterior materials, and general aesthetic appearance. 
2.  All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed from the structure. 
3.  The home shall be oriented with its longer side parallel to the adjacent street, to the maximum extent practical. 
4.  The city council recognizes the existence of lots zoned RMH (mobile home development district) under the 1986 Zoning Ordinance, as amended, in the subdivision known as Skyland Mobile Home Park. Any lots platted in this subdivision prior to the adoption of this new manufactured home development district ordinance shall be recognized as legal nonconforming and entitled to all permitted rights and privileges until such time the legal nonconforming lot is altered or modified; however, requirements pertaining to the structure shall be in compliance with the terms set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 15-07-027, § 1, 8-3-15) 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 15-07-027, adopted Aug. 3, 2015, amended § 17.04.070 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 17.04.070 pertained to conservation residential subdivisions and derived from Ord. 04-06-036; and Ord. No. 14-10-049, adopted Nov. 17, 2014. 
Cross reference— Zoning code adopted, § 17.04.010. 
17.04.080 - Fencing. 
Section 3-7-79 as adopted by Henry County is repealed by the city and replaced with this section. 
A.  Applicability. This section shall apply only to any development which requires final plat approval, even if the final plat has not been approved as of the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this section. 
B.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meaning prescribed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
"City" means the City of Locust Grove, Georgia. 
"Fence" means any structure, including walls, constructed or erected to provide a barrier, either physical or visual, for the purpose of protecting property, providing for security and privacy, and properly containing activities on the property. 
"Fence height" means the vertical dimension from the natural ground level to the top of the fence measured at any point along the length of the fence. 
"Front yard" means that area from the rear building line to the road or street in front of the primary structure. 
C.  General Standards. 
1.  No privately owned fence shall be installed within any public street right-of-way or within any city-owned area. 
2.  No fence shall be installed so that, in the opinion of the city manager, it obstructs vision at any street intersection, or in any way creates a hazard to traffic. 
3.  No fence shall be installed so that, in the opinion of the fire chief, it prevents or unduly restricts access to property for emergency purposes. 
4.  If a fence is designed so that its structural supports are primarily on one side, that side must always be toward the interior of the property. 
5.  If a fence is required by any governmental authority to provide for the safety and security of the residents of the city, that fence shall not be removed or otherwise left in an unsafe condition for any reason without the approval of the city manager, and without proper precautions being taken to provide for continuous protection. 
6.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which a fence is located to maintain that fence in good and proper repair so that at all times, it presents a neat and orderly appearance to surrounding property owners and to the general public. 
7.  Any fence damaged by accident or an act of God shall be properly repaired within ninety days of occurrence. Fencing required for public safety purposes shall be repaired immediately. 
D.  Construction Standards. 
1.  All fences shall be constructed of brick, cedar, cypress, rod iron, vinyl or chainlink. In the event the fence is constructed of chainlink, all exposed metal parts must be vinyl-coated or painted a standard dark brown, dark green or black color to blend into the natural surroundings. 
2.  No fence or portion of a fence shall exceed eight feet in height; however, if a property owner wishes to install a tennis court, pool or some other similar special-purpose facility, a fence not to exceed twelve feet in height may be erected. 
3.  No fence installed in a residential front yard shall be constructed to a height in excess of four feet of chainlink, or in a fashion that restricts the view through such fence by more than fifty percent of the total barrier as viewed from the street. 
E.  Temporary Fence. The city manager may permit the installation of a temporary fence of material not otherwise allowed under this section at a construction site, if it is felt that the fence would be necessary to protect the public safety or would be necessary to provide proper security for the site. A temporary fence shall remain in place for no more than one year and must comply with the following conditions: 
1.  Temporary fences shall not exceed six feet in height if located within any setback area; 
2.  No signs shall be attached to any temporary fence. 
F.  Enforcement. 
1.  The city is responsible for the enforcement of this section. 
2.  If a suspected violation is reported, it will be investigated by the code enforcement officer. 
3.  If it is determined that a violation has occurred, the city shall notify the property owner of the violation as well as the steps that should be taken to correct the violation. 
4.  If the property owner does not agree to take immediate action to correct the violation, the city shall take any action as provided by law, including the issuance of a citation, to promptly and properly correct the violation. 
5.  A property owner may request a variance as provided in Section 3-7-273. 
6.  If a fence is legally existing at the time of the enactment of this section, it shall continue to be allowed to exist as a nonconforming use, but must still be properly maintained. 
7.  If a nonconforming fence is substantially damaged or is allowed to fall into a state of disrepair, it shall be required to either be removed or brought into conformance with this section. 
8.  No nonconforming fence shall be extended in any way except as permitted by this section. 
G.  Penalties. 
1.  A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars and/or a sentence of up to thirty days incarceration per day per occurrence. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violations. Replacement shall also be required. 
2.  Upon notice from the city manager, work on any development that is being done contrary to the provisions of this section shall immediately cease. The stop-work notice shall be in writing and shall go to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. When an emergency exists, the city manager shall not be required to give written notice prior to stopping the work. Further, in the event that work on any development is being done contrary to the provisions of this section, the city manager may revoke any permit pertaining to the development activity for which the permit has been issued and may refuse to issue any further permit until, at the discretion of the city manager, the work on the development is brought into compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 04-07-047 § 2) 
17.04.090 - Residential growth regulation. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. In addition to the following statements, the preamble of this section is incorporated herein by reference. The Atlanta Regional Commission ("ARC") 2003 Population and Housing Report identifies Henry County as the fastest growing county in the metro-Atlanta Region overseen by ARC. Henry County has grown at a rate of seven percent per year between the years 2000 and 2003. Atlanta's burgeoning southeastern population growth follows the path of U.S. Interstate 75 ("I-75") through Henry County. The city of Locust Grove ("City") is located in Henry County on I-75. Although the city sits on the boundary of the ARC planning region, it has experienced and is expected to continue to experience increased residential growth. 
According to such report, single-family housing has continued to dominate the market over the past three years while multifamily housing developments have increased at significant rates in particular areas. Areas where multifamily development continues to grow is where land is located outside the perimeter of U.S. Interstate 285 ("I-285") and in close proximity and with good accessibility to interstates and highways. The city is located outside the I-285 perimeter and is bisected by I-75 and Georgia State Highway 42. 
As indicated in ARC's report, multifamily growth is occurring in the city at a rapid rate. The report correctly states that as of the close of 2003, the city's housing stock consisted of approximately seventy percent single-family housing with the remainder in the form of mobilehomes. These percentages, however, do not reflect the approximately one thousand multifamily units to be developed as a result of rezonings approved in 2003. 
To address these growth trends, the mayor and city council wish to take proactive steps to accommodate and control the amount of single-family housing, multifamily housing and mobilehome development within its boundaries. Thus, it is the intention of the mayor and city council and purpose of this section to encourage continued diversification of residential uses in the city as well as accommodate its fair share of the region's residential growth in a manner consistent with both the remote proximity of the city to the center of regional growth and the history of residential land uses developed in the city. 
B.  Residential Growth Limitation. 
1.  Within the city of Locust Grove, single-family housing, which consists of single-family detached homes under an RA, R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning classification shall not be less than seventy-seven percent of the city housing stock. Multifamily housing, which consists of the RM classification regulating apartments (RM-1), townhouses (RM-2), and condominiums (RM-3) and the RD zoning classification regulating duplexes, shall not be more than twenty percent of the city housing stock. Mobilehomes, which are built under the RMH or grandfathered RM-75 zoning classifications, shall not be more than three percent of the city housing stock. 
2.  Within the category of single-family housing as described in subsection (B)(1) of this section, homes built under an R-3 zoning classification shall not exceed thirty percent of the overall single-family housing stock for the city; and the remainder of the single-family housing stock developed under an RA, R-1, R-2 zoning classification shall not be less than forty-seven percent of the overall single-family housing stock in the city. 
C.  Administration. 
1.  Residential Housing Inventory. For purposes of determining whether or not a proposed development in the city will violate the residential growth limitations set forth in this section, the city manager or his or her designee, in coordination with the planning and zoning department of Henry County, shall determine the residential housing inventory for the city. The residential housing inventory shall be based on the total number of housing units that could be built on land zoned for residential use and in accordance with the particular zoning district regulations applicable to such land. The residential housing inventory shall then be converted into percentages of single-family, multifamily and mobilehomes for determination of compliance with the residential growth limitations set forth in subsection (B)(1) of this section. Furthermore, the residential housing inventory for all single-family uses shall be subdivided into percentages of high density single-family and low to medium density single-family use to determine compliance with the residential growth limitations set forth in subsection (B)(2) of this section. 
2.  Quarterly Residential Growth Report. The city manager, or his designee, shall document all information required under subsection (C)(1) of this section in a quarterly residential growth report, and such report shall be presented to the city council at the first meeting of the council for each quarter. Thereafter, the city manager, or his designee, shall submit such report to the Henry County planning and zoning director. The quarterly residential growth report and this section shall be considered by the municipal planning commission and the city council whenever they must respectively recommend or decide any amendment to the zoning ordinance, including the zoning map, use variance, and any development agreements entered into for residential development of property in the city. The quarterly residential growth report shall be available to the public at the city clerk's office. 
3.  No proposed rezoning of property for residential use shall be approved unless the potential or actual housing yield for the property will not violate the residential growth limitations set forth in subsection B of this section, unless the developer agrees to cap the number of units to a level which would not violate this section. 
4.  At least once every ten years after adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, the mayor and city council shall reconsider, and adjust if necessary, the residential growth limitations set forth in subsection B of this section in light of regional and local growth trends and residential uses. 
5.  This section shall not be construed, in any way, to limit the city's authority to annex property in accordance with the laws of the state of Georgia. 
D.  Variances. Each quarter, the city council shall have the authority to grant variances for up to a maximum of one hundred residential units in excess of the residential growth limitations set forth in subsection B of this section upon a showing of undue hardship in accordance with the criteria set forth under Section 3-7-273 of the Henry County zoning ordinance as adopted and amended by the city. No administrative variances to this section shall be granted. 
E.  Appeal. 
1.  Any person may appeal a quarterly residential growth report within ten calendar days of its presentation to the city council. Such an appeal shall be submitted to the city manager and shall explain the basis for the appeal in writing. Appeals of quarterly residential growth reports shall be heard by the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting, and a decision shall be made by the city council no later than at the next regularly scheduled council meeting after hearing an appeal. 
2.  A decision by the city council made pursuant to this section may be appealed by writ of certiorari to Superior Court of Henry County, Georgia, in accordance with the laws of the state of Georgia. 
3.  Any finding of or penalty imposed by the municipal court of the city pursuant to this section may be appealed by writ of certiorari to Superior Court of Henry County, Georgia, in accordance with the laws of the state of Georgia. 
F.  Penalty. A violation of this residential growth limitation set forth in subsection B of this section shall result a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and/or imprisonment not to exceed thirty days or a combination thereof after a cited person, persons or entity is found guilty or such person, persons or entity pleads guilty or nolo contendere. Such violations shall be assessed on a per dwelling unit per day basis. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. 04-09-062 § 1) 
17.04.100 - Buffer requirements. 
Sections 3-7-191 through 3-7-194, as adopted by Henry County, is repealed by the city of Locust Grove. Section 3-7-192, as adopted by Henry County, is repealed by the city of Locust Grove and replaced with the following: 
A.  The purposes of the buffer requirements set forth below are to minimize the adverse impacts of adjacent incompatible uses, to improve the aesthetics of developments in the city, to provide for green space corridors in the city, to preserve the rural feel of the city, and to calm traffic. 
B.  The requirements for planted buffers are as follows: 
1.  For all residential subdivisions (including multifamily and mobilehome developments) and industrial land uses, the minimum width of the required vegetative or planted buffer shall be one hundred feet along any existing public street and fifty feet along the perimeter of the property. If the property is wooded and the timber has not been cut in the past five years, the above required buffers shall remain undisturbed. If timber on the property has been cut within the last five years or if the property is partially wooded and partially open or entirely open, the above required buffers in the wooded area shall be undisturbed and buffers in open or timbered areas shall be enhanced with a planted vegetative buffer. Such vegetative buffer shall consist of a minimum of four rows of trees planted with twenty foot separation between trees staggered so as to provide vegetative screen. Three quarters of the trees must be overstory trees with the remainder consisting of understory trees as defined, listed and of a minimum size as prescribed in the city landscaping ordinance. Existing trees in the buffer area shall be incorporated into the planted vegetative buffer. 
2.  For all commercial and office/institutional land uses, the minimum width of the required vegetative or planted buffer shall be fifty feet along any public street and fifty feet along the perimeter of the land. However, where the land use on the adjoining property is commercial or office/institutional, the buffer area may be reduced so that total buffer area between the adjoining properties is no less than fifty feet. The buffer areas shall consist of sod, shrubs, understory trees and overstory trees as required in the city landscaping ordinance. In addition, one row of overstory trees shall be planted with no greater than fifty feet of separation between trees in accordance with the types and minimum sizes recommended in the city landscaping ordinance. Such buffers shall be maintained by the property owners. 
3.  The buffers required herein shall be permanent and shall not be disturbed or reduced in any way, except for vehicular and pedestrian (including bicycle) connectivity, ground signs, and utility installation and maintenance. 
C.  With respect to residential uses, except for conservation residential subdivisions, the required planted buffer may be incorporated into the yard setbacks as specified in the applicable residential zoning district. If the required planted buffer is not incorporated into the yard setback as specified in the applicable zoning district, the required planted buffer area shall be conveyed to a homeowners' association, which shall be responsible for the maintenance of such area, and the required buffer area may be counted towards the open space requirements for such district. 
D.  In some instances, the city may require a masonry wall, decorative fencing, or a planted berm, each no less than six feet in height, as part of the buffer requirement. If any of such structures are required, the buffer area in which such structures are required may be reduced in width as deemed appropriate by the planning director but by no more than twenty feet. 
E.  Buffers within the downtown development district shall be set by the city council after consultation with the city manager and/or downtown development authority, as the city council deems appropriate. The amount and type of buffer for properties within the downtown development district shall be determined on a case by case basis based on the existing and anticipated uses of adjacent properties and in a manner consistent with similarly situated uses within such district. 
(Ord. 04-10-071 § 1) 
17.04.131 - Section 3-7-151—OI: office/institutional district adopted as amended. 
Section 3-7-151 of the Code of Henry County, Georgia, is adopted as amended, so that it shall read as follows: 
(a)  Purpose. The office/institutional district is intended to encourage development of suitable business and professional enterprise, hospitals, medical and dental facility of a character and density deemed compatible with the primary purpose of this district. Limited retail uses normally appurtenant to office/institutional uses are also permitted. 
(b)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Churches and similar religious facilities. 
(2)  Clubs and lodges of a business character. 
(3)  Colleges and universities, business colleges, vocational-technical schools. 
(4)  Hospitals and clinics, but not veterinary facilities. 
(5)  Libraries, museums and art galleries. 
(6)  Medical and dental clinics and offices. 
(7)  Nursing and rest homes. 
(8)  Hair salons and day spas. 
(9)  Professional and business offices providing that wholesale or retail merchandise is not offered for sale. 
(10)  Retail uses in conjunction with and normally appurtenant to office/institutional uses, to include florist shops, cafeterias and snack shops located within office or medical buildings, pharmacies and gift shops. 
(11)  Other uses as may be determined by the community development director to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
(12)  Nursery schools, kindergarten schools, and day care centers providing child care for more than ten children when conducted in a principal structure or institution not associated with a church facility, provided that at least two hundred square feet of outdoor play area and thirty-five square feet of indoor play area is provided for each child. Use of outdoor play area in shifts is allowed. The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a security chain link fence at least four feet in height. A decorative obscuring fence may be used when adjacent to residential zoned property. State license required. 
(c)  Accessory Uses. 
1.  Parking lots and parking structures of a commercial nature. 
2.  Single-family detached residential when conducted wholly within a formerly used and occupied residential structure meeting all requirements of the R-3 ICC Building Code occupancy type and where located only in the Mixed Historic Neighborhood area as designated by the most recent Henry County/Cities Joint 2030 Comprehensive Plan map as adopted by the city. 
(d)  Conditional Uses. Upon application to, and recommendation by the planning staff and favorable decision thereon by the mayor and city council, the following conditional uses are permitted in this district: 
1.  Attached single-family residential when conducted wholly within a formerly used and occupied residential structure meeting all requirements of the R-3 ICC Building Code occupancy type and where located only in the Mixed Historic Neighborhood area as designated by the most recent Henry County/Cities Joint 2030 Comprehensive Plan map as adopted by the city. 
2.  Duplex residential when conducted wholly within a formerly used and occupied residential structure meeting all requirements of the R-3 ICC Building Code occupancy type and where located only in the mixed historic neighborhood area as designated by the most recent Henry County/Cities Joint 2030 Comprehensive Plan map as adopted by the city. 
(e)  Conditional Exception. None. 
(f)  Space Limits: 

 
(Ord. 06-05-041 § 1) 
(Ord. No. 11-10-053, § 2, 10-3-11) 
17.04.132 - Active adult residential (AAR) district. 
The regulations for the AAR active adult residential district are as follows: 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The AAR active adult residential district is established to provide locations for the development of detached dwelling units limited to those persons age fifty-five and older as defined by the Fair Housing Act as may be amended from time to time and shall not be established as a precedent for any other residential or nonresidential district. This residential use is designed to be located in areas designated for high-density residential or mixed-use either inside or within one-half mile of a neighborhood commercial, community commercial, or regional commercial area as designated by the city of Locust Grove comprehensive plan, as may be amended from time to time. 
B.  Definitions. 
"Active adult residential" means individual housing units designed for adults age fifty-five and older in accordance with the Fair Housing Act that do not include or provide any type of supportive services such as medical care, food preparation or other services normally a course of business for an assisted living facility and/or a personal care home. 
"Fair Housing Act" means Section 800 [42 U.S.C. 3601] through Section 901 [42 U.S.C 3631] of United States Code, more particularly Section 807 [42 U.S.C. 3607] pertaining to "housing for older persons," as may be amended. 
"Residential parking garage ("RPG")" means an enclosed structure attached to or part of the principal dwelling for housing at least two vehicles. All AAR dwelling RPG's shall have the following minimum dimensions: vehicular entrance height, seven feet; vehicular entrance width, sixteen feet; garage interior height, eight feet four inches; and overall garage width and depth of no less than twenty feet by twenty feet, respectively. The floor shall be constructed of concrete. Concrete floors shall be reinforced, and a minimum of four inches in thickness with appropriate fill and base. RPG's shall not be enclosed for living space, storage purposes or any other purpose without first obtaining a variance from the city and constructing an attached RPG to the main residential structure. The RPG shall be kept clear to that a minimum of one vehicle may be parked in the RPG at all times. RPG's may be placed in the following arrangements on lots as required herein: 
1.  For lots with alleyway access, RPG's shall either be placed at the rear of the structure or be incorporated into the residence with the RPG door facing the alleyway. 
2.  For lots without alleyway access, RPG's may be located with front-entry facing residential streets (architectural garage doors must be used) ; side-entry, with RPG entry located at the side of a residential structure; or plaza entry, with RPG structure in the front of the main residential structure having its garage entry placed to the side. 
C.  Permitted Uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings as limited in subsections H and I of this section; 
2.  Crop gardens; 
3.  Local, state and federal government buildings; 
4.  Publicly-owned and operated parks and recreation areas; 
5.  Temporary buildings and storage of materials in conjunction with construction of a building on a lot or adjacent lots where residential construction is taking place; 
6.  Home occupations, when conducted wholly within the principal structure. 
D.  Accessory Uses. 
1.  Accessory structures or buildings; 
2.  Subdivision recreation areas and open space owned, operated and maintained by homeowners' associations exclusively for the use of residents and their guests; 
3.  Utility substations, when located in accordance with the requirements and space limits set forth in the district regulations. All substations shall have a landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. 
E.  Conditional Uses. None. 
F.  Conditional Exceptions. The parking of one unoccupied travel trailer, motor coach or pleasure boat, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Said conditional exception must be renewed annually. 
G.  Development Standards. Except as otherwise provided for herein, the following development standards shall apply in this zoning district: 
1.  Minimum Tract Size. A development in the AAR district shall have a minimum tract area of ten contiguous acres. 
2.  Maximum Tract Size. A development in the AAR district shall have a maximum tract area of fifty contiguous acres. 
3.  Minimum Lot Area. Six thousand square feet. 
4.  Minimum Lot Width. Fifty-five feet. 
5.  Minimum Side Setback. Five feet. 
6.  Minimum Separation Between Structures. Thirteen feet. 
7.  Minimum Front Yard Setback. Twenty feet from property line (alleyway design); twenty-five feet (alternative design with no alleyway). 
8.  Minimum Rear Yard Setback. Twenty feet. 
9.  Maximum Height. Forty feet. 
10.  Minimum Heated Floor Area. One thousand six hundred for a single-story structure; two thousand square feet for a two-story structure. 
11.  Paved Driveway. Required. 
12.  Curb and Gutter. Required. 
13.  Sidewalks—Required. Minimum width of four feet located at a minimum of three feet behind the curb. A multiuse path can, at the discretion of the mayor and council, be substituted for sidewalks if access is provided to each lot. 
14.  Streetlights. Required. 
15.  Underground Utilities. Required. 
16.  Residential Parking Garage. Required. 
17.  Alleyways are required for all interior lots of an AAR development where the development shall have public streets. Alleyways are recommended but not required for interior lots of an AAR development where the streets shall be private. For lots along the perimeter of the development or interior lots without alleyways, an alternative parking arrangement must be provided regardless of whether the streets are public or private. Alternative parking arrangements may consist either of on-street parking a minimum of ten feet in width by twenty feet in length with tree islands every twelve spaces; off-street parking lots developed to commercial standards with minimum size of nine feet in width by eighteen feet in length; or use of an additional ten feet of front setback for additional storage of vehicles on individual lots. For lots seventy-five feet in width or greater, plaza or side-entry garages are required. Where on-street parking is used, it shall be used in conjunction with alleyway lots to prevent conflicts with driveway cuts. All parking should be distributed throughout the development to provide equal access to the lots they are intended to serve. The ratio of alternative parking shall be one space for every four lots, unless otherwise specified by city council. All parking arrangements shall be reviewed and subject to approval by city council as part of approval of the preliminary plat. 
18.  Private Streets. Permitted by approval of the preliminary plat by mayor and city council. Approval must take into account covenants for the HOA in terms of ownership and continued maintenance/assessment, the need for access for emergency access, including a secondary access point where feasible, design of the main entrance as a boulevard entrance with two entrance and exit lanes shall be required where no secondary point of access is provided. 
19.  Landscape Buffer and Screening Requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any AAR development which abuts more restrictive residentially zoned property shall have a minimum twenty-foot landscaped screening or maintained natural buffer adjacent to all residential property. When abutting nonresidentially zoned property, a ten-foot landscaped screening buffer is required. Minimum buffers may be increased by the mayor and city council based on existing conditions such as tract size, topographic conditions, etc. in order to provide compatibility with adjacent residential uses. 
H.  Additional Location Criteria, Design Criteria, Density and Use Limitations. 
1.  Any AAR development shall be subject to the preliminary plat approval by the mayor and city council prior to issuance of a land disturbance permit. Overall residential development shall be compatible with neighboring residential uses. 
2.  Maximum density of five units per acre outside any protected watershed district and 3.6 units per acre within any protected watershed district (provided that all impervious surface limitations are met); however, the overall density of a development may be reduced by mayor and council at the time of rezoning due to topography, drainage, deforestation or sediment and erosion concerns. Density shall be based on the total property area, less any areas devoted to public rights-of-way (ROW), one hundred-year flood hazard area (floodplain), stormwater detention facilities, and public lands. 
3.  All dwelling units must be limited to those persons age fifty-five and older as defined by the Fair Housing Act as may be amended from time to time. 
4.  Homeowners' Association Required. In all cases, a homeowners' association shall be established and incorporated. Membership shall be automatic and mandatory for all lot owners in the development and their successors in interest. The homeowners' association shall have the power to file liens to collect dues and assessments. The homeowners' association shall be formed under the provisions of Article 6 of Chapter 3 of Title 44 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, which is known as the "Georgia Property Owners' Association Act." (Code 1981, Section 44-3-22, et seq., enacted by Ga. L. 1994, p. 1879, Section 1) and shall contain adequate provisions that provides for building and grounds maintenance and repair, insurance and working capital. Said association must also include declaration and by-laws, including rules and regulations, subject to staff review and approval. The declaration and by-laws shall not be enforced by the city. The declaration and by-laws shall, at a minimum, regulate and control the following: 
a.  Maintenance of structures and grounds of all lots and common open space; 
b.  Ownership, maintenance, and access to private streets, if elected: 
c.  Animals; 
d.  Signs; 
e.  Exterior items such as fences, lawn ornaments and restrictions on removal of landscape areas and buffers; 
f.  Building improvements; 
g.  Outside storage; 
h.  Overnight parking of vehicles; 
i.  Decorations; 
j.  Trash collection; 
k.  Restrictions/definitions on single-family residential use only, and leasing of units. No more than ten percent of the total units may be leased by individual owners at any time; 
l.  Restrictions on all units being occupied by persons age fifty-five and older as defined by the Fair Housing Act as may be amended from time to time; 
m.  Accessory buildings and structures. 
5.  Multiuse Paths and Pedestrian Circulation. All AAR developments must be designed to provide pedestrian access to all adjacent properties and roadways. Multiuse paths shall be a minimum of ten feet external to the development (minimum of eight feet internal to the development) and shall be constructed with a minimum of four inches of asphalt or concrete pavement. The paths shall connect lots throughout the development to the majority of the open space and amenity areas. In addition, such multiuse paths shall interconnect with adjoining paths and along such areas designated by the future land use map, the transportation system map, or other equivalent map showing an overall trail system for the city of Locust Grove, as amended. 
6.  Required Amenities. Any AAR development shall provide amenities in areas centrally located to all residential units where feasible and will be required to design such feature for those residents age fifty-five and older. Amenities shall be approved by the mayor and city council during site plan approval and shall incorporate at a minimum one amenity per fifty dwelling units. The following amenities shall be eligible for inclusion within the development: 
a.  Clubhouse with a minimum of one thousand three hundred square feet of heated space; 
b.  A junior Olympic-sized swimming pool; 
c.  Resistance swimming area of a minimum of two hundred square feet; 
d.  Tennis courts—one lighted and enclosed facility featuring a minimum of two playing courts; 
e.  Walking trails—at least two thousand lineal feet, three feet in width. Multiuse paths can constitute walking trails so long as they are appropriately demarcated to designate that at least four feet of width is solely for pedestrian use; 
f.  An upgraded clubhouse with additional one thousand square feet devoted to entertainment or community activities; 
g.  Pocket park of no more than a quarter-acre in size where activities such as lawn bowling or croquet may occur in addition to passive seating areas; 
h.  Other—any other amenity similar in nature and size to those listed above that is approved by the city council at the time of zoning. 
7.  Exterior Elevations, Requirements. At least fifty percent of the exterior elevations of each individual dwelling unit must be constructed with brick, stucco, or stone, with the remaining elevations constructed of any combination of brick, stucco, stone, or cement fiber siding. 
8.  No AAR development may be located within an existing subdivision, unless being proposed as part of or connecting to a larger, mixed-use development. 
9.  Condominium Ownership. Any condominium projects developed under the AAR district shall be subject to the Georgia Condominium Act, as may be amended from time to time. 
I.  Special Building Provisions for AAR Dwellings. All dwelling units within an AAR development must incorporate applicable accessibility and "easy living" standards (as administered and copyrighted by a coalition of Georgia citizens including AARP of Georgia, Atlanta Regional Commission, Concrete Change, Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Governor's Council on Developmental Disabilities, Home Builders Association of Georgia, Shepherd Center and the Statewide Independent Living Council of Georgia) to include: 
1.  A step-free entrance into the main floor at either the front or side of the structure, or through the garage; 
2.  A bedroom, kitchen, wheelchair-friendly bathroom and entertaining area on the main floor; 
3.  Every interior door on the main floor provides a minimum thirty-two inches of clear passage; 
4.  Blocking installed in the bathroom(s) on the main floor to facilitate the future addition of hand rails or similar accessibility features. 
(Ord. 06-10-86 § 1) 
17.04.133 - Section 3-7-105 commercial outdoor display and storage activity adopted as amended. 
Section 3-7-105 of the Code of Henry County, Georgia, is adopted as amended, so that it shall read as follows: 
(a)  Purpose. This section shall define and regulate the practice of outdoor display and storage within all nonresidential zoning districts, where such uses are permitted, to provide reasonable allowance for outdoor display within the downtown area, and define development standards for these activities. 
(b)  Definitions: 
(1)  Outdoor Display means the use of a portion of property outside of a building where merchandise, goods or other items are placed in public view for the purpose of advertising or for sale or lease. 
(2)  Outdoor Storage means the use of keeping, within an unroofed area, of any goods, material, merchandise, vehicles or equipment in the same place for more than 24 hours. This term would include the outdoor storage involving machinery and equipment, service areas for vehicles in need of major service or repair, materials for construction or distribution, and the use of containerized storage. 
(3)  Containerized Storage means the use of shipping boxes, railroad cars, commercial vehicle trailers, or other non-permanent structures not on a permanent foundation for the keeping of equipment, bulk materials, merchandise, or goods in an unroofed area. 
(4)  Downtown Area means the main business strip, consisting of the properties shown on the accompanying map prepared by the City of Locust Grove geographic information system (GIS) dated ____________ . 
(c)  Where permitted. Outdoor display is permitted in the C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts under the conditions established in (e) below. Outdoor storage is permitted in the C-3, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts under the conditions established in (f) below. 
(d)  Exception. Outdoor display is permitted within the downtown area, regardless of underlying zoning district, during the hours of 7:00 AM to 9:00 PM, Monday through Saturday and from 7:00 AM to 7:00 PM on Sunday. All display shall take place in front of the respective storefront and shall not extend beyond five feet (5′) from the edge of the building into the sidewalk area and shall not be more than twenty percent (20%) of this prescribed sidewalk area in total. 
(e)  Conditions for outdoor display. The following conditions shall apply for outdoor display in the C-3, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts: 
a.  Outdoor display area shall be contained within all required yard setback areas. The use of an automobile, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, or outdoor sport vehicle dealership shall not be termed outdoor display shall may use all yard areas not devoted to landscaping and tree protection. 
b.  Outdoor display area shall not comprise more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total principal structural area. The use of an automobile, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, outdoor sport vehicle or equipment dealership shall not be termed outdoor display shall may use all yard areas not devoted to landscaping and tree protection. 
c.  Outdoor display area shall not take up any required parking area. 
d.  Outdoor display areas shall be arranged as an extension of the principal building area and shall have screening consisting of decorative fencing to a height of no less than six feet (6′). Fencing materials shall be consistent with the materials and design of the principal structure. 
(f)  Conditions for outdoor storage. The following conditions shall apply for outdoor storage, including containerized storage: 
a.  Outdoor storage may only be conducted in a side or rear yard except for properties zoned M-1 or M-2. 
b.  Outdoor storage areas must be enclosed by an opaque fence or decorative wall of a minimum height of six feet (6′) for commercial uses and eight feet (8′) for industrial uses. 
c.  Outdoor storage areas shall not comprise more than fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area except for properties zoned M-1 or M-2. 
d.  All materials and containers shall be kept a minimum of twenty-six feet (26′) from side and rear property lines for fire protection purposes. 
e.  Site landscaping should be arranged where practical adjacent to all outdoor storage areas to provide additional screening within required buffer areas as part of the overall requirements of landscaping for the site. 
(g)  Temporary or Seasonal outdoor display. Outdoor display shall be permitted as part of permits issued under Chapter 5.36 "Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers" under conditions in (e) above. 
(Ord. 07-09-083 § 1) 
17.04.134 - Section 3-7-153—C-2: general commercial district adopted as amended. 
Section 3-7-153 of the Code of Henry County, Georgia, is adopted as amended, so that it shall read as follows: 
(a)  Purpose. This district is intended to provide locations for a wide variety of retail and service uses and wholesale establishments to satisfy the common and frequent needs of residents in large sections of the city and surrounding area including the traveling public. It is the intent of this district to encourage businesses to be part of planned commercial convenience centers, neighborhood, community and regional shopping centers and along developed sections of heavily traveled corridors. This district is to be used in areas denoted as community commercial center, regional commercial center and in mixed-use areas on the city's future land use map, as adopted. Uses in this district shall be located on or near roads having a minimum classification of minor or major arterial. 
(b)  Permitted Uses: 
1.  Any use permitted in the C-1 zoning district. 
2.  Ambulance service. 
3.  Auction gallery. 
4.  Automobile wash. 
5.  Automobile service centers and stations, but not including major repair, body and fender work or painting, provided that all structures and building except principal use signs and including storage tanks shall be located not less than twenty-five feet from any side or rear property lines except where such side or rear property lines abut a street, in which case the setback shall be that required for such streets, including gasoline pumps and storage tanks, except principal use (or equivalent signs stated in Chapter 15.24), shall comply with the setback requirements of any abutting street. If the automobile service state is located on a corner lot, the means of ingress and egress provided shall be not less than twenty-five feet from the intersection of street right-of-way lines. Ingress and egress shall be arranged and designed so as to minimize the interference with the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
6.  Bus terminals. 
7.  Business and commercial schools, including tutoring or instructional testing facilities. 
8.  Church or other place of worship. 
9.  Community and regional shopping centers. 
10.  Dancing schools including group instruction. 
11.  Department stores. 
12.  Drive-in configurations of any business otherwise permitted in this district; provided, that any such establishment shall provide adequate off-street space for the maneuvering and storage of patrons' vehicles; and further provided that there be a sturdy, decorative fence or wall for the retaining of any discarded paper or other material on all sides of the parking area except the front; and provided that no music or loudspeaker system shall be installed or operated that can be heard at neighboring residential, motel or motor hotel properties; and providing all lighting shall be directed and shielded so as to light only the property of such establishment. 
13.  Electrical appliance repair shops. 
14.  Furniture stores. 
15.  Grocery, fruit, vegetable, and meat markets, including supermarkets up to sixty thousand square feet, but no killing, eviscerating, skinning, plucking or smoking of food products is permitted. 
16.  Gyms and indoor instruction of sports activities. 
17.  Indoor recreation including bowling alleys, theaters, pool rooms and electronic machines. 
18.  Lifestyle shopping centers where major tenants and shops are clustered together alongside entertainment areas, restaurants, and lodging facilities that afford patrons the opportunity to walk conveniently within the interior of the center and is planned and organized as an unique destination and activity center. 
19.  Neighborhood shopping centers. 
20.  Parking lots and structures. 
21.  Paint and decorating stores. 
22.  Pet shops and grooming facilities. 
23.  Planned commercial center, where there are a minimum of three or more uses platted or organized for the purposes of common promotion plan to be approved within Chapter 15.24. 
24.  Radio/television repair (including the sale and supplies of equipment). 
25.  Printing, job, when mechanical operation is not visible from a street, and employing not more than four persons. 
26.  Professional, medical and dental offices. 
27.  Radio and television stations, except transmission towers over thirty-five feet high. 
28.  Restaurants, including fast food, high-turnover, and casual or fine dining. 
29.  Stationery and office machines sales and service. 
30.  Taxi office where no storage and/or repair of vehicles is permitted. 
31.  Upholstery shops. 
32.  Wholesale stores, but not establishments operated primarily as a warehouse for distribution purposes. A wholesale store shall be distinguished from a warehouse if there is at least one square foot or more of office, sales and display space for each square foot of warehousing space, and the building is so arranged as to encourage walk-in trade. 
33.  Other uses as may be determined by the planning staff to be similar and compatible with the above listed permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory Uses. Those uses determined by the planning staff to be customarily appurtenant to those uses permitted in this district. 
(d)  Conditional Uses. Upon application to, and recommendation by the planning staff and favorable decision thereon by the mayor and city council, the following conditional uses are permitted in this district: 
(1)  Animal hospital or clinic, provided there are no outside runs or pens. 
(2)  Building and lumber supply establishments, provided all storage is under roof and said storage areas are to the side or rear of the primary structure. Said business must be on lots of greater than three contiguous acres and must provide solid opaque fencing or decorative masonry walls where adjoining residentially zoned properties. 
(3)  Clubs and lodges. 
(4)  Commercial kennel, provided that all boarding is indoors and is conducted on a minimum lot size of twenty thousand square feet and all structures are a minimum of fifty feet from adjoining residential property. 
(5)  Funeral homes. 
(6)  Gasoline service stations which conduct major automotive repair, provided all storage of vehicles is to the side or rear of the lot and is screened from view by appropriate decorative fencing or masonry wall a minimum of eight feet in height. 
(7)  Greenhouses and nurseries including landscape service, provided all storage of vehicles is to the side or rear of the lot and is screened from view by appropriate decorative fencing or masonry wall a minimum of eight feet in height. 
(8)  Mortuaries and crematoriums, provided minimum lot size is three acres and all structures are located a minimum of seventy-five feet from any adjoining residential property. 
(9)  Outdoor amusement facilities, including pony riding, miniature golf, racing cars, carnival and bazaars. 
(10)  Radio and television transmission towers over thirty-five feet in height, provided said facility maintains a setback from all adjoining property lines a minimum of one-half the tower height unless additional setback distance is required for safety of adjoining properties. 
(e)  Conditional Exceptions. None. 
(f)  Space Limits and Development Standards: 

 
(Ord. No. 11-10-054, § 1, 10-3-11; Ord. No. 12-01-003, § 1, 1-3-12) 
17.04.135 - Section 3-7-154—C-3: heavy commercial district adopted as amended. 
Section 3-7-154 of the Code of Henry County, Georgia, is adopted as amended, so that it shall read as follows: 
(a)  Purpose. This district is intended to provide distinct areas for commercial activities which provide products and services that require locations along major arterial roads, highway intersections and freeway interchange areas, due to the need to transport and display heavy bulk materials, generate heavy traffic, and which provide services that would not be appropriately located in areas providing neighborhood or general commercial retail and service activities as permitted in the C-1 and C-2 districts. This district is to be used in areas denoted as Regional Commercial Center and Mixed-Use in the City's Future Land Use Map, as adopted. Uses in this district shall be located on or near roads having a minimum classification of major arterial. 
(b)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts. 
(2)  Automobile and truck sales. 
(3)  Boat sales. 
(4)  Church or other place of worship. 
(5)  Commercial kennels for boarding of pets, provided all outdoor runs and pens are kept a minimum of seventy-five feet from neighboring residential properties, including multifamily properties. 
(6)  Discount superstores over two hundred thousand square feet in gross area containing grocery, dry goods, general retail goods and services. 
(7)  Dry cleaning plants not employing more than twenty persons. 
(8)  Farmers' market. 
(9)  Feed and seed stores. 
(10)  Grocery, fruit, vegetable, and meat markets, including supermarkets over sixty thousand square feet, but no killing, eviscerating, skinning, plucking or smoking of food products is permitted. 
(11)  Heavy equipment sales and service. 
(12)  Major automotive repair. 
(13)  Medical centers and hospitals with related office, physical plant, and parking facilities. 
(14)  Mobile home sales lots. 
(15)  Motels and hotels. 
(16)  Nursing homes and convalescent care facilities. 
(17)  Outdoor theaters. 
(18)  Parking garages and facilities serving more one thousand or more vehicles. 
(19)  Recreational vehicle sales and service. 
(20)  Regional and superregional shopping centers in excess of five hundred thousand square feet of gross leasable area either under one roof or under a common promotion plan by name, signage, and/or other similar common area agreement. 
(21)  Sporting goods stores over one hundred thousand square feet in gross area. 
(22)  Taxi stands with storage and/or repair of vehicles. 
(23)  Tire retreading. 
(24)  Trade shops, including electrical, plumbing, gutter, machines, and HVAC contractors. 
(25)  Used car and truck sales. 
(26)  Warehouse discount stores where memberships are required for purchase of goods sold at retail. 
(27)  Other uses as may be determined by the planning staff to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory Uses. Those uses determined by the planning staff to be customarily appurtenant to those uses permitted in this district. 
(d)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Travel trailer/recreation vehicle parks having a minimum lot area of five acres. 
(2)  Crematoriums. 
(e)  Conditional Exceptions. None. 
(f)  Space Limits: 

 
(Ord. 08-02-011 § 2) 
(Ord. No. 12-01-004, § 1, 1-3-12) 
17.04.137 - Historic preservation district overlay (HPDO). 
(a)  Purpose. This district is intended to provide for preservation of unique anthropological, cultural, and historical features within the corporate limits of the city of Locust Grove as so determined by the City of Locust Grove Downtown Historic District: Recommendation Report to the Mayor and City Council, dated March 15, 2010, by the Locust Grove Historic Preservation Commission, incorporated herein by reference and maintained by the city clerk. 
(b)  Delineation of district boundaries. The HPDO district boundaries consist of the following Tax Parcel ID numbers as of the date of adoption from the Henry County Tax Assessor Office: 

 
The district boundaries are also shown on the map drawn by the Community Development Department GIS entitled "Historic Preservation District Overlay Map" dated January 24, 2011 and shall be incorporated into the Official Zoning Map for the City of Locust Grove. 
(c)  Permitted Uses. Any permitted uses within the underlying zoning districts are permitted in the HPDO. 
(d)  Accessory Uses. Those uses determined by the planning staff to be customarily appurtenant to those uses permitted in the underlying zoning districts are permitted in the HPDO. 
(e)  Conditional Uses. Any conditional use within the underlying zoning districts are permitted in the HPDO. 
(f)  Conditional Exceptions. None. 
(g)  Space Limits. Those dimension and areas permitted within the underlying zoning districts permitted in the HPDO. 
(h)  Certificate of Appropriateness Required. Any development, redevelopment, restoration, and or building permit which constitute a material change in the structure shall require a certificate of appropriateness as defined in Chapter 14.03 "Historic Preservation Commission" of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. No. 11-05-020, § 1, 5-2-11) 
17.04.138 - Transportation, communications and utilities (TCU) district. 
(a)  Purpose. This district is intended to provide locations for transportation improvements, communications facilities, and utilities where not currently zoned for such activities in private or public rights-of-way to serve the needs mobility, access, telecommunications, data services and electric, gas, water, and sanitary sewer services. This district is to be used in areas denoted as transportation, communications and utilities and in all other areas where necessary on the city's Future Land Use Map, as adopted for the provision of services. 
(b)  Permitted Uses: 
1.  Roads, streets, and highways. 
2.  Railroad tracks, sidings and those facilities associated with and pertinent to the normal operations of a railroad. 
3.  Railroad intermodal facilities and switch yards. 
4.  Sidewalks, trails and multiuse paths. 
5.  Communications facilities (both overhead and below ground) such as telephone, cable, and broadband facilities. 
6.  Transit stations and associated facilities. 
7.  Water, sanitary sewer, and tertiary treatment facilities, lines and stations. 
8.  Wireless communications facilities providing mobile communications, broadband and data access. 
(c)  Accessory Uses. Those uses determined by the planning staff to be customarily appurtenant to those uses permitted in this district. 
(d)  Conditional Uses. None 
(e)  Conditional Exceptions. None. 
(f)  Space Limits and Development Standards: 
1.  Minimum lot area: None. 
2.  Minimum lot width: None. 
3.  Minimum front yard: None. 
4.  Minimum side yard: None. 
5.  Minimum rear yard: None. 
6.  Maximum height: Two hundred feet. 
7.  Sidewalks or multiuse trails: N/A 
8.  Lighting: N/A. 
(g)  Signage Standards: Any and all signs authorized under Chapter 15.24 Sign Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 12-10-077, § 1, 10-1-12) 
17.04.160 - Conservation residential subdivision overlay district (CRSO). 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the conservation residential subdivision overlay district (CRSO) is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the current and future inhabitants of the city by allowing flexibility in the design of certain subdivision from standard regulations to support permanent protection of green space. 
The specific purposes of the CRSO include: 
1.  To provide single-family residential subdivisions which permit flexibility of design in order to preserve environmentally-sensitive areas and create efficient uses of land. 
2.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplain, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands, wildlife habitats, historic features and unique topography. 
3.  To permit clustering of dwellings and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces, utilities, earthwork and other land disturbing activities necessary for residential development. 
4.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential developments. 
5.  To conserve a portion of the otherwise developable property as green space in perpetuity. This option is not necessarily intended to allow an applicant to conserve only the portion of the tract that is already unbuildable due to factors such as steep slopes, wetlands, or land adjacent to undesirable areas such as landfills or livestock farming. 
6.  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the city. 
7.  To promote linking of greenways and corridors between the city and neighboring jurisdictions. 
8.  To encourage interactions of persons living in the resulting residential community by clustering dwellings and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
9.  To encourage street designs that reduces traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
10.  To incorporate aesthetic design standards that will increase the value of the neighborhood. 
11.  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by promoting views of green space, from within the development and from arterial and collector roads. 
12.  To preserve important historical and archaeological sites. 
13.  To promote other purposes of the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, soil erosion and sediment control ordinance and other ordinances and policies of the city. 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meaning prescribed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
"Conservation easement" means a nonpossessory interest of a holder in real property imposing limitations of affirmative obligations for the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic, green, or open areas of real property, assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or green space use, protecting natural resources, maintaining or enhancing air or water quality, or preserving the historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural aspects of real property. 
"Conservation residential subdivision overlay (CRSO)" means a single-family residential subdivision design which concentrates lots, dwellings, streets, utilities and related development activities on the more suitable and less environmentally sensitive areas of the site, thereby preserving the steep slopes, wetlands, unsuitable soils, stream corridors and other areas in a natural or undisturbed state. A CRSO allows for slightly higher net density than that typically allowed for the underlying zoning classification of the property, and smaller lots sizes in order to preserve environmentally-sensitive areas in dedicated, perpetual green space. 
"Density bonus" is the amount of additional density applicable to a type of development in the CRSO district according to the quality construction standards established herein. 
"Green space" means an area of land within the subdivision boundary whish shall remain in a permanent undeveloped condition except for amenity areas. The ownership, uses, limitations of use and maintenance of such land shall be determined through a written management plan to be approved by the city at or before approval of the final plat for property approved for this district. The green space shall include net usable acreage and should include non-usable acreage within the gross acreage of the subdivision. 
"Holder" means a governmental body empowered to hold an interest in real property under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States; or a charitable corporation, charitable association, or charitable trust, the purposes or powers of which include retaining or protecting the natural, scenic, or green space values of real property, assuring the availability of real property for agricultural, forestry, recreational, or green space use, protecting natural resources, maintaining or enhancing air or water quality, or preserving the historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural aspects of real property. 
"Master development plan" is a site plan that depicts the proposed subdivision layout including lot dimensions, rights-of-way (street) layout, parking facilities, sidewalks, multiuse paths, stormwater detention/retention facilities, green space area including any physiographic characteristics, buffers, and amenities. The master development plan shall also provide the amount of land in one hundred-year floodplain, rights-of-way, stormwater detention/retention ponds, nonresidential lands, public lands, net usable area and amount of green space. Furthermore, the master development plan shall state the proposed density; quality construction standards to be met and the corresponding density bonuses to be applied, if any; percentage of impervious surfaces; and any other information required by the city. 
"Net usable area (nua)" mean the area of land on which dwellings may be constructed but exclusive of streets; rights-of-way; one hundred-year floodplain or flood hazard areas; stormwater detention/retention ponds; land used solely for commercial, office, institutional, or industrial uses, and public lands. Easements for stormwater, sanitary sewer, or water services shall not be excluded from nua. 
"Pocket parks" are parks for passive recreational uses consisting (typically) of one-quarter of an acre to not more than one acre of nua acreage the purpose of which is to provide green space for recreational use within walking distance of most residences, especially those located farthest from amenity areas or access to green space. This allows for a slightly larger pocket park area in terms of more formal elements for consideration during the zoning or preliminary plat process. 
"Residential garage" shall mean an enclosed structure attached to or part of the principal dwelling for housing at least two vehicles. All single-family CRSO home garages shall have the following minimum dimensions: vehicular entrance height, seven fee; vehicular entrance width, sixteen feet; garage interior height, eight feet four inches; and overall garage width and depth of no less than twenty feet by twenty feet, respectively. The floor shall be constructed of concrete. Concrete floors shall be reinforced, where appropriate, and a minimum of four inches in thickness with appropriate fill and base. Residential garages shall not be enclosed for living space, storage purposes or any other purpose without first obtaining a variance from the city and constructing an attached residential garage to the main residential structure. The residential garage shall be kept clear to that a minimum of one vehicle may be parked in the garage at all times. Garages may be placed in the following arrangements on lots as required herein: 
1.  For lots with alleyway access, garages shall either be placed at the rear of the structure or have the garage door at the rear of the main structure. 
2.  For lots without alleyway access, garages may be located with front-entry facing residential streets; side-entry, with garage entry located at the side of a residential structure; or plaza entry, with garage structure in the front of the main residential structure having its garage entry placed to the side. 
"Standard subdivision" means the form of subdivision design where all land areas within the development are typically divided into building lots and rights-of-way with little or no green space is set aside. 
"Third party right of enforcement" means the right provided in a conservation easement to enforce any of its terms granted to a governmental body, charitable corporation, charitable association, or charitable trust, which, although eligible to a holder, is not a holder. 
C.  Permitted Locations for the CRSO District. The CRSO district shall be applied any single-family zoning district (RA, R-1, R-2, R-3) as approved through rezoning by the city council. All properties must have access to an arterial or collector street; however, a CRSO may gain access to a local street where approved by city council according to the master development plan and any required traffic impact analysis on such streets. All CRSO subdivisions must have access to public water and sewer. 
D.  Dimensional Requirements for Conservation Residential Subdivision Overlays: 
1.  The minimum property size shall be twenty-five acres, unless approved by council through a zoning map amendment. Although no maximum acreage amount is established, the city council reserves the right to restrict the number of acres that may be dedicated for CRSO use. 
2.  The average, maximum and minimum lot size shall be as follows, except as provided herein: 

 
* Minimum lot sizes shall be limited to cases of radial lots and no case shall be more than ten percent of the total number of lots within the CRSO subdivision. 
3.  The average, maximum and minimum lot widths (and minimum width at building line) shall be as follows, except as provided herein: 

 
* Minimum lot widths shall be limited to cases of radial lots and no case shall be more than ten percent of the total number of lots within the CRSO subdivision. 
4.  Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND). For developments in the R-2 and R-3 zoning district, an applicant may elect, upon approval of the council and mayor, to develop up to twenty-five percent of the lots within a CRSO as a traditional neighborhood element (TND) consisting of rear alleyways, historic (pre-1940) architectural building styles, and formalized open space within that area defined for TND. Lot widths and lot area may be reduced to no less than fifteen percent of the average in subsections (D)(2) and (D)(3) above. Approval of such reductions shall be approved by the council and mayor during the rezoning request or preliminary plat approval and must include review and approval of submitted architectural standards to be made part of the permanent record of the development. 
5.  The minimum front yard setback shall be as follows in accordance with street classification and off-street parking design: 

 
The front setbacks shall apply depending on lot frontage, regardless of orientation of actual residential home to the street network. All developments shall incorporate reverse-frontage lots except where approved by council and mayor during preliminary plat approval. 
6.  The minimum side yard shall be as follows: 

 
7.  The minimum rear setback shall be twenty-five feet for CRSO in the R-2 and R-3 zoning districts and forty feet for CRSO in the RA and R-1 zoning district. 
8.  The maximum building height shall be that established in the underlying residential zoning district. 
E.  Ownership of Development Site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownerships. If held in multiple ownerships, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
F.  Housing Density Determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation residential subdivision overlay shall be determined by a yield plan plus any applicable quality construction bonus density provided herein. A yield plan shall depict the maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by a registered landscape architect, engineer, or land surveyor of the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible in the underlying zoning district. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
G.  Development Standards. Applications for the CRSO shall be processed in the same manner as an application for a zoning map amendment. CRSO plats shall be processed in the same manner as a standard subdivision plat, with exception of a formal review and approval of a preliminary subdivision plat by city council. All approved preliminary and final plats shall have an additional marking of "CRSO", symbolizing the use of conservation residential subdivision overlay development standards. The minimum development standards that must be met by a CRSO are as follows: 
1.  A minimum of twenty-five percent of the total acreage shall be permanently protected as described elsewhere in this section. Of this required green space total, at least twenty-five percent of that amount shall consist of net usable acreage. 
2.  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the twenty-five percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). 
3.  Unless otherwise provided for below, a seventy-five-foot undisturbed buffer shall be maintained along all exterior streets and a twenty-five-foot undisturbed buffer along the perimeter of the property shall be maintained. 
a.  Existing vegetation shall be of sufficient depth and foliage to provide a visual opaque buffer at a minimum height of six feet from prevailing grade throughout the length of the required undisturbed buffer area. Where such vegetation does not exist, or, where there exists a greater need for a structural buffer (landscaped earthen berm or masonry wall), either additional plantings, or a structural buffer shall be installed under the approval of the council and mayor as part of preliminary plat approval. Use of a structural buffer may allow the reduction of the required buffer width to no less than forty feet at the discretion of the council and mayor. 
b.  Buffer shall not be included in the lot area required for a CRS subdivision. 
4.  Along each side of a perennial stream a one hundred-foot undisturbed buffer is required. A minimum of a twenty-five-foot buffer shall be maintained around all wetlands, ponds and lakes (unless a greater buffer is required); but access easements of no wider than twenty feet may be cleared. The number and location of such easements shall be determined by the community development director. 
5.  All dedications, easements, or other specific measures required to be done to meet the regulations of this section shall be completed prior to the issuance of a building permit on any lot of the subdivision. 
6.  Exterior Elevation Requirements. The following are required for exterior building elevations for lots within the CRSO district: 

 
The term "all brick" shall permit for minor trim elements in the gables and in small portions (less than fifteen percent in surface area) of the front elevation for other masonry (stucco, stone) and fiber cement siding. Vinyl siding shall be permitted only for soffits for all structures. 
7.  Streets must meet the minimum standards as required by the subdivision ordinance, except where varied on preliminary plat approval of city council. 
8.  Paved driveways are required. 
9.  Sidewalks are required except where in conflict with multiuse paths. 
10.  Decorative streetlights required. 
11.  Underground utilities required. 
12.  Minimum heated floor space shall be one thousand eight hundred square feet for a single-story dwelling and two thousand five hundred square feet for a multistory dwelling. A minimum of fifty percent of homes in the subdivision shall be either multistory or contain a minimum of two thousand five hundred square feet of heated floor space. Where use of the TND option is proposed, minimum home size may be reduced by no more than ten percent upon approval by the council and mayor. 
13.  Alleyways are required for all interior lots of a CRSO where practical. For lots along the perimeter of the development, either alleyways or an alternative parking arrangement must be provided. Alternative parking arrangements may consist either of on-street parking a minimum of ten feet in width by twenty feet in length with tree islands every twelve spaces; off-street parking lots developed to commercial standards with minimum size of nine feet in width by eighteen feet in length; or use of an additional ten feet of front setback for additional storage of vehicles on individual lots. For lots seventy-five feet in width or greater, plaza or side-entry garages are required. Where on-street parking is used, it shall be used in conjunction with alleyway lots to prevent conflicts with driveway cuts. All parking should be distributed throughout the development to provide equal access to the lots they are intended to serve. The ratio of alternative parking shall be one space for every three lots, unless otherwise specified by council and mayor. All parking arrangements shall be reviewed with submission for the CRSO and must be approved by city council as part of approval of the preliminary plat. 
14.  Residential parking garages are required. No more than forty percent of the front elevation may consist of a residential parking garage. All lots served by alleys must have garages in the rear yard of the lot. All front or plaza entry garages must use architectural garage doors. 
15.  Multiuse paths are required and should connect lots throughout the development to the majority of the open space and amenity areas. In addition, such multiuse paths shall interconnect with adjoining paths and along such areas designated by the future land use map, the transportation system map, or other equivalent map showing an overall trail system for the city. 
16.  Impervious Cover Requirements. The master development plan shall demonstrate that the subdivision will comply with all impervious cover requirements set forth in the zoning, watershed, wetland, soil erosion, and stormwater ordinance, as applicable. Compliance with the impervious surface requirements shall be certified by a licensed surveyor, engineer, landscape architect, or other licensed professional authorized to render such services under state law. 
17.  The subdivision must be served by public water and sewer with adequate pressure and capacity. 
18.  Required Amenities. 
a.  Except as otherwise provided for herein, all developments under this section shall provide one or more of the following amenities: 
•  A clubhouse of one thousand three hundred minimum square feet. 
•  A minimum sized adult pool of twenty feet × forty feet (in-ground). 
•  A wading pool for children, in addition to the adult sized pool, consisting of a minimum of two hundred square feet. 
•  Tennis courts - one lighted and enclosed facility featuring a minimum of two playing courts. 
•  Walking trails - at least two thousand feet, three feet in width. Multiuse paths can constitute walking trails so long as they are appropriately demarcated to designate that at least four feet of width is solely for pedestrian use. 
•  A baseball field - (reg.) regulation size. 
•  A baseball field - (LL) little league size. 
•  A softball field - regulation size (adult). 
•  A soccer field - regulation size. 
•  A multiuse field - football and soccer. 
•  A multiuse field - football and baseball. 
•  A football field - regulation size. 
•  A lake with access to trails. 
•  A regulation-size basketball court with two backboards, hoops, and next structures. 
•  A pocket park or parks, not to comprise more than fifty percent of the amenities for developments larger than fifty lots. 
The amenities required shall depend on the number of dwelling units included in each development, as follows: 

 
b.  Amenities provided shall be conveniently located for the majority of dwellings and may be located in the required green space. A homeowners' association shall be established and shall be responsible for ownership, liability, and maintenance of all amenities. 
c.  Amenities shall include passive recreation areas. 
d.  City council may accept in lieu of providing an amenity the monetary value of such amenity established by three written estimates from a reputable builder of such amenity items after review by the city manager and/or community development director. Any funds accepted in lieu shall be used for the sole purpose of providing public green space or amenities similar to those listed herein. 
H.  Conservation Protection Implementation. The developer/subdivider/property owner shall submit a written management plan for the protection of all green space prior to the approval of the final plat. The management plan shall include: 
1.  Provisions for the use, restrictions of use, ownership, maintenance, and perpetual preservation of the green space areas; 
2.  Allocation of the responsibility and establishing guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the green space and any facilities located thereon. These guidelines must include provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements if any; 
3.  Estimates of the costs and requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the green space and an outline of the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
4.  The green space required herein shall be permanently protected in perpetuity by a conservation easement conveyed to either the homeowners' association, a qualified land trust, or other entity approved by city council prior to final plat approval. The conservation easement shall be created subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1, which is known as the "Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act." (O.C.G.A. 1981, § 44-10-1 et seq. Enacted by Ga. L. 1192, p. 227, § 1). All such conservation easement shall provide for either enforcement rights or third party enforcement rights, as the case may be, vested in the homeowners' association, city council, and in any other party approved by the city council, and shall provide that the conservation easement may not be terminated or otherwise modified without the consent of the city council and all entities having either a property right or enforcement right therein. 
5.  The green space areas shall be owned and maintained in accordance with the following criteria provided that the record title to the property and the conservation easement shall be held by different entities: 
a.  Record title may be held by: 
i.  Equal share of undivided interest by each lot owner, 
ii.  The homeowners' association, or, 
iii.  Other entity approved by the city. 
b.  Conservation easement may be held by: 
i.  The homeowners' association, 
ii.  The city, or 
iii.  Other entity approved by the city, qualified to be a holder under the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act. 
c.  Maintenance: 
i.  Homeowners' association, or 
ii.  Other entity approved by the city. 
6.  Homeowners' Association: In all cases, a homeowners' association shall be established. Membership shall be automatic and mandatory for all lot owners in the development and their successors and the homeowners' association shall have the power to file liens to collect dues and assessments. The homeowners' association shall be formed under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-3-6, which is known as the "Georgia Property Owners' Association Act." (O.C.G.A. 1981, § 44-3-22, et seq. enacted by Ga. L. 1994, p. 1879, § 1) and shall contain adequate provisions to qualify it as a "holder" under the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, if it is to act as a holder of the conservation easement. The homeowners' associations shall be responsible for the maintenance of private alleyways and amenities. 
I.  Standards for Determining Green Space. 
1.  The minimum area of green space preserved shall be determined by multiplying the total acreage included in the CRSO by twenty-five percent with at least twenty-five percent of that minimum green space amount shall consisting of net usable acreage. The result shall constitute the minimum amount of area that must be preserved. 
2.  Physiographic characteristics. The types of land area included in the green space shall include the following: 
a.  Floodprone areas, floodplains, and floodway, 
b.  Wetlands, 
c.  Ponds, lakes, including perennial and intermittent streams, rivers, including their required buffer zones, 
d.  Waters of the state, 
e.  Wellhead protection zones, 
f.  Slopes twenty-five percent and steeper, 
g.  Areas with shallow bedrock, 
h.  Areas and soils which, when disturbed, are prone to excessive erosion, 
i.  Prime views and vistas, 
j.  Areas of historical or archaeological significance, 
k.  Cemeteries, 
l.  Populations of endangered species, or habitat for such species, and 
m.  Other similar areas which are less suitable for development. 
3.  The green space shall be an integrated part of the subdivision rather than an isolated element, and fragmentation of the green space shall be minimized. At least seventy-five percent of the green space shall be contiguous. Individual green space parcels generally shall be larger than two acres. Exceptions may be made for entrances to trails, pocket parks and other particular uses as deemed appropriate by city council. 
4.  Green space shall be located, to the greatest extent practical, to provide for interconnected greenways or vegetated corridors within the city and between jurisdictions. 
5.  The green space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the green space. 
6.  Where practicable green space areas shall also be configured to provide a greater buffer area than the minimum buffer required hereunder between adjoining property outside the conservation residential subdivision and the dwelling units within the subdivision. 
J.  Permitted Uses of Green Space. 
1.  Uses of green space may include the following: 
a.  Conservation of natural, archaeological or historical resources; 
b.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
c.  Multiuse paths, private alleyways where they include multiuse paths, or walking trails; 
d.  Passive recreation areas such as parks, community gardens, playing fields or recreation facilities primarily for the use of the subdivision residents and their guests (including required amenities and additional amenities); 
e.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space requirement; 
f.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts; 
g.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
h.  Other conservation-oriented uses if approved by the city council. 
2.  Non-permissible uses: 
a.  Golf courses; 
b.  Roads and other impervious surfaces (except for the required amenities and additional amenities) unless to provide connection to adjoining properties or as approved by city council; 
c.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and, 
d.  Other uses inconsistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
K.  Quality Construction Density Bonuses. Upon application for the CRSO district or upon approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider/developer may choose to enhance the construction quality of the development according to the standards listed below and receive the corresponding density bonus. The maximum total of all density bonuses used shall not exceed the following for the underlying zoning district applicable to the property: 

 
* Dependent upon the final lot yield in the underlying zoning district. Actual yield plan may be less. 
No quality construction density bonuses shall be permitted in the Indian Creek or Tussahaw watershed protection district. Quality construction standards implemented by the subdivider/developer shall be noted as a requirement on the final plat. Allowable density bonuses include the following: 
1.  0.1 bonus density unit per net usable acre for each additional ten percent of the dwellings constructed with all sides brick above the minimum exterior requirements hereunder. 
2.  0.05 bonus density unit per net usable acre for each additional ten percent of the dwellings constructed with front side brick above the minimum exterior requirements hereunder, but the total amount of bonus shall not exceed .25. 
3.  0.1 bonus density units per net usable acre if eighty percent or more of the dwellings in the subdivision are built with front porches as minimum of ten feet in length by six feet in width. 
4.  0.05 bonus density unit per net usable acre for an additional one hundred square feet increase in the minimum heated floor space for the development, but the total amount of bonus shall not exceed 0.25. 
5.  0.1 bonus density unit per net usable acre for installation of traffic calming devices appropriately located throughout the development as speed tables and/or landscaped roundabouts. 
(Ord. 06-10-085 § 1) 
(Ord. No. 09-04-016, §§ I—IV, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 14-10-050, § 1, 11-17-14) 
17.04.161—17.04.270 - Reserved. 
Article II - Appeals and Variances 

17.04.271 - Appeals. 
A.  When it is alleged that an error has been made in interpretation of the provisions of this chapter or when a decision relating to provisions of this chapter aggrieves any person an appeal shall be made within thirty days of the decision. 
B.  Such appeal shall be filed with the community development department director and the purpose of the appeal shall be specified in writing. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 4, 5, 7-5-05) 
17.04.272 - Appeals process. 
The city council shall establish a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and shall give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest; and shall decide the appeal within reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 4, 5, 7-5-05) 
17.04.273 - Variances. 
The city council is authorized upon appeal in specific cases to consider such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the chapter will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings, or structures in the same or in other districts shall not constitute a reason for a variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the city council that all the following conditions exist: 
A.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district. 
B.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties of the district in which the property is located. 
C.  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located. 
D.  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare. 
E.  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant. 
F.  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
G.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings, or structures which is not permitted by right in the district involved. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 4, 5, 7-5-05) 
17.04.274 - Variance procedure. 
A.  An applicant requesting a variance may submit an application for a hearing before the city council if his/her request meets all of the following conditions: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same zoning district. 
2.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties within the city or within a similar zoning or overlay district. 
3.  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties within the city or within a similar zoning or overlay district. 
4.  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter, the specific zoning of the property and the land use plan and will not be injurious to the general welfare of the community. 
5.  The special circumstances or justifications for the variance are not the result of self-imposed actions or misfortunes of the applicant. 
6.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building, or structure which is not permitted by right in the overlaying zoning district or scheme of the land use plan. 
7.  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 4, 5, 7-5-05) 
17.04.275 - Administrative variances. 
The community development department director shall have the power to grant variances from the development standards of this chapter where, in his opinion, the intent of the chapter can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a variance. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variance from the following requirements: 
1.  Front yard or yard adjacent to public street: Variance not to exceed five feet. 
2.  Side yard: Variance not to exceed two feet. 
3.  Rear yard: Variance not to exceed four feet. 
4.  Height of building: Variance not to exceed five feet. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 4, 5, 7-5-05) 
17.04.276 - Fees. 
All requests by private groups, individuals, businesses and other nonpublic organizations for appeals and variances shall be accompanied by a filing fee which is maintained in the office of the community development department director. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 4, 5, 7-5-05) 
17.04.277 - Appeals and variances. 
A.  The city council shall consider all of the following prior to making a decision: 
1.  The report of recommendations submitted by the community development department. 
2.  Whether all specific requirements of this chapter relative to consideration of a variance have been met. 
3.  The impact the proposed use may have on traffic and neighboring properties. 
4.  The physical characteristics of the site and its suitability for the proposed request. The elements of topography, drainage, size and shape of the land(s) should be part of the decision making process. 
5.  The adequacy and availability of public infrastructure (water, sewer, roads, etc.) to serve the request. 
6.  Whether the applicant has agreed to any specific conditions that will enhance his/her request and will protect the public interest and assure the continued beneficial use of nearby properties. 
7.  Whether the request will further or support the goals and objectives of the land use plan and will not be detrimental to nearby properties and property values. 
B.  The city council may consider such other information specifically related to public health, safety, aesthetics, and the general welfare of the residents of the city, including without limitation the potential impact on city infrastructure, the impact on adjacent property owners, and necessary road improvements/alignments/relocations. 
C.  The city council shall hold a public hearing on all variances and appeals. The hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and Henry County no less than fifteen days prior to the date of the scheduled meeting and no more than forty-five days prior to the date of the scheduled meeting. 
D.  The city council shall at its next regular public meeting make a decision on all variances and appeals based on the report of the community development department and from the public hearing. 
E.  Should the city council deny a request on a parcel(s) of land, then the same request may not be considered until the expiration of at least six months from the date of denial. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 4, 5, 7-5-05) 
17.04.278—17.04.290 - Reserved. 
Article III - Conditional Uses and Conditional Exceptions 

17.04.291 - Generally. 
The following standards and guidelines shall apply to all conditional use and conditional exception requests as permitted in the zoning districts of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 6, 77-5-05) 
17.04.292 - Procedure for review and public hearing before the city council. 
A.  The city council shall review requests for conditional uses and conditional exceptions after completion and review of an application to the city community development department. The application shall be submitted to the city community development director for technical review. A site plan reflecting compliance with all appropriate provisions of this chapter shall accompany the application. The city department community development director shall make a report to the city council on each request. The community development department director and/or the city council may require additional information necessary to evaluate the application. 
B.  The city council shall hold a public hearing that shall be advertised in a paper of general circulation within the city and Henry County no less than fifteen days prior to the hearing and no more than forty-five days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 6, 77-5-05) 
17.04.293 - Action by city council. 
A.  The city council shall make a final decision on the request at their next regular public meeting. 
B.  The city council shall consider all of the following prior to making a decision: 
1.  The report submitted by the community development department and from the public hearing. 
2.  Whether all the specific requirements of this chapter relative to consideration of a conditional use or conditional exception have been met. 
3.  The impact the proposed use may have on traffic and/or the adverse effect it may cause to neighboring properties. 
4.  The physical characteristics of the site and its sustainability for the proposed request. The elements of topography, drainage, size and shape of the land(s) should be part of the council's decision making process. 
5.  The adequacy and availability of public infrastructure (water, sewer, roads, etc.) to serve the request. 
6.  Whether the applicant has agreed to any specific conditions that will enhance his/her request and will protect the public interest and assure the continued beneficial use of nearby properties. 
7.  Whether the request will further or support the goals and objectives of the land use plan and will not be detrimental to nearby properties and property values. 
C.  The city council may consider such information specifically related to public health, safety, aesthetics and the general welfare of the residents of the city, including without limitation the potential impact on city infrastructure, the impact on adjacent property owners, necessary road improvements/alignments/relocations. 
D.  Should the city council deny a request for conditional use/exception on a parcel(s) of land, then the same request may not be considered until the expiration of at least six months from the date of denial. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 6, 7, 77-5-05) 
17.04.294—17.04.310 - Reserved. 
Article IV - Amendments 

17.04.311 - Amendments to chapter and to official zoning map. 
This chapter, including the official zoning map, may be amended by the city council that shall become effective after review and comment in a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 8, 9, 7-5-05) 
17.04.312 - Application for amendment. 
A.  A zoning map amendment may be proposed by any public agency or department of Locust Grove, Georgia or by the city council. Unless initiated by one of the above bodies, all applications for map amendments must be submitted by an individual with fifty-one or more percent ownership in fee simple of the subject property being petitioned for rezoning, or his legal agent authorized in writing over the owner's signature. 
B.  Any petition for amendment of the Locust Grove Zoning Ordinance or official zoning map shall be accompanied by a filing fee which is maintained in the office of the community development department. 
C.  Applications for zoning map amendments shall be filed with the Locust Grove Community Development Department, which will schedule the application for public hearing before the city council. 
D.  Applications for a zoning map amendment must contain the following: 
1.  A completed and signed copy of the application for zoning map amendment. 
2.  A sketch plat/site plan representing information on the location, extent and type of proposed development, which may include, depending upon the type of development, the following minimum types of information: 
a.  Correct scale and north arrow. 
b.  The present zoning classification of all adjacent parcels. 
c.  The location of the parcel relative to existing or proposed public streets. 
d.  Required zoning yard setbacks for the zoning district requested. 
e.  Topographic information sufficient to show elevation and drainage conditions of the land. 
f.  Existing conditions or improvements on the property. 
g.  The location and extent of required buffer areas, including the extent of natural vegetation or fences as required. 
h.  Proposed lot layout of the property if it is to be a subdivision for residential, commercial or industrial development, with required building line setbacks and buffer areas shown. 
i.  Commercial or industrial development on existing individual lots, or proposed shopping center developments shall also indicate the location and dimensions of proposed buildings, parking and loading areas, driveways and storage areas. 
j.  Report from the Henry County Health Department and the Henry County Water and Sewerage Authority and/or (as applicable) the city utility department. 
k.  The community development department may require additional information, or information different from the above depending upon the type of development, to properly evaluate the zoning map amendment. 
3.  A copy of the proposed restrictive covenants to be placed upon property that a rezoning application is being made therefore. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 8, 9, 7-5-05) 
17.04.313 - Review of application for amendment. 
A.  All proposed amendments to this chapter or to the official zoning map with required site plans shall be transmitted to the community development department director and city council for analysis and public hearing. The community development department director shall study the need and justification of the following facts: 
1.  The possible effects of the change in the regulations or map on the character of a zoning district, a particular piece of property, neighborhood, a particular area, or the community. 
2.  The relation that the proposed amendment bears to the purpose of the overall zoning scheme with due consideration given to whether or not the proposed change will help carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
3.  Consistency with the land use plan. 
4.  The potential impact of the proposed amendment on county infrastructure including water and sewerage systems. 
5.  The impact of the proposed amendment on adjacent thoroughfares and pedestrian and vehicular circulation and traffic volumes. 
6.  The impact upon adjacent property owners should the request be approved. 
7.  The ability of the subject land to be developed as it is presently zoned. 
8.  The physical conditions of the site relative to its capability to be developed as requested, including topography, drainage, access, and size and shape of the property. 
9.  The merits of the requested change in zoning relative to any other guidelines and policies for development which the city council may use in furthering the objectives of the land use plan. 
B.  After completing the analysis and review, the city council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed zoning map amendment. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 8, 9, 7-5-05) 
17.04.314 - Notification and public hearing. 
A.  If Locust Grove, Georgia is taking action resulting in a zoning decision, it shall provide for a hearing on the proposed action. At least fifteen but not more than forty-five days prior to the date of the hearing, the community development department shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the city limits and Henry County a notice of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
B.  If a zoning decision of Locust Grove, Georgia is for the rezoning of property and the rezoning is initiated by a party other than city officials or a city department then: 
1.  The notice, in addition to the foregoing requirements, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and 
2.  A sign containing information required by this chapter shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property not less than fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing. 
C.  If the property proposed for rezoning does not have frontage on a public street, then the sign may be posted on the right-of-way of the nearest public street which provides access to the site. No public hearing may be held by the city council until said sign(s) have been posted for at least fifteen days. Said signs shall remain posted until final action has been taken by the city council. 
D.  Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, whether the proposed amendment is a text or map amendment, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon for the purpose of receiving and considering public comment on the merits of the proposed amendment. Said hearings shall be held only after full compliance with all required public notification of the hearing as set forth herein. 
E.  If the zoning decision of the city council is to deny the rezoning request, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 8, 9, 7-5-05) 
17.04.315 - Procedure for hearing before city council. 
A.  All proposed amendments to this chapter or to the official zoning map with required site plans shall be considered at public hearing. The city council shall consider the following: 
1.  The possible effects of the change in the regulations or map on the character of a zoning district, a particular piece of property, neighborhood, a particular area, or the community. 
2.  The relation that the proposed amendment bears to the purpose of the overall zoning scheme with due consideration given to whether or not the proposed change will help carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
3.  Consistency with the land use plan. 
4.  The potential impact of the proposed amendment on city infrastructure including water and sewerage systems. 
5.  The impact of the proposed amendment on adjacent thoroughfares and pedestrian vehicular circulation and traffic volumes. 
6.  The impact upon adjacent property owners should the request be approved. 
7.  The ability of the subject land to be developed as it is presently zoned. 
8.  The physical conditions of the site relative to its capability to be developed as requested, including topography, drainage, access, and size and shape of the property. 
9.  The merits of the requested change in zoning relative to any other guidelines and policies for development which the community development commission and city council may use in furthering the objectives of the land use plan. 
B.  The following rules of procedure shall govern the public hearing before the city council: 
1.  Each applicant shall appear before the council, identify himself/herself by name, address and whether or not applicant is owner or agent for owner. 
2.  Each applicant or other interested party who provides the council with documents shall have each document numbered and shall identify each document and each such document submitted shall be made a part of the official record of the hearing. 
3.  a.  Each applicant shall have thirty minutes to present facts pertinent to the application. An applicant may have additional time to address the council if the applicant notifies the city clerk prior to the start of the public hearing that applicant needs additional time. The additional time shall be limited to ten minutes. 
b.  Each person in opposition to rezoning of property and amendment to the zoning ordinance shall have ten minutes to address the council and shall provide the city clerk with name and address; however, the total time for all interested parties in opposition shall be thirty minutes unless the applicant requests for additional time in subsection (a) above, and then the total time shall not exceed forty minutes. 
4.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall make a final decision and its next regular public meeting and direct the community development department to notify the applicant in writing of the council's decision. The decision shall be based on the information contained in Section 17.04.315(A) and from the public hearing. The written notification shall immediately be entered on the minutes and made a part of the record on the date that written notification is given to the applicant. 
5.  Any aggrieved party shall have thirty days from the date of written notification to file an appeal from the council's decision with the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 8, 9, 7-5-05) 
17.04.316 - Conditional zoning. 
A.  In deciding upon any application for zoning map amendment, the city council may, on their own motion or upon the suggestion of the applicant, or on consideration of the recommendations of the community development department, grant the application subject to certain conditions necessary to promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  The city council may grant approval of a zoning map amendment and include conditional approval as follows: 
1.  Such conditions as deemed necessary to protect neighboring properties and to lessen any potentially adverse effects of the zoning change; 
2.  That the rezoning is conditional upon the condition that the applicant or any successor in title may construct only those uses and only in such a manner as depicted upon any site plan submitted and approved with the application; and, 
3.  That the rezoning is conditional upon any written conditions proposed by the applicant and/or city council, and as further set forth on an approved site plan. 
C.  Prior to a final vote being taken upon any application for a zoning map amendment for which such conditions shall be imposed, such conditions shall be announced at the public hearing and made a part of the motion to approve. If the applicant finds such conditions to be unacceptable, it may, at the time, withdraw the application for zoning map amendment. Such withdrawal shall not enable the applicant to re-file the same zoning map amendment for the same property until six months have elapsed from the date of withdrawal. 
D.  Any zoning map amendment which is adopted with conditions shall be indicated on the official zoning map. The property shall be indicated on the official zoning map with the suffix "c" to indicate that the property has been rezoned with conditions. Such conditions shall remain imposed upon the property until removed or modified by the city council. 
E.  Conditional requirements may be imposed upon either permitted and/or conditional use within any zoning district. In ruling upon such requirements, the city council shall utilize the standards of review contained in Section 17.04.313 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 8, 9, 7-5-05) 
17.04.317 - Types of zoning conditions. 
In adopting an amendment to the zoning map, or approving a conditional use permitted in any zoning district, the city council may impose conditions, such as, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  Setback requirements from any lot line; 
B.  Specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas; 
C.  Restrictions on land use activities to be permitted; 
D.  Maximum building dimensions and height; 
E.  Landscaping or planted area which may include the location, type and maintenance of plant materials within a designated buffer area; 
F.  Fences, walls, earthen berms, or other landscape buffer provisions or protective measures; 
G.  Preservation of existing trees and vegetation; 
H.  Special conditions to eliminate or reduce undesirable views, light, glare, dust or odor; 
I.  Hours of operation; 
J.  Architectural details to be compatible with existing buildings in the area; 
K.  Adherence to specific site plans as adopted; and 
L.  Any other requirements that the city council may deem appropriate and necessary for the protection of public health and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 8, 9, 7-5-05) 
17.04.318 - Reversion. 
After an approval has been granted for a map amendment to create or extend any zoning district, the applicant, agent or property owner has twelve months in which to make substantial progress in developing the property. Substantial progress shall mean the point of construction at which time the first inspection is carried out. If no substantial construction or alteration of the property or other affirmative action to develop the property has occurred within twelve months of the granting of an application for rezoning, the city council shall review the situation and report its findings with who can, at a public hearing change, the zoning category to its prior or other appropriate zoning district classification. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 8, 9, 7-5-05) 
17.04.319 - Invalidation of preliminary subdivision plat. 
If no substantial construction or alteration of the property or other affirmative action to develop the property occurs within twelve months of the effective date of granting approval of a preliminary plat, said plat approval may become void. Unless there are circumstances that clearly justify an extension of time, the city council may nullify the preliminary plat approval and so instruct the community development department director to: 
A.  Inform the preliminary plat applicant by letter of the actions of the community development commission; and 
B.  Inform the property owner that land alteration shall terminate until another preliminary plat is approved. 
(Ord. No. 04-07-059, §§ 8, 9, 7-5-05) 
17.04.320 - Reserved. 
Title 18 - CABLE SERVICES AND OTHER TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FRANCHISING 
Chapters: 
Chapter 18.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

18.04.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this title, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
"Cable services" means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
"Cable system" means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
"City" means the city of Locust Grove. 
"City council" means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
"Franchise" means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
"Grantee" means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable or telecommunications services or both, to inhabitants within the franchise area. 
"May" is permissive. 
"Person" means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
"Shall" is mandatory, not merely directive. 
"Streets" means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
"Telecommunications services" means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial cable, optical fiber, or satellite or microwave transmission, of one or more audio, voice or data signals. "Telecommunications services" includes both cable services and noncable telecommunications services. 
"Title" means this title and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. 95-10.9.C § 1 (1.1.01—1.1.12)) 
18.04.020 - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this title to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this title or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or franchisee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this title. 
(Ord. 95-10.9.C § 1(3.2)) 
Chapter 18.08 - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 
Sections: 

18.08.010 - Franchise—Granting authority. 
A.  No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this title and no person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications service other than cable services without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
B.  The city council may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this title; provided, that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this title by amendment hereof. 
C.  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. 
D.  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services. 
E.  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city and for all or less than all telecommunications services, and for telecommunications services for all or less than all purposes. 
F.  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, governing cable television franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. 95-10.9.C § 1(2.1)) 
18.08.020 - Franchise applications. 
A.  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
B.  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
1.  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
2.  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant, 
b.  The names, residence and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity, 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby, 
d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications or cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable or telecommunications system in the city, 
e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement, and 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system or telecommunications franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable or telecommunications system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof; 
3.  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A description of the cable services and any other telecommunications services proposed to be provided, 
b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced, 
c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other telecommunications service charges, 
d.  A detailed, informative and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant, 
e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable or telecommunications services, and 
f.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
4.  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines or conduits; and 
5.  Any other details, statements, supplementary information or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the Council, or by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. 95-10.9.C § 1(2.2)) 
18.08.030 - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises. 
No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
A.  Purpose of Application Fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal and consultant's expenses. 
B.  Application Fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this title, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of two thousand dollars by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city of Locust Grove. 
(Ord. 95-10.9.C § 1(2.2.03)) 
18.08.040 - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 95-10.9.C § 1(2.3)) 
18.08.050 - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. 95-10.9.C § 1(2.4)) 
18.08.060 - Evaluation criteria. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
A.  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
B.  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
C.  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
D.  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to be provided, including the type of telecommunications services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
E.  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
F.  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(Ord. 95-10.9.C § 1(2.5)) 
18.08.070 - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
A.  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
B.  If the city council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider one or more applications, the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
C.  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
D.  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Ord. 95-10.9.C § 1(2.6)) 
18.08.080 - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this title shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
A.  The term of the franchise; 
B.  The franchise area and the cable services and other telecommunications services and purposes of such other telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of the franchise; 
C.  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
D.  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or canceled; 
E.  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise; 
F.  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee; 
G.  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee; 
H.  The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
I.  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
J.  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
K.  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the franchisee by the city; 
L.  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
M.  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
N.  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; 
O.  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
P.  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
Q.  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(Ord. 95-10.9.C § 1(2.7)) 
Chapter 18.09 - STATE CABLE OR VIDEO FRANCHISES 
Sections: 

18.09.010 - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
The city requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the state of Georgia. 
(Ord. 08-01-002 § 2) 
18.09.020 - Authorized designee. 
The city authorizes mayor, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. 08-01-002 § 3) 
STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR GEORGIA CITIES AND TOWNS 
The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to Georgia cities and towns. They are up to date through the Regular Session of the 2016 Legislative Session. 
General Provisions 
Incorporation of municipal corporations 
OCGA ch. 36-31 
Powers of municipal corporations generally 
OCGA chs. 36-30 and 36-34 
Home rule 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II; OCGA ch. 36-35 
Limitations on home rule powers 
OCGA § 36-35-6 
Elections 
OCGA title 21 
Ordinances 
OCGA §§ 36-30-3; 36-35-3 
Local government code enforcement boards 
OCGA ch. 36-74 
Penalty limits 
OCGA §§ 36-30-8 and 36-35-6(a)(2) 
Annexation of territory 
OCGA ch. 36-36 
Administration and Personnel 
Administrative powers generally 
OCGA § 36-34-2 
Officers generally 
OCGA §§ 36-30-4 et seq., 36-34-2 
Vacancies in office 
OCGA § 36-30-13 
Ethics in Government Act 
OCGA ch. 21-5 
Public meetings 
OCGA ch. 50-14 
Ordinances not to bind succeeding councils 
OCGA § 36-30-3 
Municipal courts 
OCGA ch. 36-32 
Park or recreation boards 
OCGA § 36-64-5 
Liability for acts or omissions of officers 
OCGA ch. 36-33 
Municipal training 
OCGA ch. 36-45 
Police and fire protection 
Ga. Const. Art IX, § II, para. III 
Peace officer training 
OCGA ch. 35-8 
Compensation of law enforcement officers 
OCGA § 36-30-9 
Mutual aid agreements 
OCGA ch. 36-69 
Revenue and Finance 
Financial provisions generally 
OCGA §§ 36-80-2 et seq., 36-60-7, 36-60-8 
Powers of taxation and expenditure 
Ga. Const. Art IX, § IV 
Limits on taxing power 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. VIII 
Fiscal year 
OCGA § 36-81-3 
Limits on local debt 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § V 
Municipal taxation 
OCGA § 48-5-350 et seq. 
Revenue bonds 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § VI 
Budgets and audits 
OCGA ch. 36-81 
Bonds 
OCGA chs. 36-38 and 36-82 
Local government investment pool 
OCGA ch. 36-83 
Public works bidding 
OCGA ch. 36-91 
Interlocal risk management agencies 
OCGA ch. 36-85 
Acquisition, sale and lease of real and personal property 
OCGA ch. 36-37 
Grants of state funds 
OCGA ch. 36-40 
Urban residential finance authorities 
OCGA ch. 36-41 
Downtown development authorities 
OCGA ch. 36-42 
City business improvement districts 
OCGA ch. 36-43 
Immunity from antitrust liability 
OCGA ch. 36-65 
Business and occupation taxes 
OCGA ch. 48-13 
Fees and taxes on insurance companies 
OCGA ch. 33-8 
Special assessments 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § VI 
Business Licenses and Regulations 
Alcoholic beverages 
OCGA title 3 
Business and occupation taxes 
OCGA ch. 48-13 & §§ 36-60-6 and 36-60-9 
Cable television 
OCGA §§ 36-18-3, 36-34-2(7) 
Adult bookstores and theaters 
OCGA § 36-60-3 
Self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps 
OCGA § 36-60-1 
Animals 
Animals generally 
OCGA title 4 
Dogs 
OCGA ch. 4-8 
Responsible Dog Ownership Law 
OCGA § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Health and Safety 
Food service establishments 
OCGA § 26-2-370 et seq. 
Air quality control 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Public health facilities 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Facilities for treatment of patients 
OCGA § 36-34-4 
Fireworks 
OCGA ch. 25-10 
Garbage collection and disposal 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Police and fire protection 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Alarm systems 
OCGA § 36-60-12 
Unfit buildings 
OCGA §§ 36-61-11 and 41-2-7 et seq. 
War on terrorism local assistance 
OCGA ch. 36-75 
Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
State criminal code 
OCGA title 16 
Prohibition on regulating conduct which is prohibited by state criminal law 
OCGA § 36-35-6(a)(2) 
Vehicles and Traffic 
Vehicle code 
OCGA title 40 
Powers of local authorities 
OCGA § 40-6-370 et seq. 
Prosecution of traffic offenders 
OCGA ch. 40-13 
Abandoned and junked motor vehicles 
OCGA ch. 40-11; OCGA § 36-60-4 
Public transportation 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
Street and sidewalk construction and maintenance 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III; OCGA §§ 36-60-5, 36-30-11, 36-30-12 
Street improvements 
OCGA ch. 36-39 
Street obstructions 
OCGA § 36-30-10 
Parks and recreation areas 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III; OCGA ch. 36-64 
Botanical gardens 
OCGA § 36-34-5.2 
Zoos 
OCGA § 36-34-5.3 
Public Services 
Water and sewer systems 
OCGA § 36-34-5 
Industrial waste water treatment services 
OCGA § 36-60-2 
Library services 
OCGA § 36-34-5.1 
Buildings and Construction 
Building codes 
OCGA ch. 8-2 
State building codes 
OCGA § 8-2-20 et seq. 
Planning and Zoning 
Generally 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. IV 
Zoning procedures 
OCGA ch. 36-66 
Conflict of interest in zoning actions 
OCGA ch. 36-67A 
Coordinated and comprehensive planning 
OCGA ch. 36-70 
Development impact fees 
OCGA ch. 36-71 
CROSS-REFERENCE TABLE 
This table provides users with the current disposition of the sections of the Locust Grove Municipal Code. 
Thus, prior code Section 1.10 appears in this code in Chapter 1.04. 
The prior code section information was derived from the Revised Ordinances of the City of Locust Grove. 
As of Supplement No. 7, this table will no longer be updated. 

 
As of Supplement No. 7, this table will no longer be updated. 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
Beginning with Supplement No. 7, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 

 

 

 
Beginning with Supplement No. 7, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of Locust Grove beginning with Supplement No. 7, included in this Code. 

 