Chapter 50 - FLOODS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 42; soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 42-211 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; zoning ordinance, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B; airport zoning ordinance, app. C.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note—Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, adopted Sept. 11, 2008, repealed the former art. II, §§ 50-31—50-105, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1976, § 9-6001; Ord. No. 87-45, art. 1, §§ A—D, art. 2, art. 3, §§ A—H, art. 4, §§ A—D, art. 5, §§ A—E, adopted July 9, 1987.
DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 
Sec. 50-31. - Authorization.     Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a), have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Valdosta, Georgia, does ordain as follows. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-32. - Findings of fact. (a)	The flood hazard areas of Valdosta, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. (b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-33. - Statement of purpose.     It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: (1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; (2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities or erosion; (3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; (4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and (5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-34. - Objectives.     The objectives of this article are to: (1)	Protect human life and health;(2)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; (3)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; (4)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;(5)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; (6)	Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and(7)	Insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area.(Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Secs. 50-35—50-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 50-61. - Lands to which this article applies.     This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Valdosta, Georgia. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-62. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. (a)	The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. (b)	For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 26, 2008 with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for ("unincorporated Lowndes County") are hereby adopted by reference. (c)	Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. (d)	The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Engineering Department, 300 N. Lee Street, City Hall Annex Bldg 2nd floor. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-63. - Establishment of development permit.     A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-64. - Compliance.     No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-65. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.     This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-66. - Interpretation.     In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit, nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-67. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.     The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Valdosta or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-68. - Penalties for violation.     Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $300.00 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Valdosta from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Secs. 50-69—50-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 
Sec. 50-91. - Designation of ordinance administrator.     The City of Valdosta City Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of the ordinance from which this article derives. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-92. - Permit procedures.     Application for a development permit shall be made to the city engineer on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment and drainage facilities.     Specifically, the following information is required: (1)	Application stage: a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 50-122(2); d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. (2)	Construction stage: For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.     Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city engineer shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-93. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.     Duties of the city engineer shall include, but shall not be limited to: (1)	Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. (2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. (3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. (4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 50-62, then the city engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4. (5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 50-92(2). (6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 50-92(2). (7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the city engineer shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 50-92(1)c. and subsections 50-122(2) or 50-124(2). (8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. (9)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. (11)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city engineer shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. (12)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city engineer and shall be open for public inspection. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Secs. 50-94—50-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
Sec. 50-121. - General standards.     In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: (1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; (2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; (3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; (4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. b.	So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. (5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; (6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; (7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; (8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; (9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and (10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-122. - Specific standards.     In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: (1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 50-121(4), "Elevated buildings". a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. (2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to two feet above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 50-93(6). (3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels; (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation; or 2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (reference subsection 50-121(6) above). d.	All recreational vehicles placed on-sites must either:1.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 3.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a. and c., above. (4)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 50-62, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. b.	Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-123. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones).     Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 50-62, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: (1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 50-62, then the city engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (subsections (2) and (3), below) shall apply. (2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. (3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 50-121(4) "Elevated buildings". a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The city engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-124. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones).     Areas of special flood hazard established in section 50-62, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: (1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 50-121(4), "Elevated buildings". The city engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus two feet, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 50-92(1)c. and 50-92(2). (3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-125. - Standards for subdivisions. (a)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. (b)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. (c)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (d)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-126. - Standards for critical facilities. (a)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. (b)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Secs. 50-127—50-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES 
Sec. 50-151. - Variances procedures. (a)	The floodplain board as established by mayor and council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. (b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision or determination is made by the mayor/council in the enforcement or administration of this article. (c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the floodplain board may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Lowndes County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. (d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. (e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. (g)	In reviewing such requests, the floodplain board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Sec. 50-152. - Conditions for variances. (a)	A variance shall be issued only when there is:(1)	A finding of good and sufficient cause;(2)	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and (3)	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. (b)	The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. (c)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (d)	The city engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.     Upon consideration of the factors listed in this division, above and the purposes of this article, the floodplain board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)
Secs. 50-153—50-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 50-181. - Terms defined.     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.     Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like.     Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction".     Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain board's interpretation of any provision of this article.     Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.     Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 50-62.     Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.     Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30 and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.     Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.     Building means any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.     Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: (1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic or water-reactive materials; (2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; (3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and (4)	Generating plants and other principal points of utility lines.    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations and storage of materials or equipment.     Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.     Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 1987 [i.e., the effective date of the first Floodplain Management Code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)].     Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 1987 [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community].     Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.     Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A.     Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.     Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.     Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding.     Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.     Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.     Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.     Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building.     Historic structure means any structure that is: (1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; orb.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code.     Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.     Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.     Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).     National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.     New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after July 1987 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)].     New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 1987 [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community].     North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.     Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: (1)	Built on a single chassis;(2)	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.     Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.     Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank.     Subdivision the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development.     Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.     Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. (NOTE: The market value of the structure should be: (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.) This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".     Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.     Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article.     Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. No. 2008-40, § 1, 9-11-2008)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Chapter 54 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 42; floods, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98.State Law reference— Health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq.; regulations for septic tanks or individual sewerage management systems in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; authority to provide public health facilities and services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE RULES, REGULATIONS 
Sec. 54-31. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Health officer means the county director of health or his authorized representatives. Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-32. - Adopted.     The following rules and regulations of the state department of human resources are adopted: (1)	Chapter 290-5-26, On-Site Sewage Management Systems, April 27, 1984.(2)	Chapter 290-5-14, Food Service, revised September 10, 1986.(3)	Chapter 290-5-18, Tourist Courts, revised April 27, 1984.(Code 1976, § 11-4005; Ord. No. 96-5, 1-25-1996)
Sec. 54-33. - Issuance of citation. (a)	Upon information of a violation of any of the rules and regulations adopted in this article being made known to the county health officer or to his designee, there shall cause a citation to be issued requiring such violator to appear before the judge of the municipal court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for such violation. (b)	Citations issued under this section shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and shall be personally served upon the person accused of such violation. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
Sec. 54-34. - Penalty for violation. (a)	Any person violating the provisions of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-11. Separate offenses shall be deemed to be committed on each day during on or which a violation occurs or continues. (b)	In addition to all other provisions of this article, any violation of this article is deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction in the superior court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
Chapter 58 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 42; landscape development, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 98; zoning ordinance, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B; airport zoning ordinance, app. C.State Law reference— Georgia Register of Historic Places, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-50.2; fire safety requirements for historic buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13; grants to municipal corporations for repairs on facilities of historical value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1; Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 58-31. - Purpose.     This article is adopted for the following purposes: (1)	In support and furtherance of the mayor and council's determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the citizens of the city; (2)	An ordinance to stimulate revitalization of the city's central business district and its historic neighborhoods and to promote and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; (3)	In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; (4)	In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historical districts and to participate in federal and state programs to do the same; (5)	To establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having a special historic, cultural or aesthetic interest or value in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 1(A)—(E), 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-32. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district.     Exterior and environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property.     Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other relative appertainments, architectural fixtures, features, details or elements.     Historic district means a geographically defined area designated by the city by the mayor and council as an historic district pursuant to the criteria established in this article.     Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, object or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof, designated by the mayor and council as historic property pursuant to the criteria established in this article. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 2(B)—(E), 11-8-1984)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-33. - Development standards. (a)	Certificate of appropriateness. For all buildings in a designated historic area or designated historic properties rated exceptional, notable or valuable, the historic preservation commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in appearance will not have a substantial adverse affect on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to all other pertinent factors, the historic and architectural value and significance; architectural style; general design, arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved; and their relationship to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other structures in the immediate neighborhood. (b)	Protective maintenance required. (1)	The owner of any building or structure which is located within an historic district shall keep such structure properly maintained and repaired. The degree of maintenance and repair required by this subsection is that degree sufficient to prevent any permanent damage to the structural components and/or the exterior by any foreseeable force, including but not limited to, weather, fire and termites. The historic preservation commission is empowered to require such owner to discharge this duty. Acts which the commission may require such owner to perform pursuant to this subsection shall include but shall not be limited to the following: a.	Exterior painting;b.	Replacing broken window panes;c.	Securing abandoned structures by boarding up or otherwise;d.	Maintaining a sound roof, eaves and roof gutter;e.	Termite treatment if the commission suspects that the structure contains termites.The commission is empowered to use whatever legal processes are necessary to assure that this duty is discharged fully and properly. The director of inspections and zoning administrator, to the extent that their powers permit, shall honor requests made by the commission for the purpose of enforcing this subsection. (2)	The owner of any building or structure requiring the degree of maintenance or repairs as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be given an opportunity to be heard by the commission on any issue of maintenance or repair that the commission feels is necessary and should be done to prevent permanent damage to the structural components and/or the exterior of the building or structure. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 86-56, § 1, 11-6-1986)
Sec. 58-34. - Relocation of historic buildings.     Historic buildings shall not be relocated on another site unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the historic preservation commission that the preservation of its existing site is impractical and creates an undue burden on the owner. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 13, 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-35. - Nonhistoric buildings. (a)	Nonhistoric buildings adjacent to historic structures. The construction of a new building or structure, or the moving, reconstruction, alteration, renovation or repair involving a change materially affecting the exterior appearance of a nonrated building or structure shall be generally of such form, proportion, mass, configuration, building material, texture and location on the lots as will be visibly compatible with the adjacent historic structure. The term "adjacent" refers to the visual or physical relationship of the building. Visually adjacent buildings means 100 percent of the front facade, and 50 percent of one side of the historic building must be visible from the nonhistoric building to be considered visually adjacent. Physically adjacent means a nonhistoric building shall be the next building from one side of an historic structure, separated only by an alley, street, easement or public-right-of-way. (b)	Nonhistoric buildings not adjacent to historic structures. Any applicable standards as provided in appendix A to this Code shall apply to development standards for all other nonhistoric buildings within any designated historic area. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 14, 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-36. - Undue hardship.     Where by reason of unusual circumstances the strict application of any provision of this article would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the historic preservation commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to the provisions, or to interpret the meaning of the provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and all additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 16, 11-8-1984)
Secs. 58-37—58-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-271 et seq.State Law reference— Historic preservation commissions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24.
Sec. 58-61. - Creation.     There is created a commission to be known as the Valdosta Historic Preservation Commission. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 3(A), 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-62. - Position within the city.     The historic preservation commission shall be part of the planning function of the city. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 3(B), 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-63. - Members; number, appointments, terms and compensation. (a)	The historic preservation commission shall consist of six members, appointed by the mayor and council, who shall be residents of the city who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. (b)	The term of office for each commission member shall be three years. An appointment of the first commission, two members shall be appointed for a term of three years, two members for a term of two years, and two members for a term of one year. All appointments thereafter shall be for a term of three years. In the event of a vacancy, the appointment shall be for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. (c)	Members of the commission shall serve without compensation, although they may be reimbursed for expenses incurred. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 3(C), (D), 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-64. - Powers.     The historic preservation commission shall be authorized to: (1)	Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; (2)	Recommend to the mayor and council specific places, districts, buildings, structures, objects, or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; (3)	Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny such certificates in accordance with the provisions of this article; (4)	Recommend to the mayor and council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, object, or work of art as an historic property or as an historic district or as part of an historic district be revoked or removed; (5)	Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; (6)	Conduct educational programs on historical properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; (7)	Make such investigations and studies on matters relating to historic preservation, including the consultation with historic preservation experts as the mayor and council or the commission itself may deem necessary from time to time or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; (8)	Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the mayor and council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; (9)	Submit to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; (10)	Perform historic preservation activities as official agency of the city historic preservation programs; (11)	Review and make comments to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Properties; and (12)	Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of mayor and council enter into agreements to do so. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 3(E), 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-65. - Powers to adopt rules and standards.     The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designations and certificates of appropriateness such as bylaws, removal of membership, provisions, and designated guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the authority to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall also provide for the time and place of its regular meetings and a method for calling of special meetings. The commission shall elect such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum of the commission shall consist of a majority of the members. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 3(F), 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-66. - Conflict of interest.     At any time the historic preservation commission reviews a project or application in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, or that member is employed by a financial institution that may be considering financing of the project or application, that particular member shall be prohibited from voting on the particular project or application. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 3(G), 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-67. - Records of meetings.     All meetings of the historic preservation commission shall be public meetings; and a public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 3(H), 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-68. - Relationship to existing zoning and zoning districts.     The provisions of this article and in particular the designation of any area as an historic district or any structure as historic property are intended to preserve and protect the historicity or architecture for the buildings, structures, sites, monuments or works of art of the historic area. In all zoning districts lying within the boundaries of any designated historic district, the regulations of both the zoning district and the historic district shall apply. Whenever a conflict between the regulations of the zoning district and the regulations of the historic district conflict, the more restrictive shall apply. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 3(I), 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-69. - Appeal from decisions of the commission. (a)	Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the mayor and council. The mayor and council may approve, modify or reject the decision of the commission if it finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. (b)	The application for such an appeal shall be filed with the city manager within 30 days of the decision of the commission stating the findings of the commission, and the applicant's reasons for disagreement with such findings. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 15, 11-8-1984)
Secs. 58-70—58-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECOMMENDATION, DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND PROPERTIES 
Sec. 58-91. - Preliminary research by commission. (a)	The historic preservation commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. (b)	The commission shall present to the mayor and council recommendations for historic districts and properties. (c)	Prior to the commission's recommendation of an historic district or historic property to the mayor and council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report consisting of: (1)	A physical description of the property or district;(2)	A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance of the property or district; (3)	A map showing district boundaries and classifications of individual properties in the district, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; (4)	A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and(5)	Representative photographs of the district or properties.(Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 4(A), 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-92. - Designation of an historic district. (a)	Criteria for selection of historic districts. An historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art or a combination of such features which: (1)	Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest;(2)	Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architects or types of one or more eras in the history of the city, county, state or the general geographic region; and (3)	Cause such areas, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visually perceptive section of the city. (b)	Boundaries of an historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. (c)	Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic district shall be classified as: (1)	Historic, which is further subdivided as:a.	Exceptional, i.e., a structure having special character and which contributes to the district because of its particular historical character. b.	Notable, i.e., a structure which represent one or more architectural styles typical of one or more eras in Valdosta history and is one of the few remaining examples of that architectural style; and c.	Valuable, i.e., a structure that is of value as part of the area and contributes to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the designated area. (2)	Nonhistoric, which are those structures not classified as exceptional, notable or valuable. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 4(B), 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-93. - Designation of an historic property. (a)	Criteria for selection of historic properties. An historic property is a building, structure, site, work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for its proper appreciation or use, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, the state, or the local region, or for one of the following reasons: (1)	It is an outstanding example of structural representation of its era;(2)	It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style;(3)	It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, the state or the region; or (4)	It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historic development and heritage of the city, the county, the state or the region. (b)	Boundary description. Boundaries shall be included in separate ordinances designating such properties and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 4(C), 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-94. - Requirements for adopting an ordinance for designation of historic districts and historic properties. (a)	Application for designation of historic districts or properties. Designations may be proposed by the mayor and council or the historic preservation commission itself. (1)	For historic districts, an historic society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation. (2)	For historic properties, an historic society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation. (b)	Required components of a designated ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: (1)	List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; (2)	Set forth the names of the owners of the designated properties;(3)	Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and (4)	Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city.(c)	Required public hearings. The commission and the city shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of a hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed no less than ten days nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for a public hearing. A notice sent by the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city and county tax rolls and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this section. (d)	Recommendations of proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the mayor and council. (e)	Mayor and council action on commission recommendations. Following the receipt of the commission's recommendation, the mayor and council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. (f)	Notification to historic preservation section. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit a report as required by law to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources. (g)	Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following adopting of the ordinance for designation by the mayor and council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within the designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the mayor and council, which notice shall apply to the owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city and/or county tax roll or a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notice to the owner and occupants under this section. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 4(D), 11-8-1984)
Secs. 58-95—58-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Certificates of appropriateness, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28.
Sec. 58-121. - Required.     A certificate of appropriateness issued by the planning director after approval by the historic preservation commission shall be required before a permit is issued for any of the following within any designated historic district or on any designated historic property: (1)	Demolition of an historic building;(2)	Moving of an historic building;(3)	Any material change in the exterior appearance of existing building classified as historic by additions, reconstructions or alterations of the existing buildings; (4)	The erection or display on any lot, in any designated historic district or on any designated historic property of any building, structure, sign, light or other fixture. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 5, 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-122. - Application for certificate of appropriateness.     Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made to the historic preservation commission accompanied by such sketches, drawings, photographs, descriptions or other information showing any proposed exterior alterations, additions, changes or new construction on the property in question and any additional information as is reasonably required by the commission. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 6, 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-123. - Action on application for certificate of appropriateness.     The preservation planner shall transmit the application for a certificate of appropriateness, together with the supporting information and documents, to the historic preservation commission for approval. The commission shall act upon the application within 30 days after its filing; otherwise, the application shall be deemed to be approved and a certificate of appropriateness shall be issued. Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit an extension of time where mutually agreed upon between the parties. If the commission approves the application, a certificate of appropriateness shall be issued. If the certificate of appropriateness is issued, the application shall be processed in the same manner as applications for buildings and/or demolition permits. If the commission denies the application, a certificate of appropriateness shall not be issued. The commission shall state its reasons for denial in writing, and the zoning administrator shall advise the applicant of the denial and the reasons for denial. Under no circumstances shall any permit for alteration, demolition or construction be issued wherein a certificate of appropriateness has been denied. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 7, 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-124. - Guidelines and criteria for certificates of appropriateness.     Where considering applications for certificates of appropriateness to existing buildings, the secretary of the interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation Projects," including the secretary's "Standards for Rehabilitation," shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted and established by the historic preservation commission. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 8, 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-125. - Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices and right to be heard. (a)	At least seven days prior to the review of a certificate of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. This notice shall include a posting of the sign on the property affected at least seven days prior to the public hearing. The sign shall state as follows:     "Notice - A public hearing will be held to consider application for a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition, moving or material change of the exterior of this property. This public hearing will be held at ____________ (place of meeting), at ____________ ____________.m. on the ____________ day of ____________/____________/____________, ____________." (b)	All meetings of the commission to consider certificates of appropriateness shall be public hearings and shall be open to the general public. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 9, 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-126. - Interior alterations.     In the review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangements or alterations or use having no effect on the exterior architectural feature of the building in question. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 10, 11-8-1984)
Sec. 58-127. - Requirements of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. (a)	All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to requirements of such certificate. If work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the historic preservation commission shall issue a cease and desist order; and all work shall cease immediately. (b)	The mayor and council or the commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. (Code 1976, § 9-8001; Ord. No. 84-40, § 11(B), 11-8-1984)
Secs. 58-128—58-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HISTORIC AND LANDMARK MUSEUM BUILDINGS[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Historic landmark or district designation procedure, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26; landmark historic property for purposes of ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.3.
Sec. 58-161. - Intent and purposes. (a)	It is the purpose of this article to encourage the sensitive rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization or preservation of existing buildings located within the corporate limits of the city and to encourage the preservation of buildings and structures deemed to be historic in total or in part; however, such rehabilitation and preservation efforts should provide for the upgrading of the safety features of the building or structure to provide a practical level of safety to the public and surrounding property. It is the further purpose of this article to provide guidance regarding acceptable alternative solutions as outlined in the Life Safety Code, and to stimulate enforcement authorities to utilize alternative compliance concepts whenever practical to permit the continued use of existing buildings and structures without overly restrictive financial burdens on owners or occupants. (b)	The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to new construction, except as specifically provided in this article. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 2, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-162. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Building system means any utility, mechanical, electrical, structural, engross, or fire protection/safety system.     Enforcement authority means the chief building official or his designee, and the fire chief or his designee.     Existing building or structure means any completed building or structure which has been placed in service for a minimum of five years.     Historic building means any building so designated by the state historic preservation officer as individually significant or as contributing to the historic character of an historic district, pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted by the board of natural resources or as so designated pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq., the Georgia Historic Preservation Act.     Landmark museum building means an historic building or structure used as an exhibit of the building or structure itself, and which exhibits a high degree of architectural integrity, and which is open to the public not less than 12 days per year; however, additional uses, original or ancillary, to the use as a museum shall be permitted within the same building subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13(b)(3). Landmark museum buildings shall be so designated by the state historic preservation officer pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the board of natural resources. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 3, 9-21-1995)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-163. - Conditions for application.     The provisions of this article authorize the enforcement authority to permit the repair, alteration, addition, or change of use or occupancy of existing buildings without total compliance with any rule, regulation, code or standard for new construction requirements under the following general conditions: (1)	Plans shall be submitted for review to the plans review committee and approved before a permit is issued as to compliance with building and fire safety codes; (2)	All noted conditions hazardous to life, based on the provisions of applicable state and local standards or codes for existing buildings, and outlined in section 58-164 shall be corrected to a reasonable and realistic degree as set forth in this Code; (3)	The existing building becomes the minimum performance standard; and(4)	The degree of compliance of the building after changes must not be below that existing before the changes. Nothing in this article will require or prohibit compliance with requirements more stringent than those provided in this Code. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 4, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-164. - Hazardous conditions.     With reference to existing buildings, authorized enforcement authorities should assure that any of the conditions or defects described in this section are identified and corrected as deemed appropriate by the enforcement authority having jurisdiction and through the utilization of appropriate compliance alternatives: (1)	Structural. Any building or structure or portion which is in imminent danger of collapse because of but not limited to the following factors: a.	Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;b.	Faulty structural design or construction;c.	The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; or d.	The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of the foundation;(2)	Number of exits. Less than two approved independent, remote and properly protected exit ways serving every story of a building, except where a single exit way is permitted by the applicable state or local fire or building code or life safety code; and if acceptable alternative safeguards cannot be met, an automatic fire suppression system shall be provided; (3)	Capacity of exits. Any required door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of egress which is not of sufficient capacity to provide for the population of the portions of the building served and which is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of egress to a place of safety; and (4)	Mechanical systems. Utilities and mechanical systems not in conformance with the codes in effect at the time of construction of a building which create a serious threat of fire or threaten the safety of the occupants of the building. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 5, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-165. - Additions to existing building.     Additions to an existing building shall comply with the applicable requirements of state and local laws, rules, regulations, codes and standards for new construction. Such additions shall not impose loads either vertical or horizontal which would cause the existing building to be subjected to stresses exceeding those permitted under new construction. If the existing building does not comply with the standards provided in this article and the authorized enforcement authority finds that the addition adversely affects the performance of the total building, the authorized enforcement authority may require: (1)	The new addition to be separated from the existing structure by at least a two-hour firewall with openings properly protected; (2)	The installation of an approved automatic fire suppression system; or(3)	Other remedies which may be deemed appropriate by the enforcement authority.(Ord. No. 95-30, § 6, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-166. - Minor alterations and new mechanical systems.     Minor alterations or repairs to an existing building which do not adversely affect the performance or safety of the building may be made with the same or like materials. Existing buildings which, in part or as a whole, exceed the requirements of any applicable construction or fire safety code may, in the course of compliance with this article, have reduced or removed, in part or totally, features not required by such code for new construction provided such features were not a condition of prior approval. Existing buildings and structures which, in part or as a whole, do not meet the requirements of the applicable code for new construction may be altered or repaired without further compliance to any such code by utilizing the provisions of this article provided their present degree of compliance to any applicable construction of fire safety code is not reduced. Any new mechanical systems installed in an existing building shall conform to applicable codes for new construction to the fullest extent practical as approved by the authorized enforcement authorities. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 7, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-167. - Continued use.     The legal use and occupancy of any building or structure may be continued without change, except as may be provided otherwise by this chapter or as may be legally provided for by any applicable state or local law, rule, regulation, code or standard. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 8, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-168. - Change in use. (a)	A total change in the use or occupancy of any existing building which would cause a greater hazard to the public shall not be made unless such building is made to comply with the requirements of the applicable state and local rules, regulations, codes and standards for the new use or occupancy; however, the compliance alternative provision of this article may be utilized by authorized enforcement authorities where total or strict compliance with applicable state or local rules, regulations, codes or standards is not practical. (b)	When the proposed use is of equal or lesser hazard as determined by the enforcement authority, further compliance with any code for new construction is not required unless otherwise provided in this article. Alterations or repairs to an existing building or structure which do not adversely affect the performance of the building may be made with like materials. Any proposed change to the existing building or change in type of contents of the existing building shall not increase the fire hazard to adjacent buildings or structures. If the fire hazard to adjacent buildings or structures is increased, requirements of applicable construction of fire safety codes for exterior walls shall apply. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 9, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-169. - Changes in use of a portion of a building. (a)	If a portion of a building is changed to a new use or occupancy and that portion is separated from the remainder of the building with vertical or horizontal fire separations complying with applicable state or local rules, regulations, codes or standards or with compliance alternatives, the portion changed shall be made to comply with the applicable requirements for the new use or occupancy to the extent noted in section 58-168. (b)	If a portion of the building is changed to a new use or occupancy and that portion is not separated from the remainder of the building as noted in subsection (a) of this section, the provisions of the applicable state and local rules, regulations, codes and standards applying to each use or occupancy of the building shall apply to the entire building to the extent noted in section 58-168; however, if there are conflicting provisions in requirements for the various uses or occupancies, the authorized enforcement authority shall apply the strictest requirements. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 10, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-170. - Floor loading.     Any proposed change in the use or occupancy of an existing building or portion which could increase the floor loading should be investigated by a state registered professional architect or engineer to determine the adequacy of the existing floor systems to support the increased loads. If the existing floor system is found to be inadequate, it should be modified to support the increased loads; or the proposed allowable floor loading shall be reduced by and posted by the appropriate enforcement authority. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 11, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-171. - Documentation.     Whenever action is taken on any existing building to repair, make alterations, or change the use or occupancy of an existing structure and when such action proposes the use of compliance alternatives, the authorized enforcement authority shall ensure that at least one copy of the accepted compliance alternative approved, including applicable plans, test data or other data submitted for evaluation, be maintained on file in the office of the chief building official. If the structure also falls under the jurisdiction of a state-level enforcement authority, at least one copy of the same material shall be maintained on file with that authority. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 12, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-172. - Compliance alternatives. (a)	Subsections (b) through (f) of this section contain generally acceptable compliance alternatives illustrating principles which shall be applied to the rehabilitation of existing buildings by enforcement authorities in the city. It is recognized for purposes of this article that all building systems interact with each other; therefore, any consideration of compliance alternatives should take into account all existing and proposed conditions to determine their acceptability. The compliance alternatives are not all-inclusive and do not preclude consideration and approval of other alternatives by any enforcement authority. (b)	Compliance alternatives for an inadequate number of exits include:(1)	Provide connecting fire-exit balconies between buildings, acceptable to the enforcement authority; (2)	Provide alternative exits or egress facilities leading to safety outside the building or to a place of safe refuge in the building or an adjoining building as acceptable to the enforcement authority; (3)	Provide exterior fire escapes as acceptable to the enforcement authority where the providing of enclosed interior or enclosed exterior stairs is not practical; or (4)	Install early fire warning and fire suppression systems.(c)	Compliance alternatives for excessive travel distances to an approved exit include:(1)	Install an approved smoke detection system throughout the building;(2)	Install an approved completed automatic fire suppression system;(3)	Subdivide the exit travel route with smoke-stop doors acceptable to the enforcement authority; (4)	Increase the fire-resistance rating of corridor walls and doors; or(5)	Provide additional approved means of escape.(d)	Compliance alternatives for unenclosed or improperly enclosed exit stairways or vertical shafts include: (1)	Improve enclosure of exit stairway;(2)	Add a partial fire suppression system;(3)	Add a sprinkler draft curtain; or(4)	Add a smoke detection system.(e)	Compliance alternatives for inadequate or a total lack of fire partitions or fire separations walls shall be as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. (f)	Compliance alternatives for a lack of required protection of openings in exterior walls where a fire exposure is a risk include: (1)	Improve fire resistance of existing openings and protect them with fire-related windows or doors as appropriate; (2)	Seal the openings with fire-related construction as approved by the enforcement authority; or (3)	Install an approved fire suppression system.(Ord. No. 95-30, § 13, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-173. - Historic buildings. (a)	Historic buildings not classified as landmark museum buildings shall meet the requirements of applicable building and fire safety laws, ordinances, codes, standards, rules or regulations as they pertain to existing buildings as noted in this article. If an historic building or structure is damaged from fire or other casualty, it may be restored to the condition prior to the fire or casualty using techniques and methods consistent with its original construction, or it shall meet the requirements for new construction of the applicable codes, standards, rules or regulations, provided these requirements do not significantly compromise the features for which the building was considered historically significant. (b)	As to any buildings or structures in the city which have been designated as historic buildings or structures by the state historic preservation officer, the appropriate enforcement authority, in granting or denying a variance shall consider the intent of this chapter, with special attention to section 58-174; O.C.G.A. § 58-2-200 et seq., "The Uniform Act for Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings"; O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq., the "Georgia Historic Preservation Act"; and the secretary of interior's standards for preservation projects. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 14, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-174. - Landmark museum buildings. (a)	The provisions of this article relating to landmark museum buildings shall apply only to those portions of such buildings which meet all the requirements of a landmark museum building, except as otherwise provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. Subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall, unless otherwise provided, preempt all laws, regulations or rules governing reconstruction, alteration, repair or maintenance of landmark museum buildings. (b)	A landmark museum building shall be subject to the following provisions:(1)	Repairs, maintenance and restoration shall be allowed without the conformity to any building or fire safety related code, standard, rule or regulation, provided the building is brought into and remains in full compliance with this section; (2)	In case of fire or other casualty to a landmark museum building, it may be rebuilt, in total or in part, using such techniques and materials as are necessary to restore it to the condition prior to the fire or casualty and use as a totally preserved building; or (3)	If an historic building or structure, as a result of proposed work or changes in use, would become eligible and would be so certified as a landmark museum building, and the state historic preservation officer so certifies and such is submitted to the local fire and building code official with the construction or building permit application, the work may proceed under the provisions of this section. (c)	All landmark museum buildings shall comply with the following requirements:(1)	Every landmark museum building shall have portable fire extinguishers as deemed appropriate by the local fire authority having jurisdiction based on the applicable state or local fire safety codes or regulations. (2)	All landmark museum buildings which contain residential units shall have electrically powered smoke products of combustion detectors installed within each living unit between living and sleeping areas. Such detectors shall be continuously powered by the building's electrical system. When activated, the detector shall initiate an alarm which is audible in the sleeping rooms of that living unit. These unit detectors shall be required in addition to any other protective system that may be installed in the building. (3)	For all landmark museum buildings, except those protected by a total automatic fire suppression system and one- and two-family dwellings, approved automatic fire warning protection shall be provided as follows: Install at least one listed smoke or products of combustion detector for every 1,200 square feet of floor area per floor or story. In addition, all lobbies, common corridors, hallways and ways of exit access shall be provided with listed smoke or products of combustion detectors not more than 30 feet apart. Detectors shall be so connected as to sound an alarm audible throughout the structure or building. With respect to buildings which are totally protected by an automatic fire suppression system, activation of the sprinkler system shall sound an alarm throughout the structure or building. (4)	Smoke or products of combustion detectors shall be listed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. (5)	All multistory landmark museum buildings, except one- and two-family dwellings, with occupancy above or below the street or grade level, shall have manual fire alarm pull stations in the natural path of egress. The activation of a manual pull station shall cause the building fire warning system to sound. (6)	Approved exit signs shall be located where designated by the authority having jurisdiction in accordance with the applicable code, standard, rule or regulation. (7)	Except for one- and two-family dwellings, every landmark museum building occupied after daylight, or which has occupied areas subject to being totally darkened during daylight hours due to a power failure or failure of the electrical system, shall be equipped with approved emergency lighting meeting the provisions of the applicable code, standard, rule or regulation. (8)	Occupant loading of landmark museum buildings or structures shall be limited by either the actual structural floor load capacity or by the limitations of means of egress or by a combination of factors. Actual floor load capacity shall be determined by a state registered professional architect or engineer. The floor load shall be posted at a conspicuous location. The building owner shall submit evidence of this certification and related computations to the enforcement authority having jurisdiction upon request. Where one or more floors of a landmark museum building have only one means of egress, the occupant load shall be computed and occupancy limited as determined by the fire marshal. (9)	The electrical, heating and mechanical systems of landmark museum buildings shall be inspected, and any conditions that create a threat of fire or a threat to life shall be corrected in accordance with applicable standards to the extent deemed necessary by the authority having jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 15, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-175. - Appeals.     Should a party not agree with a decision of the enforcement authority or should an enforcement authority desire a ruling, an appeal may be made to the mayor and council. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 17, 9-21-1995)
Sec. 58-176. - Liability provisions.     Nothing in this article shall be construed to constitute a waiver of the sovereign immunity of the city or any officer or employee of the city in carrying out the provisions of this article. Further, no action shall be maintained against the city or any duly authorized, elected, or appointed officer or duly authorized employee of the city for damages sustained as a result of any fire or hazard covered by this article by reason of inspection or other action taken pursuant to this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any property owner or lessee or person in charge from any legal duty, obligation or liability incident to the ownership, maintenance or use of such property. (Ord. No. 95-30, § 18, 9-21-1995)
Chapter 60 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 60-1—60-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 
Sec. 60-19. - Purpose.     It shall be the purpose of this article to provide, within constitutional limits, for fair housing throughout the corporate limits of the city as provided for under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 60-20. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Aggrieved person means and includes any person who: (1)	Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or(2)	Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.     Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 60-22, 60-23, 60-24, 60-25 or 60-26.     Dwelling means any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families.     Familial status means one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or the written permission of such parent or other person. The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.     Family means and includes a single individual, with the status of such family being further defined in the definition Familial status.     Handicap means, with respect to a person: (1)	A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; (2)	A record of having such an impairment;(3)	Being regarded as having such an impairment; or(4)	An impairment described or defined pursuant to the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. The term "handicap" shall not include current illegal use of or addictions to a controlled substance as defined in section 802 of title 21 of the United States Code.     Person means and includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, nonincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under title 11 of the United States Code, receivers, and fiduciaries.     To rent means and includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 2, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 60-21. - Unlawful practice.     Subject to the provisions of subsection (2) of this section and section 60-26, section 60-22 shall apply to: (1)	All dwellings, except as exempted by subsection (2) of this section.(2)	Other than the provisions of subsection (3) of this section, nothing in section 60-22 shall apply to: a.	Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided that in the sale of such single family house by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period. The private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or reserved on his behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented: 1.	Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent or salesman, or person; and 2.	Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of advertisement or written notice in violation of section 60-22(3), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title; or b.	Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. (3)	For the purposes of subsection (2) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: a.	He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; b.	He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more transaction involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or c.	He is the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 3, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 60-22. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing.     As made applicable by section 60-21, and except as exempted by sections 60-21(2) and 60-26, it shall be unlawful: (1)	To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. (2)	To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. (3)	To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. (4)	To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. (5)	For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. (6)	a.	To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of: 1.	That buyer or renter;2.	A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or 3.	Any person associated with that person.b.	To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of: 1.	That person; or2.	A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or 3.	Any person associated with that person.c.	For purposes of this subsection (6), discrimination includes:1.	A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 2.	A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 3.	In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after January 1, 2007, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that: (i)	The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; (ii)	All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and (iii)	All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design:(A)	An accessible route into and through the dwelling;(B)	Light, switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations; (C)	Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. d.	Compliance with the appropriate requirement Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people. e.	Nothing in this subsection (6) requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 4, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 60-23. - Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions. (a)	It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. (b)	As used in this section, the term "residential real estate-related transaction" means any of the following: (1)	The making or purchasing of loans or other financial assistance:a.	For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; orb.	Secured by residential real estate.(2)	The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.(c)	Nothing in this article prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 5, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 60-24. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service.     It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 6, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 60-25. - Interference, coercion, or intimidation.     It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by sections 60-21, 60-22, 60-23 or 60-24. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 7, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 60-26. - Exemptions. (a)	Exemptions defined shall be exempt from the provisions of this article to include those activities or organizations set forth under subsections (b) and (c) of this section. (b)	Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this article prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members. (c)	Nothing in this article regarding familial status shall apply with respect to housing for older persons. (d)	As used in this section, "housing for older persons" means housing:(1)	Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the state civil rights commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly person (as defined in the state or federal program); (2)	Intended for, and solely occupied by, a person 62 years of age or older; or(3)	Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 8, 9-21-2006)
Sec. 60-27. - Administrative enforcement of article.     Any aggrieved person who claims to have been injured or discriminated by any practice protected by this article may file a complaint with the city manager's office for the city. Said complaint shall be forwarded to the regional director of the fair housing commission with the Department of Housing and Urban Development Regional Office in Atlanta, Georgia. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 9, 9-21-2006)
Chapter 62 - LANDSCAPE DEVELOPMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 42; historical preservation, ch. 58; zoning ordinance, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B; airport zoning ordinance, app. C.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 62-1. - Purpose and intent. (a)	The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance both the immediate and long-range health, safety, economic stability and general welfare of the present and future citizens of the city. This chapter is enacted to provide standards for the preservation and/or replacement of trees and vegetation as part of the land development and building construction within the city. (b)	The intent of this chapter is to provide necessary information to facilitate the development of project design, plan and review and enforcement processes administered in a most effective, efficient and economical manner so as to accomplish the purpose of this chapter and to provide for orderly, enhanced development within the corporate limits of the city. (Code 1976, § 9-4001; Ord. No. 94-6, 3-24-1994; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4001, 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-2. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Applicant means the person or entity making application for a permit as provided in this chapter and who shall be responsible for, and in charge of, a project. The applicant may be the owner, developer, project manager or contractor.     Basal caliper means the diameter of a plant's main stem, measured at six inches above the ground level.     Buffer means an area of land which includes landscape material established for the purposes of separating, screening or shielding a use from a dissimilar or more intense use.     Building permit means a permit issued by the department of inspections to proceed with the development or redevelopment of property meeting the form and requirements as established by the city building code.     Canopy tree means a large tree, or group of trees, that has a distinct presence in the landscape or forest. For the purpose of this chapter, all large and medium trees identified as canopy trees are listed in appendix A of this Code (zoning ordinance).     Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the department of inspections certifying that all requirements for development or redevelopment of property have been met and authorizing occupancy of buildings and structures.     Change of ownership means when the legal title or owner of the property changes from one person, entity or corporation to another person, entity or corporation.     Critical root zone (CRZ) means the minimum area beneath a tree which must be undisturbed in development in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to ensure the tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone (CRZ) shall be a concentric circle centering on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. (Example: The CRZ radius of a 20-inch diameter tree shall be 20 feet.)     Diameter, breast height, (DBH) means the diameter or width of the main stem of a tree as measured 4.5 feet above the ground.     Drip line means a vertical line extending from the outermost portion of a tree canopy to the ground.     Encroachment means the protrusion or extension of a vehicle outside or beyond the parameters of a parking space, display area, storage area or accessway into a landscaped area.     Green space means lands to be left as natural areas or landscapes, after development, in accordance with this chapter.     Grubbing means the removal of underbrush, such as shrubs, vines and trees under four-inch basal caliper. Such term does not include root raking and/or soil disturbance within the drip line of preserved trees.     Interior planting area means the area within a vehicular use area devoted to growing plants or vegetation.     Land disturbance activity means any activity, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and/or the filling of a parcel with topsoil or landfill soils. Such term shall not include agricultural practices as described in section 42-212(5).     Landscape means existing natural vegetation or the placing of ground cover, shrubs or trees in a planting area in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.     Mature tree means the mature height and canopy width of a tree as described in the latest edition of the Manual of Woody Landscape Plants.     Outparcel means a parcel of property adjacent to a principal development not included in the original or first development, but intended to be developed or sold or leased for development separately or at a later time.     Outside storage area means an open or fenced outdoor area, or a separate building constructed for storage of materials or refuse.     Perimeter planting area means the front, sides and rear yard areas between vehicular surface areas and adjacent property lines designed for planting and landscaping.     Planting area means an outdoor area devoted entirely to the planting or conservation and maintenance of trees, shrubs and ground covers.     Preserved tree means any tree designated on a site development plan that is to be preserved during development for incorporation into the final landscaping of the developed parcel.     Retention/detention basin means land area designed to temporarily retain or detain stormwater runoff.     Sight triangle means the area of property on both sides of a driveway formed by the intersection of each side of the driveway and public right-of-way with the two sides of each triangle being a minimum of 20 feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a straight line connecting the ends of the two other sides.     Soil erosion and sedimentation control. See section 42-261 et seq. (Land disturbance permit.)     Specimen tree means any tree designated by the city arborist for preservation because of its rarity, aesthetic value, historical value, botanical importance or size. In certifying a specimen tree, the city arborist shall use the following size criteria: (1)	Large species trees: a.	Oaks and magnolias, 14 inches DBH or larger;b.	Long leaf and spruce pines, ten inches DBH or larger;c.	Other pines, 20 inches DBH or larger;d.	All other species, 18 inches DBH or larger.(2)	Small species trees: Six inches DBH or larger.     Street yard means a landscaped area required adjacent to a street right-of-way.     Substantial improvement means the repair, reconstruction, alteration or improvement of an existing structure in which the cost of such improvement exceeds 25 percent of the ad valorem tax value as established by the current digest at the time the proposed improvement is begun or contemplated.     Tree inventory means a listing and designation of all trees with a six-inch DBH or larger on a map or survey, drawn to scale.     Tree save area means an area consisting of a group of trees designated to be preserved.     Utility service area means an area which contains any surface mounted HVAC equipment or freestanding, above the ground devices, such as utility boxes, booster boxes, switch boxes and transformers that are part of an underground utilities system.     Vehicular use area means any ground surface area, except public rights-of-way used by any type of vehicle, whether moving or at rest, for the purpose of, including, but not limited to, driving, parking, loading, unloading, storage or display, such as, but not limited to, new and used car lots, activities of a drive-in nature in connection with banks, restaurants, service stations and grocery and convenience stores.     Wetlands means lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface, or the land is covered by shallow water. For the purpose of this definition, the term "wetlands" must have one or more of the following attributes: (1)	At least periodically, the land supports predominately hydrophytes;(2)	The substrate is predominately undrained hydric soil; and(3)	The substrate is nonsoil and is saturated with water or covered by shallow water at some time during the growing season of each year, or is designated by the National Cooperative Soils Survey of the Soil Conservation Service by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as designed by the National Wetlands Inventory, United States Department of Interior, or any future approved and designated state or federal agency. (Code 1976, § 9-4002; Ord. No. 95-29, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4002, 7-6-2000)Editor's note— Appendix A, referred to in this section, is on file in the office of the city clerk. Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-3. - Tree bank.     There is established by the city parks and recreation department a separate fund to be known and designated as the "tree bank." Funds provided for in this chapter shall be accumulated in such tree bank fund and used for the planting and installation of trees on public property, parks and other approved property within the city. All projects for planting shall be approved by the city tree commission. (Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(D), 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-4. - Continuing compliance.     All developments are to be reviewed within one year to ensure continuing compliance with the landscape permit and to determine and establish that all plants are thriving and healthy. The owner of the property shall be notified by the department of inspections of any missing or dead plants that need to be replaced. Replacement of plants will be required if existing remaining plants or inventory of trees falls below the minimum landscape requirements. (Code 1976, § 9-4007; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4006, 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-5. - Office of inspection.     The office of inspection, acting through the director of inspections or his designee with the assistance of the city arborist, shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter and the regulation of the care and removal of all trees growing in the city in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4003, 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-6. - Enforcement. (a)	Authority. The department of inspections and the city marshal with the assistance of the city arborist or their designee shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter. (b)	Procedures. (1)	Routine inspections. The following inspections shall be conducted in conjunction with all development activities under this chapter: a.	Initial inspection. Any inspection by the city arborist and/or the director of inspections or their designee shall be conducted prior to approval of any permit application. b.	Vegetation protection inspection. An inspection shall be conducted by the city arborist to ensure proper installation of tree and vegetation protection devices before site disturbance. (See section 62-83, Tree and protected zone preservation standards.) c.	Final inspection, notice of completion and certificate of occupancy. The final inspection shall occur when all development activities permitted for the site have been completed. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued, nor any building or premises occupied, unless and until the final inspection reveals that all work has been installed in accordance with the approved permit, and tree protection or removal activity has been carried out according to the approved permit and plan. d.	Inspection for performance bond and temporary certificate of occupancy. If there is a delay in complying with the approved permits and plans by final inspection, the owner will be required to secure a performance bond or other securities in the amount of not less than 110 percent of the cost of the nonconstructed improvements. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued where a performance bond has been approved, provided, that such bonded uncompleted improvements are satisfactorily installed within a reasonable length of time as specified by the city arborist, not to exceed three months. After improvements are completed and approved, a permanent certificate of occupancy will be issued after a final inspection by the department of inspections. (2)	Notification of violations. Where it is determined that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city shall give written notice of the violation to the occupant, applicant and/or the owner shown on the most recent tax roll of the city. Such written notice shall include, but not be limited to: a.	A description of the location of the property involved, either by street address or legal description. b.	A statement indicating the nature of the violation.c.	A statement showing the time within which all necessary remedial action must be accomplished, which may not be less than ten days, nor more than 60 days from the date of such written notice. d.	The name of the persons upon whom the notice of violation is served.e.	A statement advising that, upon failure to comply with the requirements of the notice, the city arborist and/or city marshal shall take such enforcement procedures as may be required under such notice. (3)	Notification. Written notice required in subsection (b)(2) of this section shall be served upon the person violating this chapter and the person owning the land by either personal delivery or certified mail. (4)	Stop work order. a.	Warranting circumstances. Upon the recommendation and advice of the city arborist or his designee, the director of inspections may request issuance of a stop work order in any of the following circumstances: 1.	When development is being implemented without the approved permits;2.	When ongoing noncomplying work is not immediately and permanently stopped upon receipt of a written or oral notice of violation; 3.	Upon failure to post all required and approved permits under this chapter.b.	Authority to issue. The director of inspections or the city marshal shall have the authority to issue a stop work order. (5)	Failure to comply after issuance of a stop work order. Where work or development continues after issuance of a stop work order, the director of inspections may initiate any appropriate act or legal action authorized by law. (6)	Notice of compliance. Upon satisfactory completion of corrective action required by a notice of violation or stop work order, the director of inspections or his designee shall issue a notice of compliance and allow the work to continue. (Code 1976, § 9-4008; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4007, 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-7. - Violations; penalties.     The following shall constitute offenses punishable in the municipal court of the city: (1)	It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to remove or destroy any tree without first obtaining a permit, where applicable. The removal or destruction of each tree shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter. (2)	It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to commence construction or development without first obtaining a land disturbance permit, tree removal permit and/or landscape permit, where applicable. Each day such development or construction continues without obtaining a permit shall constitute a separate offense. (3)	It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to fail to protect and preserve trees designated for preservation during development. Each day such failure to protect such designated trees continues shall constitute a separate offense. (4)	It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to fail to replace any dead plants or trees after 60 days' written notice to replace such dead plants or trees. Each day that such person or entity fails to replace such dead plants or trees after such notice shall constitute a separate offense. (5)	The violation of any other provision or requirement of this chapter shall constitute a violation punishable in the municipal court of the city. (Code 1976, § 9-4009; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4009, 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-8. - Appeals.     If any person is dissatisfied with a decision of the office of inspections adversely affecting such person involving the application of this chapter, such person may file an appeal with the zoning board of appeals within 30 days of the decision from which the appeal is taken. The zoning board of appeals shall hear the appeal and render a written opinion affirming, overruling or modifying the decision of the city office of inspections. Appeals from the decision of the zoning board of appeals must be made in accordance with the applicable state law. (Code 1976, § 9-4011; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4008, 7-6-2000)
Secs. 62-9—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 
Sec. 62-31. - Application; exemptions.     The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to real property within the city, as follows: (1)	All undeveloped property and existing commercial or multifamily residential development which undergoes substantial improvement as defined by this chapter and/or has a change in the zoning classification of such property. The current developed and existing property zoned single-family or two-family residential is exempt from the application of this chapter. (2)	The portion of each lot which shall correspond with the portion of the lot covered by the front (street), side, rear yard or interior vehicle use area as defined in this chapter. (3)	Redeveloped or substantially improved property. All property, except property zoned single-family or two-family residential, which is redeveloped or substantially improved to the extent that the cost of such redevelopment or improvement, excluding landscaping, exceeds 25 percent of the ad valorem tax value as determined by the current digest shall comply with this chapter, as follows: a.	Improvements or renovations at a cost which equals 25 percent of the ad valorem tax value as determined by the current digest shall comply with the landscape standards and requirements of this chapter at the rate of 25 percent of the total requirements. b.	Improvements or renovations at a cost which is between 25 percent to 49 percent of the ad valorem tax value as determined by the current digest shall comply with the landscape standards and requirements of this chapter at the same ratio or percentage as the cost of improvements relates to the total ad valorem tax value (i.e., 45 percent improvements of the tax digest value requires 45 percent compliance with the landscape standards and requirements in this chapter). c.	Substantial improvements or renovations at a cost which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the ad valorem tax value as established by the current tax digest shall require full compliance with the landscape standards and requirements of this chapter. d.	A second substantial improvement within 12 calendar months shall require full compliance with the landscape requirements and standards of this chapter. This subsection shall not apply to reconstruction or rebuilding of structures that are destroyed by fire or other natural disaster if such compliance is not possible due to conflict with health, safety or zoning codes. Where construction is the result of fire or destruction by natural disaster, the provisions of this chapter shall not result in noncompliance with zoning and parking regulations or noncompliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act, other federal law or the city zoning ordinance (appendix A) of this Code. (4)	Property annexed into the corporate limits of the city is subject to the following conditions: a.	Upon annexation, the property owner shall have 12 months from the date of annexation within which to comply with the provisions and terms of this chapter. b.	Annexed property developed or improved prior to the passage date of this chapter will comply with the terms and provisions of this chapter in effect at the time of the passage date of this chapter (1996 landscape ordinance). Annexed property developed or improved after the passage date of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. (5)	When development is commenced and trees are removed and cleared, but no actual construction has begun within six months of the date of issuance of the initial permit, the owner and/or developer shall landscape the street yard within 30 days after such date in accordance with the approved plans. (6)	Any expansion of existing vehicular use areas shall require compliance with the landscape standards set forth in article V of this chapter. (7)	This chapter shall not be applicable to any parcel of land within the CD (downtown commercial) zoning district and/or the central Valdosta area as defined in the Central Valdosta Development Authority Act which has a zero building lot setback line under the city zoning ordinance (appendix A) of this Code. All other parcels in the CD zoning district shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. The professional staff of the city shall, however, have authority to adjust the requirements and standards of this chapter where the parcel is not large enough to allow full application of the landscape requirements of this chapter. (Code 1976, § 9-4003(A); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4004, 7-6-2000; Ord. No. 2001-9, 3-22-2001)
Sec. 62-32. - Land disturbing activities requiring permits. (a)	Tree removal permit. Before commencing development or substantial improvements, no person shall, directly or indirectly, remove or destroy any tree without first obtaining a permit for such removal or destruction. (1)	Permits for tree removal or destruction shall be obtained by making written application to the office of inspections. The application shall be submitted with a site drawing, drawn to scale, giving a complete tree inventory and proposed landscaping plan, if applicable, showing all trees to be saved and removed. The proposed plan must be submitted to and approved by the city arborist before the issuance of a tree removal permit. (2)	A copy of the tree removal permit must be displayed on-site with all other construction permits during all phases of construction. (3)	Upon receipt of the application for a tree removal permit and the accompanying documents, the office of inspections shall review such application and documents and either approve or reject such application within ten days of its receipt. Should any applicant be dissatisfied with the denial of such permit or request an interpretation of this chapter, an appeal should be filed within 30 days with the zoning board of appeals. (4)	A tree inventory, drawn to scale, shall accurately locate and identify all specimen trees and trees with a DBH of six inches or more. Groups of trees less than six inches DBH and not specimen or canopy trees shall be delineated as a tree mass. The inventory shall indicate and designate which trees are to be removed and/or retained. (Note: Existing trees with a four-inch DBH or greater may be used to meet minimum landscape requirements as defined under this chapter.) (b)	Landscape permit. (1)	Site plan. No person shall, directly or indirectly, commence landscaping of any development or construction project without first obtaining a landscape permit as provided in this subsection (b). Such a permit shall be obtained by making written application to the office of inspections in the form prescribed by the mayor and council. Such application shall be accompanied by a detailed plan of the site, drawn to scale, on a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or larger, indicating or exhibiting the following: a.	Proposed and existing buildings, location type, dimension and square footage of vehicular use areas, outdoor storage areas, utility service areas and proposed parking spaces, including proposed truck parking and loading service areas. b.	Sidewalks or other pedestrian circulation or walkways.c.	All proposed landscaping, including the location, botanical or common names and sizes of proposed trees, shrubs and ground cover which meet the landscaping requirements of this chapter; the location and dimensions of planting areas and street yards; and the location and size of earthen berms and buffers. d.	All setback lines.e.	Location of all signage on the property.f.	Location, species and DBH of existing trees to be preserved and trees to be relocated or removed. g.	Any barriers to be erected to protect any existing vegetation and trees from damage during construction as required under section 62-83. h.	A brief description of the type of barriers to be erected.i.	All walls, fences and railings.j.	Location of all overhead utility lines.k.	Any trenching adjacent to or within the drip lines of trees to be preserved.l.	Location of all surface water retention and/or detention areas.m.	Lineal feet of the street yard, side yard and rear yard.n.	Total area, in square feet, of vehicular use areas, and the number of parking spaces provided and required. o.	Percentage of proposed natural or landscaped green space on the parcel, and a designation of green space areas, with the square footage. The total number and caliper inches (DBH) of specimen trees removed, by category. (2)	Procedures. The following permit procedures and requirements shall be followed by the applicant and city: a.	Landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city arborist prior to the issuance of a landscape permit by the office of inspections. b.	The city shall have ten working days after receiving the completed landscape plan within which to approve or deny the application for a landscape permit. If the permit is denied, the city shall specify to the applicant in writing the reasons for such denial. c.	A copy of all approved landscape permits shall be permanently displayed on-site during installation of landscape improvements. d.	No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until the city has determined at the final inspection that required site improvements have been installed according to the approved application, and all landscaping has been completed in accordance with the landscaping plan. The city may require a performance bond or other security, in an amount of not more than 110 percent of the cost of required improvements, in lieu of withholding a certificate of occupancy, and may further require that the improvements be satisfactorily installed and completed within the specified length of time, not to exceed six months; except, however, additional allowances up to one month may be granted from time to time if weather conditions do not permit planting with a reasonable probability of plant survival. e.	An applicant objecting to the interpretation and/or any enforcement of this chapter shall have the right to appeal the action to the zoning board of appeals. The appeal shall be filed in writing in the office of the director of inspections within 30 days of the action aggrieved. The appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the zoning board of appeals, provided, the appeal is filed within 15 days prior to such meeting. If the appeal is not filed within such 15-day period, it shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the zoning board of appeals. (Code 1976, § 9-4003(B); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(A), (B), 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-33. - Exemptions. (a)	If any tree is damaged by a wind storm or any other act of God, or shall be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare or safety and require immediate removal without delay, such tree shall be removed without obtaining a permit as required in this article. (b)	During any period of emergency, such as a tornado, hurricane, flood or any other act of nature, the requirements of this article may be waived by the mayor and council or their designee. (c)	The pruning or trimming of trees for beautification purposes, or for removal of dead or diseased limbs, shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. The pruning or trimming of trees as part of normal maintenance, or public utilities maintaining lines and easements within the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this article; however, all public utilities holding easements within the city shall give notice at least three days in advance when pruning or trimming of easements and rights-of-way is done. All trimming and pruning shall be done prudently so as to maintain the natural shape and beauty of all plants and trees. (Code 1976, § 9-4010; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4010, 7-6-2000)
Secs. 62-34—62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREE PRESERVATION STANDARDS 
Sec. 62-61. - Land disturbance permit for site development. (a)	A land disturbance permit for site development is required for parcels 1.1 acres or greater, and shall be obtained only after the approval and issuance of a tree removal permit as required by this chapter. (b)	The applicant is required to ensure that the land disturbance and tree removal permits are obtained in the name of the owner of the project and displayed on the site prior to any land disturbance activity, and shall be required to ensure that all contractors and workers are in compliance with the tree and protected zone preservations standards stated in section 62-63. 
Sec. 62-62. - Tree removal permit for specimen and canopy trees.     Permits for removal of specimen or canopy trees shall be obtained by making written application to the office of inspections on the form prescribed by the mayor and council. (Code 1976, § 9-4004(A); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005, 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-63. - Tree and protected zone preservation standards.     In reviewing the site development plans, the city arborist shall verify that trees and vegetation in protected zones intended to be preserved are retained within the protected areas so as to eliminate the following: (1)	Soil compaction in the critical root zone areas resulting from heavy equipment, vehicular or excessive pedestrian traffic or storage of equipment or building materials. (2)	Root disturbance due to cuts, fills or trenching.(3)	Wounds by mechanical equipment to exposed roots, trunks or limbs.(4)	Any other activity which may endanger trees or vegetation.(Code 1976, § 9-4004(B); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(B), 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-64. - Established. (a)	Trees, groups of trees or protected zones to be preserved shall be protected during development or construction by completely surrounding the critical root zone of all trees to be preserved with appropriate materials. (b)	No construction or soil disturbance shall occur within a tree's drip line unless protective measures to ensure the protection of the tree are detailed in the landscape plan and approved by the city arborist. (c)	The landscape plans shall indicate what tree protection devices are to be used. Active tree protection devices are required where trees or protected zones are located in close proximity to construction activity. (d)	Trees proposed to be preserved during construction shall be replaced prior to occupancy.(e)	The location of all tree protection devices will be verified by the department of inspections before any construction activity occurs on the site. Any change in protected zones must be reviewed and approved by the department of inspections. (Code 1976, § 9-4004(C); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(B), 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-65. - Active and passive tree protection devices. (a)	Active tree protection shall consist of chainlink, orange laminated plastic, wooden post and/or rail fencing, or other equivalent restraining material. (b)	Passive tree protection shall consist of heavy grade plastic flagging, a minimum of four inches wide, with dark lettering on a bright background, with the words "Tree Protection Area—Do Not Enter," or equivalent signage, on a continuous, durable restraint. (Code 1976, § 9-4004(D); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(B), 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-66. - Installation of tree protection devices.     All tree protection devices shall be installed prior to any clearing, grubbing or grading. The city arborist or department of inspections shall inspect and approve the installation of tree protection control devices before a land disturbance permit is issued. Tree protection devices shall remain in functional condition throughout all phases of development. (Code 1976, § 9-4004(E); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(B), 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-67. - Other specifications. (a)	Clearing. Where clearing has been approved, all trees shall be removed in a manner which does not adversely impact preserved trees. No felling of trees into protection zones, or the disturbance of roots inside protection zones is permitted. (b)	Erosion and sedimentation control. All erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be installed in a manner which will not result in the accumulation of sediment in a tree protection zone. (c)	Signage. All tree protection zones shall be designated as such with "Tree Save Area" signs visibly posted during construction at intervals along the perimeter of the fenced-in area. (d)	Tunneling. All boring under the tree protection zone shall be a minimum of 36 inches deep on center, and shall begin before the critical root zone and end beyond the critical root zone or drip line, whichever is greater. (e)	Trenching. All trenching shall meet the following specifications: (1)	All crushed or torn roots shall be cleaved back to good wood and a sharp clean cut shall be made to promote regrowth. (2)	All work and foot traffic in the area should be on the farthest side of the trench away from trees. (3)	All exposed root ends shall be kept moist.(f)	Pruning. All tree pruning is recommended to be in accordance with ANSI (American National Safety Institute) A300-1995 Standard Practices for Tree Care Operations For Trees, Shrubs and Other Woody Plant Maintenance, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city arborist. (1)	All pruning shall start beyond the branch collar of the tree.(2)	Pruning shall be done to remove branch weight as much as possible before the final cut to prevent tearing of bark and cambium. (3)	In all pruning, the branch collar and part of the trunk shall remain intact and uninjured.(g)	Safety. All tree care operations shall comply with ANSI (American National Safety Institute) Z133.1-1994 Safety Requirements for Pruning, Trimming, Repairing, Maintaining and Removing Trees and Cutting Brush. (Code 1976, § 9-4004(F); Ord. No. 95-29, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(B), 7-6-2000) 
Secs. 62-68—62-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIMEN TREES 
Sec. 62-91. - Identification.     Specimen trees are trees which warrant special consideration and encouragement for preservation. Specimen trees may be designated for preservation because of rarity, aesthetic value, historical value, botanical importance, importance to overall community planning or size. The size or condition of trees will be evaluated by the city arborist to determine if they qualify as specimen trees, based upon the following criteria: (1)	Size. a.	Large and medium species trees. 1.	Oaks and magnolia species, 14 inches DBH or larger.2.	Long leaf and spruce pine, ten inches DBH or larger.3.	All other confers (pines), 20 inches DBH or larger.4.	All other species, 18 inches DBH or larger.b.	Small species trees. Six inches DBH or larger. (2)	Condition. All trees must be relatively sound and have a solid trunk, with no major insect or pathological problems. Trees which face imminent death within two years, based upon the judgment of the city arborist, may be disqualified as specimen trees. (Code 1976, § 9-4005(A); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(C), 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-92. - Preservation of specimen and canopy trees.     Preservation of specimen and canopy trees shall be given special consideration in the preparation of site development plans. It is the desire of the city to preserve all existing trees wherever possible in development. Preserved specimen and canopy trees may be used in minimum landscape or buffer requirements. (Code 1976, § 9-4005(B); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(C), 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-93. - Removal and replacement. (a)	Where application is made for removal of a specimen tree, a plan or written documentation indicating the reason for the removal must be submitted and approved by the city arborist or director of inspections or their designee. (b)	The replacement of specimen softwood species (pines) shall be on a one-for-one basis. Each specimen pine removed must be replaced with one tree having a minimum 2.5-inch basal caliper. The replacement of all other specimen trees shall be equivalent to 25 percent of the total diameter of the removed trees with a minimum of 2.5-inch basal caliper. Small specimen trees shall be replaced with a minimum of 2.0-inch basal caliper. (c)	Replacement trees may be planted on-site if the site can accommodate trees above the required minimum specifications. If replacement trees cannot be planted on-site, the canopy and specimen trees will be valued and funds placed in the tree bank established under section 62-3, at the rate of $100.00 per diameter inch. Funds in the tree bank shall be used to install trees on public property, entrances to the city or other approved property. All projects shall be approved by the city tree commission. (d)	If a specimen tree is preserved, a two-for-one credit shall be provided for new plantings. The root zone area for each preserved tree shall be equal to two trees. (e)	Where payment to the tree bank is required under subsection (c) of this section, the developer may plant trees larger than the minimum requirement and shall be entitled to a credit of $100.00 per inch above the minimum inch requirements. (f)	Removal of specimen trees from property not being currently developed also requires the replacement of 25 percent of caliper inches on the same property or public property with a minimum of 2.5-inch basal caliper trees. All removed trees that cannot be planted on-site will be valued and funds placed in the tree bank at the rate of $100.00 per diameter inch. (g)	Specimen trees must be replaced by the same species or a species having the potential for comparable size, quality and longevity. (h)	No specimen tree or canopy tree which overhangs any public right-of-way shall be removed without first obtaining a tree removal permit. (Code 1976, § 9-4005(C); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(C), 7-6-2000)
Secs. 62-94—62-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LANDSCAPE STANDARDS 
Sec. 62-121. - Compliance; alternative design and installation plans.     To ensure the attainment of the objectives of this chapter, the design and installation of required landscaping shall be consistent with the standards of this article unless it can be demonstrated that alternative design and installation plans will meet the intent and spirit of this chapter. (Code 1976, § 9-4006(intro. ¶); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005, 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-122. - General requirements. (a)	Green space. All properties subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be developed with a minimum of 15 percent of the total area developed as green space. The street yard, side yard, rear yard, wetlands, surface water retention and/or detention areas and parking islands may be used to satisfy the green space requirements, provided, such areas meet the landscape requirements. All barren areas within the green space must be landscaped with a minimum of one tree every 300 square feet. The minimum area to be designated as green space is 100 square feet, and the minimum width of any such area shall be three feet. (b)	Line of sight. All landscaping shall be in compliance with the city's minimum line of sight standards and sight triangles for streets, intersections or driveways as defined in section 62-2 and in the city zoning ordinance (appendix A of this Code). No landscaping plant materials shall obstruct or impede the traffic flow on any public right-of-way or pedestrian walkway. (c)	Plant protection. All planting in areas which are adjacent to vehicular use or outdoor storage areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by construction of curbing or other appropriate barriers. (d)	Erosion control. Surface water on all planting areas shall be stabilized to prevent erosion by the use of live ground cover, mulch, shrubs, permeable pedestrian paver blocks or any combination thereof. (e)	Maintenance. The owner and/or developer is responsible for maintaining all plant material in a healthy condition. Such maintenance practices shall include sufficient water, weeding, replacement of dead plant material, proper pruning and litter removal. All tree trunks shall be protected from damage from string trimmers and mowers by a protective collar, mulch ring or surrounded by other bedding material. It is recommended that the mulch ring shall be a minimum of three feet in diameter for up to three-inch DBH trees, and expanded six inches for every additional one-inch diameter. (f)	Overhead utility lines. The location of all overhead utilities shall be considered during the placement of required trees in accordance with the following standards: (1)	Small species which do not exceed the height of the utility lines at maturity shall be used when located within 35 feet of the overhead utility lines. (See appendix A of this Code (zoning ordinance) for characterization of tree sizes by species). (2)	Medium to large species at maturity may be used when located more than 35 feet from the nearest overhead utility lines. (See appendix A of this Code (zoning ordinance) for a characterization of tree sizes by species.) (g)	Fire equipment. A minimum of a five-foot radius shall be maintained around all fire protection equipment, including fire hydrants, and shall contain no plant materials or structural elements other than ground cover plants. (h)	Minimum planting area per existing or proposed tree. Trees provided shall have no less than 150 square feet of planting area surrounding its base. Said area shall be maintained in either vegetative landscape material or other pervious surface cover. For all planting beds less than eight feet wide, the length of all planting beds shall not exceed 2½ times its width. (i)	Root barriers. Prior to the installation of trees, a determination shall be made as to whether root barriers are necessary to prevent roots from uplifting or cracking sidewalks. If needed, root barrier collars shall be installed at the time of planting of such trees. (j)	Tree wrap and binding devices. All tree wraps, burlap, wire baskets, tied or other binding devices shall be removed from all vegetation and trees at the time of planting of such vegetation and trees. (k)	Preservation of existing trees. Preservation of existing trees shall be given special consideration in the preparation of landscape plans. The city desires to preserve all existing trees, wherever possible, in all developments. Preserved trees may be used in the minimum landscape requirements. To be deemed a preserved tree, and to comply with the minimum landscape requirements, any existing tree must be at least four inches DBH, and be included among the approved species listed in appendix A of this Code (zoning ordinance). (See section 62-83, Tree and protected zone preservation standards.) (l)	Selection. All plants shall be healthy, well proportioned, disease and pest free, and suitable for the climate. All trees selected for planting shall be included on the locally adapted species list included in appendix A of this Code (zoning ordinance). If a species is planted which is not included on such species list, it must first be approved by the city arborist. All plants must conform to the American Nursery and Landscape Association Nursery State Standards, latest edition, of which copies are available at the office of the city arborist. (m)	Planting islands. Planting islands shall have at least a six-inch clearance of good topsoil, including six inches around and below the root ball of all trees. During planting, the department of inspections may require that undesirable soil be removed and replaced with topsoil. (n)	Azaleas. The city is known as the Azalea City, and the use of azaleas is encouraged, where appropriate. (Code 1976, § 9-4006(B); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(B), 7-6-2000; Ord. No. 2007-12, 4-5-2007) Editor's note— Appendix A, referred to in this section, is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 62-123. - Vehicular use areas.     The following landscape standards shall apply to all interior or perimeter vehicular use areas: (1)	Tree, shrub and ground cover selection and minimum size requirements. a.	All medium and large trees must be at least 2½ inches basal caliper and at least eight feet in height. If container grown trees are used, they must be a minimum of 30-gallon size. If field grown trees are used, sufficient root mass must be preserved to guarantee the survival of the trees. b.	All small trees planted must be at least two inches basal caliper and at least six feet in height, and a minimum 15-gallon container for container trees, at the time of planting. c.	For multistemmed container trees, such as crepe myrtles and river birch, the minimum size shall be 30-gallon containers, and all other multistemmed trees shall have a minimum required installation height of eight feet. d.	Shrubs included in interior planting areas must be a minimum of 12 inches in height at the time of installation. At least 60 percent of the shrubs must be three-gallon containers or larger. Shrubs shall be locally adapted species, and shall be spaced according to growth habit. Not more than 30 percent of the shrubs shall be deciduous species. e.	Ground cover, other than lawn grass, shall be placed 18 inches on center.(2)	Interior vehicular use area minimum landscape requirements. a.	Minimum landscape requirements for interior vehicular use areas shall be one tree, five shrubs and a combination of ground cover, grass or mulch to cover barren areas for every 2,100 square feet of vehicular use areas, or greater fraction thereof. All trees and shrub plantings may be spaced in any pattern as long as no parking space is located more than 50 feet from the base of any tree. The street yard or exterior trees may be included when calculating the 50-foot requirement for location of parking spaces. Interior planting areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by curbing or another barrier. b.	A variance from the 50-foot spacing requirement for loading dock or heavy truck traffic areas and/or car display areas may be granted upon approval by the inspections department. c.	A minimum of 60 percent of all trees planted in the interior vehicular use areas shall be canopy trees. Canopy trees are identified in appendix A of this Code (zoning ordinance) and shall consist of all large trees and designated medium trees. (All trees shall have a minimum planting area as described in section 62-122.) (Code 1976, § 9-4006(C); Ord. No. 95-29, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(B), 7-6-2000) Editor's note— Appendix A, referred to in this section, is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 62-124. - Perimeter area minimum landscape requirements. (a)	Street yard. (1)	A landscaped street yard shall be required adjacent to all street rights-of-way. All developed parcels greater than 1.1 acres in size and outparcels shall have a minimum width of ten feet. All parcels equal to or less than 1.1 acres in size, the street yard must have a minimum width of six feet. A minimum of three trees, 30 shrubs and a combination of grass, mulch or ground cover to cover barren areas shall be required in every 75 linear feet, or greater fraction thereof, of all street yards. Under no circumstances will the street yard contain less than three trees and 30 shrubs. The width of all street yards is measured from the right-of-way line to the nearest impervious area. (2)	All walkways constructed of impervious material shall not be less than four feet from the trunk of any existing tree. (3)	For parcels greater than 1.1 acres and outparcels, a minimum of 60 percent of all the trees planted shall be large canopy trees whose growth form will provide shade. For parcels equal to or less than 1.1 acres, excluding outparcels, the total site shall contain 60 percent large canopy trees, but the percentage may be reduced for the street yard, provided, it does not reduce the required number of large canopy trees on-site. Canopy trees are identified in appendix A of this Code (zoning ordinance) and consist of all large trees and designated medium trees. (All trees shall have a minimum planting area as described in section 62-122.) (4)	All outparcels shall have the same minimum width on the street yard as the main parcel.(b)	Side and rear yard areas. (1)	For all parcels greater than 1.1 acres and outparcels, the side and rear yard areas shall have a minimum width of five feet. The width is measured from property line to the nearest impervious area. A minimum of one tree and a combination of ground cover shall be required in every 50 lineal feet, or greater fraction thereof, on side and rear yards. Side or rear yard areas may be used to meet the 15 percent green space requirements or buffer, as long as compliance with the minimum side or rear yard landscape standards are met. (2)	For parcels 1.1 acres or less, the side and rear yards shall have a minimum width of three feet. A minimum of one tree every 50 feet, or greater fraction thereof, is required. The width is measured from the right-of-way line to the nearest impervious area. (3)	For property zoned to provide for zero lot lines, the side yard minimum is not required for the area of the building only. Zero lot lines shall not change the side yard calculations for plant material requirements. Developments with zero lot lines shall also comply with the 15 percent of the total area green space requirements. (4)	A minimum of 60 percent of all trees planted in side and rear yard areas shall be canopy trees whose growth will provide shade. Canopy trees are identified in appendix A of this Code (zoning ordinance) and consist of all large trees and designated medium trees. (All trees shall have a minimum planting area described in section 62-122.) (5)	All outparcels shall have the same minimum width on the street yard as the main parcel.(c)	Residential subdivision requirements. (1)	All residential subdivisions are required to have a landscaped street yard at the primary street entrance to the development. If there is more than one entrance, the developer shall designate the primary entrance. The street yard shall be landscaped the entire length of the property line fronting on a public street at a minimum width of ten feet. The street entrance must be landscaped with a minimum of three trees and 30 shrubs per 75 lineal feet. A combination of grass, mulch or ground cover for bare areas shall be required. The width of the street entrance is measured from the right-of-way to the nearest impervious area. Existing trees that exceed four inches DBH can be used to meet minimum plant requirements. Specimen trees provide a two-for-one credit. (2)	All residential subdivision developments must comply with the buffer requirements. (See section 3-18 of appendix A of this Code (zoning ordinance)). (3)	The rear property line of all residential lots shall be preserved green space, and landscaped at a minimum width of ten feet. The landscaped rear lot area shall have a minimum of one tree per 600 square feet of preserved green space, or a minimum of two trees per lot, whichever is greater. Preservation of existing trees that exceed four inches DBH will result in a one-for-one credit toward the landscape requirements. Preservation of specimen trees as defined in section 62-101, will result in a two-for-one credit toward the landscape requirements. (4)	No final inspection shall be performed for any residential structure until the minimum landscape requirements have been met. (5)	In all residential subdivision developments of 50 or more lots, or phases of developments of 50 or more lots with a minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet or less, the developer shall designate on the plat of such developments one lot as green space or open space to be landscaped in accordance with the green space development standards set forth in subsection (c)(7) of this section. (6)	Upon obtaining the written consent from the inspections department, the residential subdivision developer may, before or at the time 50 percent of the total number of lots have been sold, substitute a different lot within the subdivision as the designated green space lot, provided, the substituted lot satisfies the minimum square footage and landscape requirements set forth in this section. Upon substitution of the green space, a revised plat shall be prepared and recorded, along with any other documents necessary to effect such change at the expense of the developer. (7)	Green space development standards shall be as follows:a.	The green space must be landscaped no later than at the time 50 percent of the designated lots in the subdivision have been sold. b.	The green space must be landscaped at a minimum of one tree per 600 square feet.c.	The specimen tree provisions of this chapter shall apply to residential subdivisions for the street yard only. d.	Trees required to be planted in the green space must meet the minimum size of 2.5 inches basal caliper or, if containerized, a minimum container size of 30 gallons. (8)	The developer may petition the mayor and council to accept the green space area required in subsection (c)(7) of this section as a community park or playground. The mayor and council may, in their discretion, accept such property as part of the city parks and recreation facility. (Code 1976, § 9-4006(D); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(B), 7-6-2000)Editor's note— Appendix A, referred to in this section, is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 62-125. - Outdoor storage/utility service screening standards. (a)	All outdoor storage with a lineal dimension of 15 feet or greater, or any dumpster-type refuse container with a lineal dimension of five feet or greater, which is not screened by a building or other structure shall be screened from view from street rights-of-way for the entire length of the structure, except for necessary access. All utility service areas shall be screened from public rights-of-way. Screening for both outdoor storage and utility service areas shall be as set forth in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. (b)	Evergreen plants shall have a minimum installation height of 36 inches, spaced three feet on center and be expected to reach a minimum height of six feet within three years. (c)	Fences or walls shall be constructed of a material compatible with that of the principal building of masonry, stone or wood, and of a height and width equal to or greater than the utility service structure to be screened. One-third of fences or walls must be screened with plants within three years after the date of planting. (d)	No screening shall be installed which would impair the safe operation, maintenance or function of the utility service equipment. (Code 1976, § 9-4006(F), (G); Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(B), 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-126. - Surface water retention and detention basins.     Surface water retention and detention basins designed to handle surface water runoff and overflow are recommended to be constructed so as to appear natural. Landscaping must be provided at or immediately above the high water mark consistent with the interior vehicular area use standards. Trees may be located so as to integrate into the surrounding landscape. Where surface water retention and detention basins are to be considered as part of the 15 percent green space requirements, all trees must be planted at a density of one tree per 300 square feet, except in residential developments. (Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9-4005(B), 7-6-2000)
Sec. 62-127. - Restrictions on outdoor water of landscape. (a)	Restrictions. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. Should the utilities director determine that a drought condition exists, additional watering restrictions may be implemented between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. as follows: Outdoor watering will be allowed on odd/even days with odd numbered addresses restricted to odd numbered days only (Monday, Wednesday, and Friday) and even numbered addresses restricted to even numbered days only (Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday). No outdoor watering for the above stated purposes will be allowed on Sundays during such a designated drought condition; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: (1)	Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; (2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; (3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 1-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; (4)	Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; (5)	Watering personal food gardens;(6)	Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; (7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;(8)	Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;(9)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; (10)	Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;(11)	Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or(13)	Hydroseeding.(b)	Enforcement. (1)	No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. (2)	The community protection department shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. (3)	Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. (c)	Definitions.     As used herein the term "drought" shall be defined as one or more of the following conditions: (1)	A period of abnormally low rainfall;(2)	A period of declining levels in the aquifer that affects the city's water supply or water quality; (3)	Abnormally high water use in relation to reduced availability of water supply;(4)	A drought as determined and declared by a state, federal, or other regulatory agency.(Ord. No. 2011-1, §§ 1—3, 1-20-2011)
Secs. 62-128—62-150. - Reserved. 
Chapter 66 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 30; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94.State Law reference— Fleeing or attempting to elude police officers, impersonating law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-395; authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 66-1. - Burglary and/or fire alarm telephone dialer systems.     No person shall have installed or operate a burglary and/or fire alarm automatic telephone dialer system that selects any emergency telephone service line of the police department unless a telephone number is specified for such purpose by the chief of police. Any system in operation on the effective date of this section shall be so modified that it is no longer in violation or be disconnected no later than 90 days after this section is adopted. (Code 1976, § 3-3002)
Secs. 66-2—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Departments, § 2-231 et seq.State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; compensation of municipal law enforcement officers to be by fixed salary only, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9.
Sec. 66-31. - Composition.     The police force of the city shall consist of such officers and employees as shall be determined by the mayor and council. (Code 1976, § 3-1001)
Sec. 66-32. - Chief's duties.     The chief of police shall be the chief administrative officer of the police force and shall be responsible for the orderly and efficient operation of the police department. (Code 1976, § 3-1002)
Sec. 66-33. - Officials authorized to accept cash bonds.     The chief of police or, in his absence, his designee (so designated by the chief of police) is the official of the city who is authorized to accept cash bonds for the personal appearance of any person charged with a violation of an ordinance or an offense against the city, to answer the charges brought against such person. The official so designated shall issue a receipt to any person who is an applicant for a cash bond. (Code 1976, § 3-1003)
Sec. 66-34. - Service of process.     The chief of police and members of the force shall be vested with full power and authority to serve all processes, executions, attachments, rules and orders of the mayor and council. (Code 1976, § 3-1004)
Sec. 66-35. - Taking of criminal bonds.     The municipal court judge is authorized to have all persons arrested carried before him that he may then and there fix bonds for the prisoner's appearance and enter the bond on the docket immediately; however, he may delegate to the arresting officer the authority to fix the bond. (Code 1976, § 3-1005)
Sec. 66-36. - Refusal to give bond.     If any person or witness shall fail or refuse to give bond and security or bond as required of him, such person so failing or refusing may be confined in the appropriate jail or be kept under a guard, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify, as the case may be. (Code 1976, § 3-1006)
Sec. 66-37. - Docket of cases.     The chief of police or his designee shall be required to keep a docket upon which he shall enter all cases carried or committed to a state court upon the municipal court, and each item of cost entered, the final disposition of each case, and the amount of costs collected in each. (Code 1976, § 3-1007)
Sec. 66-38. - Retention of weapons and badges upon retirement. (a)	Upon the retirement of any member of the police department who has accumulated 25 years of service and retires and leaves the department under honorable conditions or a police officer who is required to take a medical retirement after having attained vested status in the retirement system, which is ten years, such member shall be entitled, as part of his retirement compensation, to retain his weapon and badge pursuant to regulations promulgated by the chief of police. (b)	Upon the death of any active member of the police department in good standing who otherwise is eligible for retirement under the city's normal retirement plan, and who served under honorable conditions for a minimum of ten years and otherwise met all criteria, such member's beneficiary shall be entitled to retain the deceased officer's weapon and badge pursuant to regulations promulgated by the chief of police. (c)	Upon the death of any active member of the police department killed in the line of duty, such member's beneficiary shall be entitled to retain the deceased officer's weapon and badge pursuant to regulations promulgated by the chief of police. (Ord. No. 2003-74, 12-18-2003; Ord. No. 2005-17, 3-10-2005; Ord. No. 2009-20, § 1, 5-21-2009) 
Chapter 70 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Court, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94.State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 70-1. - Misdemeanors under state law.     Any act, the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor under the laws of the state, is prohibited within the city; and if committed within the city, and if not prosecuted by the state, it is declared to be an offense punishable by the city. 
Sec. 70-2. - Interfering with officers and employees. (a)	No person shall intentionally interfere or hinder a Valdosta official, employee, or agent when such official, employee or agent has properly identified either himself or herself or is otherwise identifiable as such and is engaged in the lawful performance of his or her official duties. (b)	No person shall give a false name, address or date of birth, or any other false information, to any a Valdosta official, employee or agent in the lawful discharge of his or her official duties with the intent to mislead such official, employee or agent in any way. (c)	No person shall refuse to provide identification, address or date of birth to a Valdosta Police Officer or Valdosta Fire Marshal while said officer is conducting an investigation and the officer has reasonable belief that said individual committed a crime, is committing a crime or is about to commit a crime. However, said person shall not be compelled to answer any other inquiry. (Code 1976, § 11-1007; Ord. No. 2008-31, 7-10-2008)
Sec. 70-3. - Disorderly conduct. (a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Meeting means the gathering of a quorum of the members of any public or quasipublic agency or of any committee of its members created by such governing body, whether standing or special, pursuant to the schedule, call or notice of and from such governing body or committee, or an authorized member at a designated time and place in which any public matter, official business, or policy of the agency is to be discussed or presented, or at which official action is to be taken or in the case of a committee recommendations of any public matter, official business, or policy of the governing body are to be formulated, presented, or discussed.     Public or quasipublic agency means: (1)	Every state department, agency, board, bureau, commission, public corporation and authority; (2)	Every county, municipal corporation, school district or other political subdivision of this state; (3)	Every department, agency, board, bureau, commission, authority or similar body of each such county, municipal corporation or other public subdivision of this state; (4)	Every city, county, regional or other authority established pursuant to the laws of this state and any nonprofit organization to which there is a direct allocation of tax funds made by the governing authority of any agency as stated above. (b)	Acts prohibited. No person shall engage in disorderly conduct. Any person who shall do any of the following shall be guilty of disorderly conduct: (1)	Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, where any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health; (2)	Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, where property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; (3)	Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct; (4)	Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; (5)	Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; (6)	Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place; (7)	Any person who shall solicit funds in crowds for unlawful purposes;(8)	Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming; (9)	Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device; (10)	Any person who assembles with another for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the town, or who shall aid or abet such person; (11)	Any person who utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets; (12)	Any person who frequents any establishment where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is allowed or tolerated; (13)	Any person who shall act in such a manner as to cause another person to reasonably be in fear of bodily harm or injury; (14)	Any person who shall use "fighting words" directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil; (15)	Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another; (16)	Any person who shall, by acts of violence, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; (17)	Any person who shall congregate with another in or on any public way, so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and refuses to clear any public way when ordered to do so; (18)	A person commits an offense if, with the intent to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, procession or gathering, the person substantially obstructs or interferes with the meeting, procession or gathering by physical action or verbal utterance. (Ord. No. 2005-63, 9-8-2005; Ord. No. 2008-7, § 1, 2-7-2008)State Law reference— Abusive or obscene language, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 70-4. - Drunkenness.     It shall be unlawful for any person to be found on the streets in a state of intoxication or significantly under the influence of intoxicants, or acting in a disorderly, riotous or tumultuous manner, or to commit any other act against the public peace, safety, morality or decency. (Code 1976, § 11-1003)Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-54. 
Sec. 70-5. - Possession of knives, razors and ice picks.     It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess or carry upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or in any public place in the city any of the following implements unless they are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for harmful use: (1)	Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches; (2)	Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches; (3)	Any knife of any kind, except for hunting or sporting purposes only while carried in an exposed manner, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three inches; this is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives and/or knives which do not close and any type knife with the blade open; (4)	Any razor or razor blade; or(5)	Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point, except this shall not apply to any person delivering ice. (Code 1976, § 11-1010)
Sec. 70-6. - Discharging firearms in city.     It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in the corporate limits of the city, except in defense of a person or property. This section shall not apply to: (1)	Authorized law officers;(2)	The discharge of firearms at private or public skeet or trap facilities where such activities are for the purpose of recreation or competition and the individual has the permission of the operator of the facility for such discharge of firearms; (3)	The discharge of firearms for the purpose of wildlife and game hunting in the wooded, uninhabited areas of the city, provided, the hunting area has a minimum size of 250 acres, and the designated area has been approved by the city manager, chief of police and city attorney for a hunting exception to this section and, provided, that no firearms are discharged within 100 yards of, or across, any public right-of-way. The city manager, chief of police and city attorney may place reasonable restrictions on the use of firearms in the designated area for safety purposes. (Code 1976, § 11-1011)State Law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104. 
Sec. 70-7. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-31, § 1, adopted Sept. 22, 2011, repealed § 70-7, entitled "Slingshots; bows and arrows; air rifles", which derived from Code 1976, § 11-1012. 
Sec. 70-8. - Iceboxes, refrigerators, similar containers; abandonment. (a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of the icebox, refrigerator or container. (b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door with a snaplock or other similar device without removing the snaplock or other similar device on the doors from the icebox, refrigerator or container. (Code 1976, § 11-1014)
Sec. 70-9. - Utility apparatus; diversion of services. (a)	It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to destroy, damage or tamper with any meter pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus owned by the city or by any company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service. (b)	It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the city or of a company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service, or intentionally divert any of the services of the city or such company, or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the city or such company, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the city or such company. (c)	No person shall knowingly receive the benefit of acts of diversion or tampering with electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service without the proper charge. (d)	Proof that any of the acts specified in this section was done on premises in possession of an accused or that the accused received the benefit of any such act shall be prima facie evidence that the accused committed such act or aided and abetted in its commission. (Code 1976, § 11-1015; Ord. No. 80-4, § 1, 1-9-1980)Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 98. 
Sec. 70-10. - Vandalism. (a)	Defined. A person commits vandalism when he engages in the willful and malicious destruction, injury, disfigurement or defacement of any public or private property, real or personal, without the consent of the owner or person having custody of the property. This offense shall include, but is not limited to, actions by cutting, tearing, breaking, marking, painting or drawing when such actions are intended to have the effect of causing damage to property. (b)	Restitution. In lieu of fine payment or incarceration, any person found guilty of violating this section, or any parent or guardian of any unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian found in such violation, may be required to submit full restitution to the victim of such vandalism by monetary payment or property repairs. (c)	Violations by unemancipated minors. In the case of an unemancipated minor accused of violating this section and residing with a parent or legal guardian at the time of such violation, the police department shall within three days notify such parent or legal guardian in writing, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, that the minor has been accused of vandalism and that the parent or legal guardian may be held financially responsible for any fine or restitution resulting from such violation. (Code 1976, § 11-1016; Ord. No. 79-60, § 1, 12-5-1979)
Sec. 70-11. - Scattering prohibited.     It shall be unlawful to deliver any handbills, advertising matter or newspapers to any premises in the city except by being handed to the recipient or placed on the porch, stoop or in the yard of private residences so as to prevent any such articles from being blown about, becoming scattered, or in any way causing litter. It shall be unlawful to deliver any advertising matter, handbill or newspapers to any premises where the owner or occupant has told the distributor or person making the deliveries that he does not desire to receive such materials. Delivery is prohibited to vacant houses or vacant lots. The distributor of any handbills, advertising matter or newspapers to any premises shall show on the subject material delivered a telephone number of the address of the distributor. (Code 1976, § 11-1017; Ord. No. 88-33, 7-7-1988)
Sec. 70-12. - Blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy guns. (a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or to offer for sale any toy pistol or toy gun in which blank cartridges are shot. (b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to sell within the corporate limits of the city toy pistols in which are shot metal cartridges; and it shall likewise be unlawful to sell any metal cartridges to be used, or that may be used, in such pistols. (Code 1976, § 11-2012)
Sec. 70-13. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-31, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 2011, repealed § 70-13, entitled "Sales of weapons", which derived from Code 1976, § 11-5008. 
Sec. 70-14. - Parental responsibility. (a)	For the purpose of this section, the term "public place" means any street, highway, alley or right-of-way, including sidewalks; any park, playground, shopping center or other place or building open to the public; any cemetery, schoolyard, body of water or watercourse; any privately-owned or publicly-owned place of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation, including, parking lots and other areas adjacent thereto; and any vacant lot or land, whether publicly-owned or privately-owned. (b)	Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any school day, it shall be unlawful for any minor between the ages of seven and 16 years to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, places, buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply when the minor: (1)	Is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the legal care or custody of the minor; (2)	Is upon an emergency errand directed by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor; (3)	Is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places referenced in subsection (b) of this section during the prescribed period of time; (4)	Is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal interstate and intrastate travel through the city; (5)	Is enrolled in a valid home study program as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690;(6)	Has completed all course study requirements for high school graduation;(7)	Is married in accordance with applicable law;(8)	Has written proof from school authorities that the minor is excused from school attendance at that particular time; (9)	Is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; or (10)	Serves as a page of the general assembly as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-692.(c)	It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody or control of any minor to allow such minor to be in or upon any public place within the city between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any school day, except in the circumstances set out in subsections (b)(1)—(9) of this section. An adult person who is in violation of this subsection shall be subject to such punishment as the city municipal court may impose, subject to all limitations contained in the city Charter and O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690.1, and in case of conflict, the latter shall control. Each violation of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. (d)	It shall be an affirmative defense if the parent or legal guardian of the minor has invoked the jurisdiction of the juvenile court against the minor prior to the time that the minor was found in violation of subsection (b) of this section. Any minor who violates subsection (b) of this section is subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. (e)	Any police officer who takes into custody a minor in violation of subsection (b) of this section shall comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 20-2-699 and 20-2-700. (f)	If a minor is suspended or expelled from school, for the duration of the suspension or expulsion, such minor's parent or legal guardian shall: (1)	Personally supervise the minor or arrange for a responsible adult 21 years of age or older to supervise the minor at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school if the minor had not been expelled or suspended; and (2)	Prohibit the minor from being in any public place at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school if the minor had not been suspended or expelled, unless the minor is: a.	Accompanied by his parent or legal guardian or a responsible adult 21 years of age or older selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor; or b.	Employed pursuant to an age or schooling certificate during the actual working hours, or traveling directly to or from the job site. (g)	A person who is in violation of subsection (f) of this section shall be subject to such punishment as the city municipal court shall impose, subject to all limitations contained in the city Charter and O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690.1, and in case of conflict, the latter shall control. Each violation of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. (h)	Any minor who violates subsection (b) of this section, while under suspension or expulsion from school, shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. (i)	It shall be an affirmative defense if the parent or legal guardian has invoked the jurisdiction of the juvenile court against the minor prior to the time that the minor violated subsection (f) of this section. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1(11-1018), 5-24-2001)
Secs. 70-15—70-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOITERING[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Ordinances proscribing loitering or related activities not preempted, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24.
Sec. 70-51. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Conviction means the previous adjudication of guilt to an illegal drug transaction, or the entering of a voluntary plea under the first offender act, or a nolo contendere plea to any criminal offense involving an illegal drug transaction or trafficking or sale of an illegal substance.     Loitering means remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, or walking about aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expression, "hanging around." The term also means the following acts and conduct: (1)	Lodging in any deserted or occupied building or in the open air;(2)	Assembling with other persons on the streets, sidewalks, alleys, public places or private places in such manner as to obstruct free passage on the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places, and failing to disperse upon the notification of any officer or member of the police force or other citizens; or (3)	Sleeping on or at the foot of any stairway or on the streets, sidewalks and public places in the city, or on the private premises of another without the consent of the owner.     Notice means that a person has notice of a drug free zone and an area designated as a location of a previously illegal drug transaction when they have received written notice of such site, or such person has been given verbal notice of such site by a law enforcement officer at the site any time prior to arrest. The posting of a sign on the site indicating the location of a previous illegal drug transaction shall be notice to all persons of the effect of this article or when verbally advised of the effect of this article at a site by a law enforcement officer and the individual refuses to leave such site.     Posted sign means a sign that has been placed in a conspicuous area which is visible to all persons, and the size of such sign shall not exceed 12 inches by 18 inches. If, in fact, a sign has been posted and is subsequently removed by vandalism or some other cause, verbal notice of the posting of the area shall constitute notice and posting of the sign under this article. (Code 1976, § 11-1005(a)(1)—(3), (b); Ord. No. 90-49, 9-6-1990; Ord. No. 2000-29, § 2, 4-20-2000) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-52. - Prohibited. (a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on or about the streets, sidewalks, alleys, public places and other places in the city. (b)	It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian or any other person having the custody of any minor under the age of 15 years to permit or allow or encourage such minor to violate this article; and it shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any public place to permit, allow or encourage any such minor to violate this article in and around such place. (Code 1976, § 11-1005(a); Ord. No. 90-49, 9-6-1990)
Sec. 70-53. - Certain types of loitering prohibited. (a)	No person shall loiter in a public place in such a manner as to:(1)	Create or cause to be created a danger or a breach of the peace;(2)	Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; (3)	Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or(4)	Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place.(b)	This section shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature, or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to or in whose hearing they are made. (Code 1976, § 11-1005(c); Ord. No. 90-49, 9-6-1990)
Sec. 70-54. - Request to leave.     Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing any of the conditions enumerated in section 70-53, any police officer may order that person to leave the place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by the police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this article. (Code 1976, § 11-1005(d); Ord. No. 90-49, 9-6-1990)
Sec. 70-55. - Loitering near school.     It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on or about any public or private school grounds, or on or in any adjoining public street or alley or avenue in the city, without any good cause or reason, after being forbidden to do so by the superintendent or principal of any such school. (Code 1976, § 11-1006)
Sec. 70-56. - Offenses. (a)	A person commits the offense of loitering when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. In addition, an individual shall commit the offense of loitering when such individual, without any apparent legitimate purpose and who has been previously convicted of a drug offense or obstruction of a police officer, is found idly standing or lingering at a location which has previously been identified and posted by the city police department as a site of an illegal drug transaction. Prior to any conviction for loitering under this subsection, the offender must have been notified on at least one occasion by a law enforcement officer of the effect of this article, and the location must have been posted with a sign or notice providing that such location is the site of a previous illegal drug transaction. Failure of such individual to vacate the location after having been warned by a law enforcement officer is sufficient to satisfy the notice requirements of this section. (b)	Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer; refuses to identify himself; or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this article, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this article if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the procedure set forth in this subsection, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. (c)	A sign shall be posted within 100 feet of the parcel of land or actual site of the previous illegal drug transaction. Such sign shall state "No Loitering—Drug Free Zone." In addition, a sign stating "Drug Free Zone" shall be posted on the boundaries of the area designated by the mayor and council as authorized in subsection (d) of this section. (d)	The area to be posted as previously designated sites of illegal drug transactions shall be designated by the mayor and council by appropriate resolution. After such designation, appropriate signs and notice shall be posted by the police department in accordance with this article within the designated area determined to be the sites of previous illegal drug activities. (Ord. No. 2000-29, § 1, 4-20-2000)
Secs. 70-57—70-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALARMS 
Sec. 70-91. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices designated and arranged to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion into the premises or to signal an attempted robbery at a protected premises with respect to which the city police are expected to respond.     False alarm means the activation of a burglary and/or robbery alarm by other than a forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no burglary, theft, robbery or forcible entry is being committed or attempted on the premises. False alarms shall include negligently activated alarms, alarms which are the result of equipment which has been improperly installed or maintained, and alarms which are purposefully activated to summon the police in nonemergency situations; but the term does not include an alarm caused by violent weather conditions or acts of God or other causes which are beyond the user's control.     Response means the dispatch of a police officer to the premises when an alarm system has been activated indicating a burglary and/or a robbery is presently in progress on the premises. (Code 1976, § 11-1004(1))Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-92. - False alarms.     No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm or need of fire, police or ambulance assistance, or to aid or abet in the commission of such act. (Code 1976, § 11-1004; Ord. No. 77-32, § 1, 8-10-1977)State Law reference— False fire alarm, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27. 
Sec. 70-93. - Prohibited alarms. (a)	In addition, any commercial premises employing an alarm or system shall post in a prominent or conspicuous place notice of an alarm control company and a named representative of such company who can be notified at all times and who is authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the alarm system or who can contact a person who can deactivate the system if there are no means of access to the premises. (b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to activate any alarm system for the purpose of summoning the police except in the event of an actual or attempted robbery or burglary or other crime. It shall also be unlawful for anyone to notify the police of an activated alarm and fail to disclose to the police his knowledge or apparent knowledge that the alarm system has been activated due to some electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system. (Code 1976, § 11-1004(2); Ord. No. 85-41, 8-22-1985; Ord. No. 86-20, 3-20-1986; Ord. No. 86-28, 5-22-1986) 
Sec. 70-94. - Offenses. (a)	If the police respond to a second false alarm within any calendar month, the owner or occupier of the premises where the alarm or burglary system is maintained shall be given written notice that two responses to false alarms have occurred within a calendar month and that upon the third false alarm a citation will issue for a violation of this article. (b)	A third response and each additional response to a false alarm within any calendar month shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in section 1-11. (Code 1976, § 11-1004(3); Ord. No. 85-41, 8-22-1985; Ord. No. 86-20, 3-20-1986; Ord. No. 86-28, 5-22-1986) 
Chapter 74 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Parks and recreation advisory board, § 2-311 et seq.; environment, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 86.State Law reference— Authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 74-1. - Protection of vegetation.     It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, remove or destroy any tree, sapling, seeding, bush or shrub, whether alive or dead; or chip, blaze, box, girdle, trim or otherwise deface or injure any tree or shrub; or break or remove any branch, foliage, flower or any tree or shrub; or pick, gather, uproot, remove or destroy any flower, plant or grass in any city park or other recreational facility owned by the city. (Code 1976, § 6-1001(1); Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)
Sec. 74-2. - Removal of sod, similar material.     It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed any sod, sand, earth, humus, peat, rocks or gravel from any city park or other recreational facility owned by the city. (Code 1976, § 6-1001(2); Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)
Sec. 74-3. - Fires restricted.     It shall be unlawful for any person to build, light or maintain any open or outdoor fire at any place within a city park or other recreational facility owned by the city except in areas or facilities provided and designated for this purpose. (Code 1976, § 6-1001(3); Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)Cross reference— Fire protection and prevention, ch. 46. 
Sec. 74-4. - Possession, use of weapons.     It shall be unlawful for any person to possess while on city park property a revolver, pistol, shotgun, rifle, air rifle, air gun, or any gun or bow or other weapon that discharges projectiles either by air, explosive substance or any other force. No person shall discharge or set off anywhere on park property any explosive, revolver, pistol, shotgun, rifle, air rifle, bow, or other weapon that discharges projectiles either by air, explosive substance or any other force. (Code 1976, § 6-1001(4); Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)
Sec. 74-5. - Possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages.     It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume alcoholic beverages while on park property without a permit as provided for in section 74-12. (Code 1976, § 6-1001(5); Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 74-6. - Breaching the peace.     It shall be unlawful for any person in any city park or other recreational facility owned by the city to cause a disturbance or engage in any activity which shall unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of the park by citizens, including the use of vulgar, profane or abusive language. (Code 1976, § 6-1001(6); Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)
Sec. 74-7. - Operation of vehicles.     It shall be unlawful for any person to drive recklessly or to drive any vehicle upon or across any part of any public park or other recreational facility of the city except upon roadways laid out and maintained for vehicular travel. In order to provide a safe environment for park users, only service vehicles will be allowed inside any park in the city. Private vehicles will be restricted to designated parking areas. Written permission may be given by the P.R.C.A. director to have private vehicles in parks under special circumstances. (Code 1976, § 6-1001(7); Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
Sec. 74-8. - Malicious mischief.     It shall be unlawful for any person to deface in any way the benches, fences or other structures in any city park or other recreational facility owned by the city. (Code 1976, § 6-1001(8); Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)
Sec. 74-9. - Littering.     It shall be unlawful for any person to litter or deposit trash or refuse matter of any kind on property in any city park or other recreational facility owned by the city. (Code 1976, § 6-1001(9); Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 82. 
Sec. 74-10. - Violation of laws.     It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any ordinance or law of the city or the state in any city park or other recreational facility owned by the city. (Code 1976, § 6-1001(10); Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)
Sec. 74-11. - Animal control.     It shall be unlawful for any person to allow pets to run free without leashes in violation of the city leash law in any city park or other recreational facility owned by the city. (Code 1976, § 6-1001(11); Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14. 
Sec. 74-12. - Permits for alcoholic beverages.     Upon application, a one-day permit may be obtained from the director of parks, recreation and community affairs and the city manager for possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages while on park property. This permit shall be issued only for special events and shall be restricted to particular dates and times. (Code 1976, § 6-1003; Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 74-13. - Park hours of operation.     All parks and recreation facilities in the city shall be open for visitors and operation between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. daily. Parks containing lighted athletic facilities may remain open until 12:00 midnight or later by permit for special events or tournaments. (Code 1976, § 6-1004; Ord. No. 95-37, 11-9-1995)
Secs. 74-14—74-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL AUDITORIUM 
Sec. 74-51. - Advertising for auditorium events only.     The sign marquee on the premises of Mathis City Auditorium shall be used only for the advertising or to advise the public of events to be held on the auditorium premises. (Code 1976, § 6-3001(a); Ord. No. 77-43, 12-14-1997)
Sec. 74-52. - Request.     Any person wishing to advertise or advise the public of an event to be held at the auditorium shall file a request with the auditorium manager 30 days prior to the event. The request shall be in writing and shall state the name of the show and the participating performers to be advertised on the marquee, that the lease agreement for the auditorium has been signed, and that a deposit has been made for use of the auditorium. (Code 1976, § 6-3001(b); Ord. No. 77-43, 12-14-1977)
Sec. 74-53. - Criteria for advertising.     The auditorium manager shall advertise events upon proper request in accordance with the following criteria: (1)	All commercial events shall have first priority for use of the marquee.(2)	All requests for civic or noncommercial usage of the marquee shall be handled on the basis of first valid request received shall be first honored by the auditorium manager. (3)	Should there be two events in the same week, each event will be given two lines of advertisement on the marquee. (4)	Should there be three events in the same week, priority shall be given to the event which has the first valid request filed with the auditorium manager. (5)	No event will be advertised on the sign marquee for more than five days prior to the actual occurrence of the event. (6)	Should there be conflict between request for use of the auditorium marquee which cannot be reconciled by the auditorium manager, the matter shall be referred to the parks and recreation director; if the parks and recreation director is unable to reconcile the matter, it shall be resolved by the city manager. (Code 1976, § 6-3001(c); Ord. No. 77-43, 12-14-1977)
Chapter 78 - PERSONNEL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; officers and employees, § 2-141 et seq.State Law reference— Power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2); municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 78-1. - Personnel provisions not affected by Code.     Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council pertaining to the policies, rules and regulations governing the officers and employees of the city. All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out in this Code. (Code 1976, § 2-7001; Ord. No. 77-31, 8-10-1977; Ord. No. 79-56, 11-7-1979; Ord. No. 81-4, 1-8-1981; Ord. No. 81-41, 8-6-1981; Ord. No. 82-15, 3-25-1982; Ord. No. 85-69, 12-10-1985; Ord. No. 86-4, 1-9-1986; Ord. No. 86-43, 8-7-1986; Ord. No. 87-38, 6-25-1987; Ord. No. 88-48, 10-6-1988; Ord. No. 90-12, 2-22-1990; Ord. No. 90-50, 9-6-1990; Ord. No. 91-2, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 91-32, 8-22-1991; Ord. No. 93-12, 3-11-1993; Ord. No. 97-20, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 7-10-2008; Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 6-25-2015) 
Sec. 78-2. - Retirement plan. (a)	Adopted by reference. The retirement plan for the employees of the city, as amended, on file in the office of the city clerk, is adopted by reference. Such plan sets forth the joint trust agreement and the contract for the administration of the plan by the city and the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System as provided by O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq., so as to: (1)	Amend the definition of earnings;(2)	Clarify the definition of annual earnings;(3)	Remove the maximum age limit at which a full-time employee hired subsequent to the effective date of the plan may participate in the plan; (4)	Allow credit for military service for re-employed employees;(5)	Clarify normal retirement dates;(6)	Remove the provisions pertaining to mandatory retirement age;(7)	Change and clarify the provisions pertaining to credited past service;(8)	Change and clarify the provisions pertaining to credited future service;(9)	Cap the amount of earnings to be taken into account for benefit computation in accordance with Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(17); (10)	Require limitations on annual benefits a participant can receive in accordance with Internal Revenue Code § 415(b); (11)	Change certain provisions pertaining to optional forms of retirement income;(12)	Provide lump sum distributions for small annuities in accordance with Internal Revenue Code § 417(e); (13)	Clarify and change certain provisions pertaining to termination and portability;(14)	Change the provisions pertaining to accrual of interest;(15)	Change and clarify the provisions pertaining to errors in computation;(16)	Change "Joint Municipal Employees Retirement System" and "JMERS" to "Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System" and "GMEBS"; (17)	Provide for an effective date;(18)	Repeal conflicting ordinances;(19)	For other purposes.(b)	Effective date. The effective date of the amended retirement plan shall be June 1, 1991. (c)	Copy on file. A copy of the retirement plan is filed in the office of the clerk of council, city hall; and the plan is adopted, as amended, and incorporated as if fully set out at length in this section. (Code 1976, § 2-6011; Ord. No. 76-8, §§ 1—3, 3-10-1976; Ord. No. 77-23, 7-6-1977; Ord. No. 79-9, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 82-4, §§ 1—3, 1-7-1984; Ord. No. 85-6, 2-21-1985; Ord. No. 85-10, 3-21-1985; Ord. No. 91-16, 5-9-1991; Ord. No. 2005-51, 8-11-2005; Ord. No. 2006-47, 8-10-2006; Ord. No. 2008-21, 5-22-2008; Ord. No. 2010-24, § 2, 6-10-2010; Ord. No. 2012-9, 4-5-2012; Ord. No. 2013-17, 8-22-2013; Ord. No. 2013-22, 10-10-2013; Ord. No. 2015-26, § 1, 10-22-2015) State Law reference— Authority to establish retirement systems for municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(4); authority of municipality to provide insurance, retirement and pension benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; Georgia municipal employees benefit system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14). 
Sec. 78-3. - Deferred compensation plan.     The mayor and council adopts the Georgia Municipal Association Deferred Compensation Program (pursuant to federal legislation permitting such plans) and its attendant investment options, and establishes the City of Valdosta Deferred Compensation Plan for voluntary participation of all eligible city employees, elected officials and independent contractors. (Code 1976, § 2-6012)
Secs. 78-4—78-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODE OF ETHICS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note—Ord. No. 2014-13, §§ I—X, adopted July 24, 2014, repealed the former art. II, §§ 78-41—78-52, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 96-18, §§ I—XII, adopted Apr. 11, 1996; and Ord. No. 2001-29, § VI, adopted Aug. 23, 2001.State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3.
Sec. 78-41. - Purpose/scope. (a)	The purpose of this code of ethics is to:(1)	Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials;(2)	Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; (3)	Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and (4)	Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms.(b)	The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. The ordinance codified in this article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. (Ord. No. 2014-13, § I, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 78-42. - Definitions.     Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics:     City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the City Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or mayor and council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or mayor and council.     Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the mayor and council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body.     Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city.     Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws.     Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value.     Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public.     Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: (1)	The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; (2)	The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed: (a) $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services; or (b) ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; (3)	The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the mayor and council; or (4)	The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. (Ord. No. 2014-13, § II, 7-24-2014)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-43. - Prohibitions. (a)	No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. (b)	No city official, in any manner before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. (c)	No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. (d)	No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. (e)	No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. (1)	This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. (2)	This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). (3)	Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. (f)	All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. (g)	Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law.(h)	No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. (i)	If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. (j)	No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. (k)	No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. (l)	A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. (m)	A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. (n)	A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. (o)	No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training, or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city thereof. (p)	No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Valdosta, nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a Municipal Court Judge of the City of Valdosta on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Valdosta. (q)	The mayor or council shall not coerce city employees to do any job not approved by their supervisor. (Ord. No. 2014-13, § III, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 78-44. - Conflict of interest. (a)	A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. (b)	A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. (c)	Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. (Ord. No. 2014-13, § IV, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 78-45. - Disclosure and disqualifications. (a)	A city official with a conflict of interest shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by sworn written statement to the city prior to the vote, decision, or action affecting the city official's family member or substantial interest. (b)	If the conflict is not realized until immediately before the vote, action, or decision, the city official must verbally declare such conflict, abstain from discussing and voting, and file a sworn statement at the earliest convenience. (c)	Such sworn statements shall be public record.(d)	Any city official with a conflict shall disqualify himself from any vote, decision, or action, if the vote, decision, or action may result in a pecuniary benefit to the city official which is not available to the general public at large. (Ord. No. 2014-13, § V, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 78-46. - Board of ethics. (a)	Upon receipt of a complaint a board of ethics shall be established in the following manner: (1)	The board of ethics shall consist of three residents of the city, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the council, and the third appointed by the two named board members and approved by a majority of the mayor and council. The third member of the board of ethics shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. The board of ethics shall hear and render decisions on all properly verified complaints filed under this article. The board shall elect one of its members to serve as chair. The board of ethics shall as soon as practical after appointment and receipt of the complaint in proper form review it to determine whether the complaint is unjust, frivolous or patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to evoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the mayor and council. (b)	All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. (c)	No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. (d)	The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The mayor and council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. (e)	No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. (f)	No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the City of Valdosta, Georgia. (g)	Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. (Ord. No. 2014-13, § VI, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 78-47. - Receipt of complaints. (a)	All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the city clerk, who will give it to the mayor and council. The mayor and council may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the mayor and council. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the city clerk or the clerk's designee shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. (b)	All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. (c)	Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the mayor and council. The board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the mayor and council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. (d)	Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the mayor and council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. (e)	The board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. (f)	The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the mayor and council has not prescribed such forms. (g)	Findings of the board of ethics shall be submitted to the mayor and council for action.(h)	To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, ethics complaints against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, which are filed between the date of qualifying for municipal office and the date of certification of the election results will be held and will not be processed until the election results for that office have been certified. (i)	The board of ethics shall have the right and authority to seek the advice and counsel of the city attorney at any stage of the proceedings. (Ord. No. 2014-13, § VII, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 78-48. - Service of complaint.     The city clerk or board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this section of the ordinance shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the mayor and council to act upon any complaint. (Ord. No. 2014-13, § VIII, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 78-49. - Right to appeal. (a)	Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. (b)	An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Lowndes County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. (Ord. No. 2014-13, § IX, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 78-50. - Penalty.     Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: (1)	Public reprimand or censure by the mayor and council; or(2)	Request for resignation by the mayor and council.(Ord. No. 2014-13, § X, 7-24-2014)
Secs. 78-51—78-75. - Reserved. 