Chapter 22 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainment, ch. 10; contractors, § 18-161 et seq.; taxation, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 98; vehicles for hire, ch. 102.State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 22-1. - Bankrupt sales.     It shall be unlawful for any person to add new merchandise to a strictly bankrupt sale conducted as such within the city. Any person who advertises by placard, or otherwise, over his store or place of business, or in any newspaper or by handbills, or otherwise, that a bankrupt sale is being carried on in such store or place of business, or that the stock being sold is a bankrupt stock, shall be deemed for the purpose of this section to be carrying on a strictly bankrupt sale. (Code 1976, § 11-5001)
Secs. 22-2—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
Sec. 22-31. - Financial institutions business license tax.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. The term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1976, § 7-1234; Ord. No. 83-51, § 1, 11-10-1983)
Sec. 22-32. - Due date; filing of return. (a)	Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. These returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. (b)	The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year.(Code 1976, § 7-1235; Ord. No. 83-51, § 2, 11-10-1983)
Secs. 22-33—22-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES 
Sec. 22-71. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale advertised and held in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.     Going out of business sale means a sale advertised and held in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to, the following kinds of sales: Adjuster's; adjustment; alteration; assignee's; bankrupt; benefit of creditors; benefit of trustees; building coming down; closing; creditor's end; executor's final days; forced cut; forced out of business; insolvent's; last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale; receiver's trustee's; quitting business.     Removal of business sale means a sale advertised and held in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the city or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. (Code 1976, § 11-5009(a); Ord. No. 92-8, 2-20-1992)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-72. - Surrender of retail license, permit from city clerk; enumerated conditions requisite to conduct sales.     Any person holding a retail license issued by the city under the business license occupational tax referred to in chapter 90 for a period of at least six months who desires to advertise and conduct any one of the types of sales defined in section 22-71 may surrender his current license to the city clerk, conduct such sale at the place of business for which his current license is issued, and the following conditions and requirements shall apply to the conduct of any such sale: (1)	The right to conduct such sale shall apply only to persons holding a current license under chapter 90 for a period of at least six months, and the permit granted by this article shall expire at the expiration of such current existing license. (2)	Such sale may be extended and conducted only at the place of business licensed under the existing business license occupational tax listed under chapter 90, except that any fire or other altered goods sale may be conducted at any other permitted location within the city. (3)	Such sale may be advertised and conducted only for a period of 90 days following the issuance of a permit, which shall include a current inventory, to conduct such sales; but upon application made by the city clerk, the length of time for the advertisement and conduct of such sale may be extended, at the discretion of the city manager, for one period of time only, not to exceed 30 days. (4)	Each license holder who conducts a sale as contemplated by this article shall obtain from the office of the city clerk a notice of permit to conduct such sale, which notice of permit shall include a permit number and the dates during which such sale will be permitted. The notice of permit referred to shall be posted at a conspicuous place on the premises where the sale is conducted so as to be readily observable by members of the public. In addition, any advertisements, whether by newspaper, handbill, television, radio or otherwise, shall make reference to the permit number under which the sale is conducted. (5)	The right to advertise and conduct such sale shall be personal and not transferable to any other person except that upon the death of a person doing business under a license issued under chapter 90, his heirs, administrators or executors shall have the right to conduct any sale provided for in section 22-41. (6)	After the completion of such sale, the current license shall be canceled by the city clerk; except that the holder of any license conducting a fire or other altered goods sale shall have his license returned to him by the city clerk, and it shall be valid during the year for which it was originally issued. (7)	No license fee shall be required for the issuance of the permit authorized by this article, but any person conducting such a sale shall not be relieved from the payment of any gross receipts license requirements on the merchandise disposed of through such sale. (8)	Any person making application for permission to conduct such sale shall furnish to the city clerk, as a part of such application, a complete and detailed inventory of the goods, wares and merchandise at the sale location to be offered for sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. The inventory shall be attached to and become a part of the application and shall include all merchandise on back order to be delivered at a later date. All merchandise on back order, to be delivered at a later date, must have been ordered more than 90 days prior to the filing of application. Inventory other than that itemized in the submission to the city clerk shall not be brought to the sale location from points outside the city. (9)	No merchandise shall be stocked for sale except such merchandise as is on hand or on back order. Each item of merchandise stocked in such places of business in violation of the terms of this article shall be presumed to be stocked for sale, and each item thus stocked for sale shall be a separate violation of this article. (10)	All permits shall be numbered, and any advertisement for a closing out sale shall contain the city closeout sale permit number. (Code 1976, § 11-5009(b); Ord. No. 92-8, 2-20-1992)
Sec. 22-73. - Operation of similar business in same location forbidden for one year.     Any person who has advertised and conducted a sale as regulated by this article shall not be granted a license to conduct a similar type of business at the same location for a period of one year from the date of a sale conducted pursuant to this article. (Code 1976, § 11-5009(c); Ord. No. 92-8, 2-20-1992)
Sec. 22-74. - Exemptions.     The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: (1)	Persons acting pursuant to an order of process of a court of competent jurisdiction;(2)	Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials;(3)	Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction;(4)	Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who publishes in good faith any advertisement without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this article have not been complied with. (Code 1976, § 11-5009(d); Ord. No. 92-8, 2-20-1992)
Sec. 22-75. - Penalty.     Any person advertising or conducting any one or more of the type of sales provided for in this article who does not comply with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction of a violation in the municipal court of the city, be punished by a fine or not less than $100.00. Each business day or day that any person advertises or conducts one or more of the type of sales provided for in this article without complying with this article shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. (Code 1976, § 11-5009(e); Ord. No. 92-8, 2-20-1992)
Secs. 22-76—22-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURERS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note—Ord. No. 2011-13, §§ 1—6, adopted May 5, 2011, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 22-111—22-116, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1976, §§ 7-1218—7-1223; Ord. No. 83-50, §§ 1—6, adopted Nov. 10, 1983; and Ord. No. 84-23, §§ 1—3, adopted July 19, 1984.State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2; general assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c).
Sec. 22-111. - Insurers license fees.     There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Valdosta, Georgia in the amount of $150.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 22-112, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the City of Valdosta, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $150.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. (Ord. No. 2011-13, § 1, 5-5-2011)
Sec. 22-112. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.     For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits, or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $52.50 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. (Ord. No. 2011-13, § 2, 5-5-2011)
Sec. 22-113. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurance.     There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident, and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-111 of this article. (Ord. No. 2011-13, § 3, 5-5-2011)
Sec. 22-114. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers.     There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-111 of this article. (Ord. No. 2011-13, § 4, 5-5-2011)
Sec. 22-115. - Due date for license fees.     License fees imposed in sections 22-111 and 22-112 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 2012 and on the first date of each subsequent year. (Ord. No. 2011-13, § 5, 5-5-2011)
Sec. 22-116. - Administrative provisions.     The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of the ordinance from which this article derives to the Insurance Commissioner of the State of Georgia within 45 days of its enactment. (Ord. No. 2011-13, § 6, 5-5-2011)
Secs. 22-117—22-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PAWNBROKERS[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.
Sec. 22-151. - License, subject to revocation; indication on face of license.     When any license is issued to a pawnbroker to carry on the business of a pawnbroker within the city, there shall be written across the face of it the following:     "This license is subject to be revoked under chapter 22, article V of the city Code." (Code 1976, § 7-1102)
Sec. 22-152. - Records; reports; penalty. (a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: Pawnbroker means the owner, operator and/or manager of any pawnshop or other business or establishment engaged in the city in the business of pawnbroker or of making loans upon the security of items of personal property deposited or left with such business establishment, but shall not include banks. (b)	Report required. Within 30 minutes after closing his place of business for the day, each pawnbroker doing business within the city shall file or cause to be filed electronically with the police department of the city a true and correct list or report of all items of personal property pawned with or pledged to such pawnbroker during that day, or purchased by such pawnbroker from one or more individuals during that day. Such list or report shall include: (1)	A complete description of each such item of personal property;(2)	Its approximate value;(3)	The amount loaned or advanced or the price paid; and(4)	The name, address, race, sex and approximate age of the person who pawned, pledged or sold the item to the pawnbroker. (c)	Form. Each such list or report shall be in such form as the chief of police may prescribe or approve, and shall be verified by the affidavit of the pawnbroker. (Code 1976, § 7-1104)
Sec. 22-153. - Penalties for violations. (a)	Any person upon being convicted for violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. (b)	In addition to the penalties provided in this article, any pawnbroker doing business within the city violating this article shall be subject to having his license to carry on such business revoked by the mayor and council, at any time such violation may occur, without refunding to him any license or occupation fee, or any part, theretofore paid by him for carrying on such business. (Code 1976, § 7-1105)
Secs. 22-154—22-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Cross reference— Noise control for hawkers, peddlers and vendors, § 42-44.State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; exception from local peddler or itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6; Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 22-191. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Applicant means not only the person applying for a license under this article, but also all employees of the applicant, whether paid or not, who will be engaging in the occupation of peddler within the corporate limits of the city.     Peddler means any person, as principal or agent, or both, which is not a regular retail or wholesale merchant with a permanent place of business in the city, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, truck or any other means of conveyance, from place to place, house to house or street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting wares, merchandise of whatever type or character, all foodstuff or provisions, offering and exposing such wares, merchandise, foodstuff or provisions for sale or making sales and delivering articles to prospective purchasers within the city, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer such articles for sale from a wagon, vehicle of any type, railroad car or any other type of vehicle or conveyance. Such term shall also mean any person traveling from house to house or business to business offering personal services such as, but not limited to, lawn maintenance or care, home improvement sales or services, or any other type of service or labor of whatever type or character. 
Sec. 22-192. - Duty of police to enforce.     It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person seen peddling, and who is not known by such police officer to be duly licensed, to produce his peddler's license and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be in violation of this article. 
Sec. 22-193. - Records.     The chief of police shall report to the city licensing clerk all convictions for violations of this article, and the city licensing clerk shall maintain a record of each license issued and record the reports of violations of this article in such record. 
Sec. 22-194. - Hours of operation.     All peddlers licensed under this article shall be permitted to peddle or solicit door to door within the city only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday of each week, excluding holidays. (Code 1976, § 7-1112)
Sec. 22-195. - Prohibited in residential areas; exception. (a)	It shall be unlawful for any peddler, hawker or itinerant merchant to sell or offer to sell to the general public, at retail or wholesale, from motorized or self-propelled vehicles, wagons or any other types of conveyances, on residential streets within the city. (b)	This section shall not be applicable to newsboys or bona fide merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business into particular residential areas. (Code 1976, § 7-1113)
Sec. 22-196. - Use of streets, public ways.     No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets; nor be permitted a stationary location; nor be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purposes of this article, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public is impeded or inconvenienced. (Code 1976, § 7-1113)
Sec. 22-197. - Solicitations without permit. (a)	Legislative intent. It is the intent of the council in enacting the ordinance from which this section derives, to improve the quality of life and economic vitality of the City of Valdosta, and to protect the safety of the general public against certain abusive conduct of persons engaged in solicitation, by imposing reasonable time, manner and place restrictions on solicitation while respecting the constitutional rights of free speech for all citizens. (b)	Definitions.     Aggressive solicitation includes, but is not limited to soliciting in any of the following manners: (1)	By intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of a person or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact. Acts authorized by a lawfully issued permit shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian traffic for purposes of this section; (2)	By approaching, seeking or following a person before, during or after solicitation if that conduct is intended, or likely to cause a reasonable person to: a.	Fear bodily harm to oneself or another;b.	Fear damage to or loss of property; orc.	Be intimidated.(3)	By using profane or abusive language or gestures, either during the solicitation or following refusal; (4)	By touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting if the touching or physical conduct is likely to cause a reasonable person to feel restrained or intimidated; or (5)	By intentionally or recklessly using obscene, abusive or threatening language or gestures, toward a person being solicited.     Automated-teller machine means a device, linked to a financial institution's account records, that is able to carry out transactions, including but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries and mortgage and loan payments.     Automated-teller machine facility means the area comprised of one or more automated-teller machines, and any adjacent space that is made available to banking customers.     Hospitality and commercial district means the area defined as follows on the map of the City of Valdosta attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by specific reference thereto, described also as follows: All properties located within the corporate limits of the City of Valdosta having frontage on any of the following roads: James Road; Baytree Road; North Oak Street between Inner Perimeter and Roosevelt Drive; North Oak Street between Georgia Avenue and West Brookwood Drive; North Valdosta Road; Inner Perimeter Road between North Valdosta Road and North Oak Street; North Ashley Street; North Lee Street between East Magnolia Street and East Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive; Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive between Lee Street and Toombs Street; East Hill Avenue; and N. St. Augustine Road. Specifically, all properties fronting on North Valdosta Road beginning at the point where the corporate limits of the City of Valdosta intersect with North Valdosta Road and continuing southeast along North Valdosta Road to the intersection of Inner Perimeter Road to then include all such property bounded by Inner Perimeter Road, North Oak Street, and North Valdosta Road. Then, continuing south to include all such property fronting on and bounded by North Oak Street and North Ashley Street until such point that North Oak Street and North Ashley Street intersect with Roosevelt/Pendleton Drive. Then, continuing south to include all properties fronting on and bounded by North Patterson Street and North Ashley Street until such point that North Patterson Street and North Ashley Street intersect with Woodrow Wilson Drive. Then, continuing south to include all properties fronting on North Patterson Street and all properties fronting on North Ashley Street until such point that North Patterson Street intersects with Georgia Avenue. The boundaries then expand west to include those properties fronting on and bounded by Georgia Avenue, North Oak Street, North Patterson Street, and West Brookwood Drive. Then, continuing south to include all properties fronting on North Oak Street, North Patterson Street, and North Ashley Street until such point that North Oak Street, North Patterson Street and North Ashley Street intersect with Magnolia Street. The corridor then incorporates the official boundaries of the Central Valdosta Development Authority as follows: All properties fronting on and bounded by Magnolia Street, Lee Street, Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and Toombs Street. The Corridor then extends west to include all properties fronting on East Hill Avenue until such point that East Hill Avenue intersects with North St. Augustine Road. The corridor then encompasses all those properties fronting on and bounded by St. Augustine Road, Norman Drive, Baytree Road, the western-most city limits line and East Hill Avenue. The corridor then extends east to include all properties fronting on Baytree Road.     Public property means all property owned, operated or controlled by a governmental entity within the city boundaries of Valdosta, Georgia, including, but not limited to, streets, public sidewalks, tree lawns, parks, playgrounds, publicly-owned parking lots, schools, libraries, post offices, municipal transit facilities and other public lands and buildings.     Solicit or soliciting is any request made in person on a street, sidewalk, or public place asking for an immediate donation of money or other thing of value, including the purchase of an item or service for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is a donation. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, by gesture, or by other means of communication. (c)	Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful to: (1)	Aggressively solicit within the City of Valdosta, Georgia.(2)	Solicit within the hospitality and commercial district.(3)	Solicit on private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property. (4)	Solicit within 30 feet of any automated-teller machine without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of the machine, provided; however, when an automated-teller machine is located within an automated-teller machine facility, the distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated-teller machine facility. (5)	Solicit within 30 feet of a line of pedestrians waiting to obtain access to a building or event. (6)	Solicit within 30 feet of the area of an outdoor approved area as defined in section 7-1034(d) of Ordinance No. 2004-35. (7)	Solicit within 30 feet of any pay telephone; provided, however, that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, the distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility. (8)	Solicit on public property within 30 feet of an entrance to a building.(9)	Solicit on public property within 30 feet of an entrance to a parking lot.(10)	Solicit on a public right-of-way designed for vehicular traffic, including medians.(11)	Solicit between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.(12)	Solicit in a false or misleading manner which includes, but is not limited to the following: (i) stating that the solicitor is from out of town and stranded when such is not true; (ii) stating or suggesting falsely that the solicitor is either a present or former member of the Armed Service indicated; (iii) wearing or displaying an indication of physical disability, when the solicitor does not suffer the disability indicated; (iv) use of any makeup or device to simulate a deformity; or (v) stating that the solicitor is homeless, when he or she is not. (d)	Penalties. (1)	Upon the first or subsequent offenses, individuals violating subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be issued a written citation, including a summons to appear in Valdosta Municipal Court, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or confinement not to exceed 30 days or both. (2)	Individuals violating subsections (c)(2)—(12) of this section, shall be issued a warning citation, which shall not include a summons to appear in Valdosta Municipal Court. On the second or subsequent offense, the individual shall be issued a written citation, including a summons to appear in Valdosta Municipal Court, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or confinement not exceed 30 days or both. (Code 1976, §§ 7-1112, 11-1001; Ord. No. 2008-34, 7-24-2008)
Sec. 22-198. - Application for license.     An applicant for a license under this article shall file in writing with the city licensing clerk a sworn application, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the city licensing clerk, which shall give the following information: (1)	Name and description of the applicant.(2)	Applicant's legal and local addresses.(3)	A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold and, in the case of farm or orchard products, whether such products are produced or grown by the applicant. (4)	If the applicant is employed, the name and address of the applicant's employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. (5)	The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.(6)	If a vehicle is to be used, a brief description of the vehicle, together with the license number or other means of identification for each such vehicle. (7)	A photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which photograph shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. (8)	The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two reliable property owners within the county who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of the names of references, any other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator designated by the city to properly evaluate the applicant's character and business responsibility. (9)	A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed for such offense. (10)	The applicant shall file with his application a statement by a reputable physician, duly licensed by the state, dated not more than ten days prior to submission of the application, certifying the applicant to be free of infectious, contagious or communicable disease. (11)	If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the current corporate officers, the registered office of the corporation, and a duly attested corporate resolution acknowledging the authority of the corporation to transact the type of business as set forth in the application. (12)	If the applicant is a corporation or form of business other than a sole proprietorship, the names and addresses of all employees who will engage in the occupation of peddler on behalf of the corporation. All information for the application for a license as enumerated in subsections (1)—(11) of this section shall be provided for each such employee. (13)	At the time of filing the application, a fee as determined by the city council and as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of the investigation. (14)	All applicants shall submit with any application a verification from the state setting forth the sales tax identification number of the applicant. (Code 1976, § 7-1112)
Sec. 22-199. - Investigation and issuance. (a)	Upon receipt of an application for a license as required by this article, the original application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. (b)	If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for such disapproval, and shall return the application to the city licensing clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. (c)	If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse his approval on the application, execute a license addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for, and return such license, along with the application, to the city licensing clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver the license to the applicant. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer, and shall show the name and address of the licensee, the class of license issued, the kind of goods to be sold under such license, the amount of the fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the license shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such peddling. The city licensing clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. Each employee of the applicant shall be deemed a licensee for purposes of this section, and a separate license shall be issued to each such employee, containing all of the information as required in this subsection. 
Sec. 22-200. - Fees.     The fee for a license required by this article shall be as determined by the city council and shall be set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1976, § 7-1112)
Sec. 22-201. - Display.     A license issued to the applicant and all employees by the city licensing clerk under this article shall be conspicuously displayed upon all vehicles used by the applicant so as to be easily seen, and shall be displayed so as to be conspicuous during such time as such licensee is engaged in the occupation of peddling. 
Sec. 22-202. - Exhibition upon request.     Peddlers shall exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. 
Sec. 22-203. - Transferability.     No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be used at any time by any person other than the person to whom it was issued. 
Sec. 22-204. - Revocation. (a)	Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city licensing clerk after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: (1)	Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the license application.(2)	Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the applicant's business as a peddler. (3)	Any violation of this article.(4)	Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.(5)	Conduct of the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. (b)	Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, specifically setting forth the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
Sec. 22-205. - Appeal.     Any person aggrieved by the action of the city licensing clerk or the chief of police in the denial of a license application under this article, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a license, shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement fully setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in section 22-204(b) for a notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
Sec. 22-206. - Expiration of license.     All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on December 31 in the year when issued. Other licenses, other than annual licenses, shall expire on the date specified in the license. 
Secs. 22-207—22-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 
Sec. 22-251. - License required; exception.     It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money, financial assistance or property, or to sell or offer to sell any article, tag, service emblem, publication, ticket, advertisement, subscription or anything of value on the streets, in any place of business, or by house-to-house canvass, or in any other public or private place, or by telephone, personal solicitation or otherwise in the city, upon representation that such sale, subscription or solicitation, or the proceeds, is for a charitable, educational, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose, unless such person shall first obtain a license so to do as provided in this division; however, this article shall not apply to any society, association or corporation organized and operated exclusively for religious, educational, philanthropic, benevolent, fraternal or other eleemosynary purposes where the solicitations of such funds and benefits shall be conducted solely among the members of such association, society or corporation. (Code 1976, § 7-1122)
Sec. 22-252. - Application required; contents.     Any person desiring a permit to solicit funds as required in this division, shall procure a license and upon application for such license shall furnish the city manager with the following on the application: (1)	Name of organization applying for permit to solicit and the address of its headquarters;(2)	Names and addresses of its principal officers and manager;(3)	The purpose for which any receipts derived from such solicitation are to be used;(4)	The name or person by whom the receipt of such solicitation shall be disbursed;(5)	The name and address of the person who shall be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation; (6)	An outline of the methods to be used in conducting the solicitation;(7)	The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitations; (8)	The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to anyone in connection with such solicitation, together with the manner in which such wages, fees, expenses, commissions or emoluments are to be expended, to whom paid, and the amount; (9)	A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for the purpose set out in section 22-251 by the organization of persons seeking a permit for such solicitation, giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and the financial distribution of the money; (10)	A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable, religious, educational or philanthropic work being done by the application organization within the city; and (11)	Such other information as may be required by the city manager to fully determine the kind and character and worthiness of the proposed solicitations and as to whether or not such solicitations are in the interest of protecting the health, life and property of the citizens of the city, and in the interest of preserving and enforcing good government for the security of the city and its inhabitants. (Code 1976, § 7-1123)
Sec. 22-253. - Revocation of license.     The license provided in this division to be issued may be revoked by the council on proper showing that the purpose of such person is not for the best interest of the citizens of the city or for any other cause the council may deem proper. (Code 1976, § 7-1124)
Secs. 22-254—22-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PRECIOUS METALS BUYERS[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- State Law reference— Duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.
Sec. 22-291. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Gold and silver buyers means any person engaged in the business of purchasing or otherwise dealing in gold or silver or other precious metals of any kind or description, from members of the general public within the corporate limits of the city. Included in this definition are buyers of secondhand jewelry and gems. Isolated transactions between persons not engaged in the business are not covered by the terms of this article. (Code 1976, § 7-1191; Ord. No. 80-55, § 1, 12-10-1980)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-292. - Findings.     Engaging in the business of buying gold, silver, other precious metals, precious gems, or jewelry within the corporate limits of the city is declared to affect the public interest because of the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. (Code 1976, § 7-1192; Ord. No. 80-55, § 2, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-293. - Compliance with article required.     It is unlawful and punishable as provided in section 1-11 to engage in the business of buying precious metals, precious gems or jewelry from members of the general public within the corporate limits of the city without first complying with the registration and other provisions of this article and obtaining a registration as provided in this article. Each day such offense occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1976, § 7-1193; Ord. No. 80-55, § 3, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-294. - Prerequisite to advertising.     No person covered by this article shall advertise, either in the news media, or portable signs, or in any other manner, the buying, selling, trading or otherwise dealing in precious metals, precious gems or jewelry until he has complied with the provisions of this article. The violation of this section shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 1-11. (Code 1976, § 7-1194; Ord. No. 80-55, § 4, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-295. - Registration with chief of police required.     All persons engaging in the business of buying precious metals, precious gems or jewelry shall register with the chief of police on a form to be provided by the chief of police. (Code 1976, § 7-1195; Ord. No. 80-55, § 5, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-296. - Information required.     All applicants for registration under the provisions of this article shall furnish, in addition to such other information as the chief of police shall require, the following information: (1)	Name of the applicant;(2)	Permanent address and local address of the applicant;(3)	If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each member of the partnership;(4)	If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of each stockholder, each officer and each director of the corporation; (5)	The name and address of each employee of the applicant who is actively engaged in the performance of such services; and (6)	If a resident, the length of time the applicant has been a resident of the state and the city. (Code 1976, § 7-1196; Ord. No. 80-55, § 6, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-297. - Certain persons ineligible.     No person shall engage in the business or activity for which registration under this article is required, or shall be a member of a partnership, or an officer, stockholder or director in a corporation engaged in such business, who shall have been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or theft. (Code 1976, § 7-1197; Ord. No. 80-55, § 7, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-298. - Bond.     Every person engaging in the business of buying precious metals, precious gems or jewelry shall file with the chief of police for the city a surety bond executed by such applicant secured by a corporate surety company, authorized to do business in the state, in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk, conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this article, and upon the prompt report of all suspicious persons dealing with the obligor, and of stolen property or property suspected of being stolen, and for the returning to the chief of police or to the true and lawful owner of any such property of making payment. The bond shall be taken in the name of the city, and the city or any person injured by the breach of the bond may bring an action on the bond in his own name to recover damages. (Code 1976, § 7-1198; Ord. No. 80-55, § 8, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-299. - Investigation of applicant; issuance of registration.     Within five days after receipt of an application as provided for in this article, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and his proposed operation. If upon investigation the chief of police shall find that the applicant is of good moral character and has never been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, and has met all of the requirements of this article, he shall approve the issuance of a registration to the applicant. The registration shall be issued, and the registration tax provided by this article shall be paid. (Code 1976, § 7-1199; Ord. No. 80-55, § 9, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-300. - Responsibility of applicant to file notice of registration approval with law enforcement agencies.     If the registration required by the provisions of this article is approved, the applicant shall file a notice with all law enforcement agencies of the county and the city within 15 days after approval. (Code 1976, § 7-1200; Ord. No. 80-55, § 10, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-301. - Register to be kept.     Every registrant under this article shall keep a register upon which the registrant shall record the name, address, social security number or driver's license number, a brief description of the person, and other identification, of every person from whom the registrant purchases any precious metals, precious gems or jewelry, together with the date and time of day of the purchase, a description of each article purchased, including the name, make and serial or other identifying number or mark, and the amount paid. Such entry shall be made at the time the transaction occurs. Before buying any precious metals, precious gems or jewelry, the registrant shall require positive identification from the seller, either from a driver's license or other document. (Code 1976, § 7-1201; Ord. No. 80-55, § 11, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-302. - Daily reports.     Each registrant under this article shall file electronic daily written reports by 5:00 p.m. with the chief of police, showing the name and description of the persons from whom precious metals, precious gems or jewelry were purchased by the licensee during the preceding 24 hours, and a description in detail of the nature, type and quantity of the precious metals, precious gems or jewelry. It is the duty of the chief of police to obtain such reports promptly each day. It shall be unlawful, and an offense punishable as provided in section 1-11, for any registrant to fail or refuse to make such daily report in the manner described by this section; and such failure shall be grounds for the revocation of the registration. (Code 1976, § 7-1202; Ord. No. 80-55, § 12, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-303. - Holding period.     No articles of personal property made of gold, silver or other precious metals, or precious gems or jewelry shall be sold, melted, altered or otherwise disposed of by any secondhand dealer until three business days have elapsed from the time the chief of police has been given a copy or transcript of the register in which such articles of personal property made of gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals or gems or jewelry are entered; and such articles shall not be transferred from within the city limits during a ten-day period of time. (Code 1976, § 7-1203; Ord. No. 80-55, § 13, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-304. - Registrations nontransferable.     Registrations issued under this article shall not be transferred. (Code 1976, § 7-1204; Ord. No. 80-55, § 14, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-305. - Registrant to surrender certain items.     If it is determined that any item covered by this article is the subject of any theft, embezzlement or other crime, the registrant shall surrender the item upon demand to the owner or the chief of police. Disposition of property will be in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 17. (Code 1976, § 7-1205; Ord. No. 80-55, § 15, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-306. - Purchases from minors.     It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 1-11 for any person engaged in the business of buying precious metals, precious gems or jewelry to purchase any of such items from a person less than 18 years of age. (Code 1976, § 7-1206; Ord. No. 80-55, § 16, 12-10-1980)
Sec. 22-307. - Suspension or revocation of registrations.     Registrations issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the city manager, upon recommendation of the chief of police, for the violation of or the failure to comply with any provision of this article or for the violation of any provision of law, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard has been given the registrant. The city manager shall immediately notify any registrant of such suspension or revocation. (Code 1976, § 7-1207; Ord. No. 80-55, § 17, 12-10-1980)
Secs. 22-308—22-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - YARD SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 22-316. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Yard sale means the sale, exchange or trade of clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques, similar goods or merchandise by persons not regularly engaged in the business of such sales on a residentially zoned lot or parcel within the city. Such term includes, but is not limited to, all sales entitled "yard sales," "garage sales," "lawn sales," "attic sales," "rummage sales" or any similar casual sale of tangible property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at-large is or can be aware of such sale. 
Sec. 22-317. - Exceptions.     The provisions of this article shall not apply to and affect the following: (1)	Any person selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction.(2)	Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.(3)	Yard sales that are conducted on public property, which have been approved by the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 22-318. - Parking of vehicles.     The person in charge of the premises upon which a yard sale is conducted shall control the parking of vehicles of patrons so as to avoid congestion and hazardous conditions. Failure to control such parking of vehicles shall be sufficient cause for the yard sale to be immediately terminated. 
Secs. 22-319—22-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
Sec. 22-341. - Required. (a)	Any person who owns the property upon which a yard sale will take place, any person conducting the yard sale and any person participating as a seller in the yard sale must obtain a permit from the city clerk prior to the date of the yard sale. (b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, conduct or participate as a seller in a yard sale within the city without first obtaining a permit from the licensing and billing clerk. (c)	Each permit issued under this division must be promptly displayed on the premises upon which the yard sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the permitted yard sale. (d)	No person can obtain more than two permits per 12-month period without payment of the required fee as set forth in section 22-347. (e)	No person may obtain more than four permits per 12-month period without the approval of the city manager. 
Sec. 22-342. - Applications.     At the time any person makes a request for the issuance of a permit under this division, the clerk shall obtain the following information: (1)	Name of the person that will be conducting the yard sale.(2)	Name of the owner of the property upon which the yard sale will be conducted.(3)	Location at which the yard sale will be conducted.(4)	Names of any persons who will be participating as a seller in the yard sale.(5)	Date of the yard sale.
Sec. 22-343. - Duration; time.     Permits issued under this division shall only be valid for 72 consecutive hours. Yard sales can only be conducted within the time authorized by the permit. 
Sec. 22-344. - Interruption of sale.     If a permit holder under this division commences a yard sale and the yard sale is interrupted or terminated for any reason, the permit holder shall not be allowed to restart the yard sale after the initial 72 hours without first obtaining an additional permit under this division. 
Sec. 22-345. - Return; replacement.     If a permit has been issued for a yard sale, but the permit holder does not commence the yard sale for any reason, the permit holder may return the permit to the city clerk and the city clerk will issue a replacement permit at the time requested by the permit holder. 
Sec. 22-346. - Maximum number per year.     The number of yard sales allowed per 12-month period under this article is as follows: (1)	Residential property. Four yard sales per year will be allowed on residentially zoned property. (2)	Church/civic/nonprofit organization property. Four yard sales per year will be allowed on church, civic or nonprofit organization property. (3)	Commercial/industrial property. One yard sale per year will be allowed on commercially/industrially zoned property. 
Sec. 22-347. - Fees. (a)	If a yard sale is conducted on residential property or church/civic/nonprofit organization property, two permits may be obtained during a 12-month period without payment of a fee. The remaining two permits allowed per 12-month period will be issued upon payment to the clerk of a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (b)	If a yard sale is conducted on commercial/industrial property or public property, a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk will be paid to the clerk. (c)	Permit fees paid under this section are nonrefundable. If a permit holder does not use the permit for the yard sale, a replacement permit will be issued, but the fee paid will not be reimbursed. 
Secs. 22-348—22-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RAILROAD COMPANIES 
Sec. 22-361. - Required to improve streets along tracks.     Any railroad company having tracks running through the streets of the city shall pave, macadamize or otherwise improve the streets along such tracks in such manner as may be required by the council. (Code 1976, § 7-1131)State Law reference— Maintenance of grade crossings, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-190. 
Sec. 22-362. - Mayor and council to prescribe requirements for repair of streets; notice.     Whenever any street along which any railroad track runs shall be in need of repairs, the mayor and council shall prescribe, by ordinance or resolution, the repairs to be made, the material to be used in making the repairs, and the manner in which such repairs shall be made; and notice of such ordinance or resolution shall be given to the affected railroad company by the clerk, by mailing a copy of such ordinance or resolution to such railroad company in the city. (Code 1976, § 7-1132)State Law reference— Authority for municipalities to require performance of railroads' responsibilities of maintenance and authority for railroads to require performance of municipalities' responsibilities of maintenance, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-202. 
Sec. 22-363. - Improvements to be made within ten days after notice.     It shall be the duty of a railroad company to whom the notice provided for in section 22-362 has been given to make the repairs prescribed by the mayor and council within ten days after notice has been mailed. (Code 1976, § 7-1133)
Sec. 22-364. - Failure to repair streets after notice.     Should any railroad company, notified as provided in section 22-342, fail to make repairs on any street along which its track runs, within ten days after notice, the repairs shall be made by the city, under the supervision of its engineer; and the entire cost shall be assessed against such railroad company. (Code 1976, § 7-1134)
Sec. 22-365. - What constitutes public streets.     For the purposes of this article, all streets or alleys open in the city or kept in what is commonly called a passable condition by it, which lead up to any of the lines of railroads in or through the city, and which are at and upon the railroad companies' right-of-way and tracks contiguous to the abutting street or alley shall be deemed and held to be public streets, whether the street is open or so kept in a passable condition on one or both sides of the railroad lines, unless there is an impassable obstruction located upon private property and not on the right-of-way from such abutting street or alley. (Code 1976, § 7-1135)
Sec. 22-366. - Blocking crossings. (a)	No railroad company having or operating a line of railroads in or through the city shall be allowed, by any of its officers or agents or anyone operating the railroad, to obstruct any of the streets, alleys or other public crossings in the city with standing cars, engines or other machinery or other things which cannot be readily and safely passed by pedestrians or by persons with vehicles, for a longer period than 15 minutes at any one time. None of such companies shall be allowed to obstruct Ashley Street or Hill Avenue in any of the ways mentioned or in any other manner that will prevent the free use of such streets for a longer period than five minutes at any one time, nor to obstruct Lee Street, Toombs Street, Troup Street, Fry Street or St. Augustine Road in like manner for longer than ten minutes. (b)	Under this section, standing cars shall also include those cars in the process of moving or moving back and forth at different intervals within the time prescribed in this section for the purposes of attaching or detaching railroad cars and loading or unloading cargo or passengers. However, standing cars shall not include a moving train blocking a crossing while performing any test of the train's operational equipment as required by the Federal Railroad Administration's rules and regulations or any other state or federal law. (Code 1976, § 7-1136; Ord. No. 95-11, 6-8-1995; Ord. No. 95-22, 8-10-1995)
Sec. 22-367. - Penalty for obstructing crossings; presumptions and burden of proof. (a)	Any railroad violating the provisions of section 22-346 by its officers, agents or employees or anyone operating the railroad shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. (b)	When an obstruction provided against by sections 22-346 and 22-347 is found upon the line of any company, it shall be prima facie evidence that it was placed there by the agents, officers or employees of the company on whose line it is found; and the burden of proof shall then be upon it to show that the obstruction was not placed there by its agents, officers or employees, or by its permission. (Code 1976, § 7-1138)
Sec. 22-368. - Speed limit for railroad trains.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any train into, or through the corporate limits of the city at a speed in excess of 40 miles per hour. (Code 1976, § 7-1139; Ord. No. 90-42, 7-5-1990)
Secs. 22-369—22-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS AND OPERATORS[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- State Law reference— O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-71, 16-5-71.1, 16-12-5, 48-13-9 and Chapter 40 of Title 31. Authority O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-71, 16-5-71.1, 16-12-5, 31-40-1—31-40-10, 31-5 and 48-13-9.
Sec. 22-391. - Authority.     The legal authority of this article is O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-71, 16-5-71.1, 16-12-5, 48-13-9 and Chapter 40 of Title 31. Authority O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-71, 16-5-71.1, 16-12-5, 31-40-1, 31-40-2, 31-40-3, 31-40-4, 31-40-5, 31-40-6, 31-40-7, 31-40-8, 31-40-9, 31-40-10, 31-5 and 48-13-9. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-392. - Purpose.     The purpose of these rules and regulations is to establish reasonable standards for individuals performing body art procedures and for the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards should insure the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving these services. Any and all body art procedures not explicitly mentioned in these rules and regulations must be approved by the Lowndes County Board of Health prior to being performed in a body art facility. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-393. - Exemptions.     These regulations do not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-394. - Definitions.     Unless otherwise defined by specific sections as used in these rules and regulations the term:     Antibacterial solution means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly.     Body art means the practice of physical body adornment by permitted establishments and operators utilizing, but not limited to the following techniques: Body piercing, tattooing and cosmetic tattooing. This definition does not include implants under the skin, tattoo removal or any other practices that are considered medical procedures by a state medical board.     Body art establishment means any place or premises, whether public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices of body art, whether or not for profit, are performed.     Body piercing means any method of piercing the skin or mucosa, except the entire ear, in order to place any object including, but not limited to, rings, studs, bars or other forms of jewelry through the skin or mucosa.     Body piercing artist means any person who performs piercing.     City means the City of Valdosta, Georgia or its duly authorized representatives.     Currently licensed health care professional includes physicians, physician assistant (PA), nurse practitioner, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians (I) or (P), holding current licenses with the State of Georgia within their respective fields.     Department means the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia.     FDA means the United States Food and Drug Administration.     Governing body means the partnership, the corporation, the association or the person or group of persons who maintain and control the body art establishment and who are legally responsible for the operation of the establishment.     Instruments used for body art means any object or instrument used in the performance of body art procedures, which may come into contact with a client's bodily fluid during the performance of a body art procedure, and includes, but is not limited to, hand pieces, needles, needle bars and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body fluid during body art procedures.     Operator means any person who controls, operates, manages, conducts or practices body art activities at a body art establishment and who is responsible for compliance with these regulations, regardless whether actually performing body art procedures or not. The term includes technicians who work under the operator and perform body art procedures.     OSHA means the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration.     Permit means the authorization granted by the city to the governing body to operate a body art establishment.     Sanitary means clean and free of agents of infection or disease.     Sanitized means effective antibacterial treatment by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacteria count, including pathogens, to a safe level on equipment.     Spore means a small, usually single-celled, asexually- or sexually-reproductive body that is highly resistant to desiccation and heat and is capable of growing into a new organism, produced especially by certain bacteria, fungi, algae and nonflowering plants.     Standard precautions means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), which includes specific recommendations for the use of gloves, masks, protective eye wear and/or other protective equipment when contact with blood or body fluids containing blood is anticipated. These guidelines and controls may be found in "Recommendations for Prevention of HIV Transmission in Health Care Settings", Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), August 21, 1987, Vol. 36, No. (SU02); 001; "Universal Precautions for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Hepatitis B Virus, and other Blood-borne Pathogens in Health-Care Settings", MMWR, June 24,1988, Vol. 37, No. 24; "Guidelines for Prevention and Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health Care and Public Safety Workers", MMWR, June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No.S-6; and MMWR; and "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures", July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. (RR08); 1-9. These guidelines are hereby incorporated by reference into this rule.     Sterilization means holding an instrument in an autoclave for 15 minutes at 15 pounds pressure at a temperature of 273 degrees Fahrenheit or 121 degrees Celsius.     Tattoo artist means any person who performs tattooing.     Tattooing means any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instruments used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo the body of any person within any area within one inch of the nearest part of the eye socket of such person.     Universal precautions means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the United State Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), which includes specific recommendations for the use of gloves, masks, protective eye wear and/or other protective equipment when contact with blood or body fluids containing blood is anticipated. These guidelines and controls may be found at 29 C.F.R. 1910.1030 and are hereby incorporated by reference into this rule. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-395. - Governing body. (a)	The governing body shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements of this chapter, with the requirements in O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 40, and with applicable administrative rules and regulations of the Lowndes County Board of Health, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes, rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. (b)	Prior to being granted a permit each body art establishment shall develop a written statement of policies and procedures outlining the responsibilities of management. (1)	No person under the age of 18 shall be tattooed except that a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath shall be authorized to do. (2)	No person shall pierce the body, with the exception of the ear lobes, of any person under the age of 18 years without the presence, consent, and proper identification of a parent, legal custodial parent or legal guardian unless under the direct supervision of a physician. (3)	Body art operators shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. (4)	No person shall receive a body art procedure that appears to be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. (5)	No animals, except for guide animals accompanying disabled persons, shall be allowed in the body art establishment. (6)	Written report of any infection of allergic reaction resulting from the application of a tattoo or body piercing shall be forwarded to the city within five working days of its occurrence or knowledge thereof. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-396. - Minimum floor plan requirements. (a)	The body art establishment shall be constructed, arranged and maintained as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers. (b)	The establishment shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the body art procedure adequate privacy from observers. The work area shall be separate from the waiting area. (c)	Body art establishments must have adequate ventilation.(d)	Walls and ceilings must be painted or covered in a manner which would allow for easy and effective cleaning. Paint or covering should be light in color in the work area. (e)	Floors of the work area must not be carpeted. Surfaces shall be of a nonabsorbent material which would allow for effective cleaning by conventional methods. (f)	A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility shall be made accessible to customers; however, it shall be separate from the work area. (g)	At least one sink and basin providing hot and cold running water for the use of the operator for washing their hands and preparing customers for body art procedures shall be easily accessible to each work station. This station shall be provided with soap, an antibacterial solution, single-use towels, and individual hand brushes for each artist. (h)	The work area shall be provided with adequate lighting.(i)	The work area shall not be used as a corridor for access to other rooms.(j)	Enough potable water for the needs of the body art establishment shall be provided from an approved source that is a public water system; or a nonpublic water system that is constructed, maintained and operated according to applicable state or local codes and shall meet state drinking water quality standards. (k)	Sewage disposal shall be disposed through an approved facility that is:(1)	A public sewage treatment plant; or(2)	An individual sewage disposal system that is sized, constructed, maintained and operated according to law. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-397. - Furnishings and fixtures. (a)	Furnishings of the body art establishment shall be maintained in good condition, intact and functional. The establishment shall be kept clean, neat and free of litter and rubbish. (b)	Facilities for the storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, single-use articles, carbon and stencils shall be provided for each operator and shall be maintained in a sanitary manner which protects them from contamination. (c)	Work tables and chairs shall be provided for each operator.(1)	Surfaces of all work tables and chairs shall be constructed of material which is smooth, nonabsorbent, corrosion-resistant, and easily sanitized. Work tables and chairs should be light in color. (2)	Work tables and chairs shall be sanitized with an antibacterial solution after each application. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-398. - Supplies. (a)	Bulk single-use articles shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These articles shall be stored in an area separate from the toilet facilities. (b)	All materials applied to the human skin shall be from single-use containers, applied only to a single individual, and shall be disposed of after each use. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-399. - Dyes and pigments. (a)	All dyes and pigments used in tattooing shall be obtained from professional suppliers specifically providing dyes and/or pigments for the tattooing of human skin. (b)	In preparing dyes or pigments to be used by the operator, only nontoxic sterile materials shall be used. Single-use or individual portions of dyes or pigments in clean, sterilized individual containers or single-use containers shall be used for each client. (c)	After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use or individual containers shall be discarded along with the container. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-400. - Piercing jewelry. (a)	Client and body piercing artist should have appropriate size and quality jewelry chosen before the procedure beings. (b)	Only appropriate jewelry should be used in piercing. Appropriate jewelry is made of implant grade, high quality surgical stainless steel (316LVM series), titanium or platinum. Appropriate jewelry has no nicks, scratches or irregular surfaces that might endanger the tissues. (c)	Ear studs or other jewelry designed for earlobe piercing are not appropriate jewelry for other body parts and must not be used by body piercing artists. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-401. - Sanitation. (a)	Prior to the start of the body art procedure the operator should inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores and abrasions. If a cut, sore or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Trim fingernails to insure that gloves are not punctured. (b)	All jewelry such as watches, rings, etc., should be removed prior to the start of the body art procedure. (c)	Before working on each client, the fingernails and hands of the operator shall be thoroughly washed and scrubbed with warm water, and antibacterial soap, using an individual hand brush that is clean and in good repair. The hands shall then be dried by single-use towels prior to beginning work on each client or when interrupted in the process. (d)	Single-use, disposable, FDA-approved examination gloves shall be worn during the body art procedure. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the body art procedure, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whenever their ability to function is compromised. (e)	Each operator shall follow the standard precautions as published by the Centers for Disease Control. (f)	Tattoo/body piercing artists who are experiencing symptoms of diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash or skin infections shall refrain from tattooing/body piercing activities. (g)	Smoking and consumption of food or drink by the artist is prohibited in the workstation.(h)	Universal precautions are to be followed per OSHA standards and guidelines.(i)	Only single-use disposable needles shall be used in the tattooing process.(j)	Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each artist for the daily operating hours. (k)	Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the area to receive body art procedures. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-402. - Sterilization. (a)	An autoclave shall be provided in each body art establishment.(b)	Used nondisposable instruments shall be kept in a separate puncture resistant container until brush scrubbed in hot water and soap, and then sterilized by autoclaving. (c)	The following procedures shall be followed during the sterilization process:(1)	Prior to being placed in the autoclave all equipment shall be bagged, dated and sealed.(2)	Each autoclave bag may hold no more than one liner and shader tube with needle and bar inserted into tube. (3)	Instruments shall remain in the autoclave 55 minutes from a cold start.(4)	If the process begins with a hot start then instruments should be processed for 35 minutes. (5)	To achieve proper sterilization, temperature must reach 273 degrees Fahrenheit and 15-30 psi. (6)	There must be a sterilization indicator in each autoclaving to monitor the sterilization procedure. The indicator must indicate exposure to steam and 250 degrees Fahrenheit. (7)	Body art operations shall demonstrate, using spore destruction tests, that their autoclaves are capable of attaining the minimum operating standards recommended by the manufacturer of the autoclave. These tests shall be performed every 30 days and verified through an independent laboratory. Spore destruction tests shall be maintained on file at the body art establishment. Spore tests shall be provided to the city upon request. (8)	Autoclaves shall be cleaned at the frequency recommended by the manufacturer. Autoclaves shall be serviced at the frequency by the manufacturer, but not less than once a year. A copy of the manufacturer's instructions for cleaning and servicing must be maintained on file in the body art establishment. (9)	All clean or packaged sterilized instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry closed cabinets or tightly covered containers. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-403. - Temporary, special event and mobile body art requirements.     All provisions of these regulations shall apply with the following exceptions: (1)	Hand wash facilities shall be easily accessible to each procedure area and designated for use by the operator only. Hand wash facilities shall comply with the requirements of subsection 22-396(g) of this article or, temporary hand wash facilities shall consist of soap, single-use paper towels and an adequate supply of potable water dispensed through a continuous flow spout. Wastewater shall be collected and disposed of in a sanitary manner. (2)	Body art operators may bring presterilized instruments, or instruments which have been sterilized at another location with documentation showing a negative spore test result within the previous seven days. On-site sterilization units may be used and shall comply with the requirements of this article. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-404. - Tattoo preparation. (a)	Before placing the tattoo design on the client's skin, the operator shall treat the skin area with an antibacterial solution. (b)	If an acetate stencil is used by an operator for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be thoroughly cleaned and rinsed in a germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes and then dried with sterile gauze or dried in the air on a sanitized surface after each use. (c)	If a paper stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be single-use and disposable. (d)	If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single-use article only. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-405. - Body piercing preparation. (a)	Set up equipment in front of client.(b)	Open sealed autoclave bags containing sterile equipment in front of client, and discard the autoclave bag. (c)	Disinfect all jewelry contaminated with only airborne pathogens (not previously worn or contaminated) with a nonhazardous hard surface disinfectant approved by the EPA. Any jewelry contaminated with blood-borne pathogens (previously worn by another person) shall not be reused. (d)	Presterilize all needles used in piercing, use only on one person, at one sitting, for a single piercing, and immediately dispose of in a medical sharps container. (e)	Presterilize all forceps, tubes, etc., in sealed, dated, sterile indicator bags. These items are to be used on one person, in one sitting. After one such use, they must be autoclaved and stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-406. - After tattoo/body piercing application. (a)	The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. (b)	After the area has dried, apply a layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube. (c)	A bandage shall then be applied to the tattoo using sealed nonsticking pads.(d)	The client shall then be given written instructions on caring for the tattoo/piercing during the healing process. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-407. - Disinfection of workplace.     Each body art establishment must be kept clean and sanitary. The owner must develop and implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination and tasks or procedures to be performed. This written schedule must be based on the location within the establishment, the type of surfaces to be cleaned, type of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the establishment. A copy of the schedule shall be submitted to the city along with the application for permit. The following procedures should be adhered to: (1)	Clean and sanitize all equipment and work surfaces with an appropriate disinfectant after completion of body art procedures and at the end of work shift when surfaces have become contaminated since the last cleaning. (2)	Remove and replace protective coverings such as plastic wrap and aluminum foil after each body art procedure. (3)	Inspect and decontaminate, on a regular basis, reusable receptacles such as bins, pails and cans that have likelihood for becoming contaminated. When contaminations are visible, clean and decontaminate receptacles immediately or as soon as feasible. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-408. - Disposal of waste. (a)	Needles, razors or other sharp instruments used during body art procedures, shall be placed in puncture-resistant, closed containers immediately after use. (b)	Needles shall not be purposely bent or broken, or otherwise manipulated by hand.(c)	Containers of sharp waste shall be sent to an approved facility where they are either incinerated or otherwise rendered nonhazardous. (d)	Disposable waste shall be placed in easily cleanable, closed containers provided with tight fitting lids, to prevent leakage or spillage. (e)	Waste containers shall be kept closed when not in use.(f)	Disposable waste shall be handled, stored and disposed of to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. (g)	Each workstation shall be supplied with a container for sharp waste and a container for disposable waste. These containers shall not be overfilled. (h)	All waste must be disposed of in an approved manner.(Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-409. - Personnel. (a)	Unless the individual is a currently licensed health care professional, persons performing the body art procedures shall obtain current certification in first-aid/CPR, and proof of attendance at a blood-borne pathogen training program (or equivalent), given or approved by the Lowndes County Health Department. Training/courses provided by professional body art organizations/ associations or by equipment manufacturers may also be submitted for consideration. (b)	Proof shall be provided upon request that all operators have completed the Hepatitis B vaccination series; that antibody testing has revealed that the employee is immune to Hepatitis B; or that the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons. Contraindication requires a dated and signed physician's statement specifying the name of the employee and that the vaccine cannot be given. (c)	The governing body must maintain a file on all employees who perform body art procedures, which will be available for inspection. This file must include a copy of the current operator's permit, required medical records and documentation of the required training. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-410. - Client files. (a)	For each client, proper records of body art administered shall be maintained by the studio. (b)	Records of each client shall be prepared prior to the procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name and signature, address, proof of age, date of body art, design, its location and name of the operator. (c)	A statement of informed consent by the individual receiving the body art must be maintained on file. (d)	A statement by the client attesting that he/she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs shall be on file. (e)	A copy of procedures signed by the client advising them of proper subsequent care of the body art procedure shall be maintained on file. (f)	A copy of instructions signed by the client informing them on the risks involved and possible complications that might result from the body art procedure must be maintained on file. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-411. - Application for permit. (a)	The governing body of each body art establishment shall submit to the city a written application for a permit to operate under the rules and regulations. No body art establishment shall be operated and no body art performed without such a permit which is current under these rules and regulations. (b)	The application for permit shall be made on forms provided by the city, and shall be submitted to the city manager's designee. (c)	Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a floor sketch of the body art establishment showing windows, doors, room measurements, chairs, tables and equipment placement for clients and/or staff. (d)	A listing of the names of all staff, including the owner who will be working in the establishment, shall be included with the application for a permit. This listing shall include the full name of each staff person. (e)	The ownership of the establishment disclosed in its application for a permit.(f)	Zoning and other local requirements (if applicable) regarding proper location and establishment of body art establishment must be approved prior to the issuance of any permit pursuant to this article by the city. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-412. - Operator/artist permit. (a)	No person shall practice body art procedures without first obtaining an operator/artist permit from the city. (b)	Persons performing the tattoo or body piercing operation shall be 18 years of age or older. (c)	The operator/artist permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire in one year and must be renewed annually unless revoked sooner by the city. (d)	Application for the operator/artist permit shall include:(1)	Name;(2)	Date of birth;(3)	Sex;(4)	Residence address;(5)	Mailing address;(6)	Phone number;(7)	Place(s) of employment as an operator/artist;(8)	Training and/or experience;(9)	Required medical information;(10)	Photo identification;(11)	Proof of attendance at a blood-borne pathogen training program and CPR/first aid course given or approved by the city. (e)	All operator/artist permits shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where they may be readily observed by clients. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-413. - Permit. (a)	The governing body of each body art establishment shall obtain a valid permit from the city prior to beginning operation. To be eligible for a permit the studio must be in compliance with these rules and regulations. (b)	The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises.(c)	Permits are not transferable from one establishment to another.(d)	A permit shall no longer be valid and shall be returned to the city when the establishment ceases to operate, is moved to another location, the ownership changes or the permit is suspended or revoked. (e)	An establishment which fails to comply with these rules and regulations shall be subject to the sanctions available to the city pursuant to this article including, but not limited to denial or revocation of its permit by the city. (f)	Any permit granted pursuant to this article shall be automatically suspended upon the suspension or revocation of any similar permit granted to the establishment by any other county, state, federal or regulatory authority. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-414. - Inspections. (a)	The establishment and its records shall be available for review and examination by properly identified representatives of the city. (b)	A copy of the inspection report shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises and also shall be available for public inspection at the appropriate city wherein the establishment is located. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Sec. 22-415. - Enforcement and penalties. (a)	Enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be in accordance with the authority vested in the city pursuant to its Charter. (b)	No person shall engage in body art except in a permitted establishment.(c)	The city may refuse to grant a permit for the operation of any body art establishment which does not fulfill the minimum requirements of these rules and regulations and may revoke a permit which has been issued and invoke other sanctions if an establishment violates any of these rules and regulations. Before any order is entered refusing a permit applied for or revoking a permit the applicant or permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the city board. The notice of refusal or revocation shall contain directions on how a hearing may be requested. (d)	The city is empowered to institute appropriate proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining violation of any applicable provision of this article. (Ord. No. 2009-31, 7-9-2009)
Secs. 22-416—22-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sec. 22-431. - Purpose and intent.     The mayor and council find that businesses are seeking licenses for designations as party rental, teen clubs, dance clubs, etc. These businesses purport to not sell a product, but rather provide a venue for entertainment either through directly charging patrons for entry or renting their facility to third parties who then charge patrons for entry. Typically, these businesses provide live or pre-recorded music or similar entertainment and generally open when alcohol serving establishments close. As a result, patrons flow to these establishments and continue partying well into the night. A large number of the patrons may have been consuming alcohol and it is impossible to detect every intoxicated driver, a public safety concern arises. Additionally, because of the large crowds at these establishments, public safety have experienced increased calls for service to include fights, intoxicated persons, illegal drug use and possession, gang related activities, firearms related issues, all of which create a burden to public safety, leaving other areas of the city without proper coverage while forcing increased focus on these establishments. (Ord. No. 2014-1, § 1, 1-10-2014)
Sec. 22-432. - Definition.     Entertainment establishment means any business licensed by the city which provides live music or provides pre-recorded music for the purpose of dancing, or provides entertainment such as, but not limited to, dancers, comedians, karaoke, performers or other like or similar entertainment. Said entertainment establishments may include, but are not limited to, establishments that are commonly referred to as "dance clubs", "teen centers" and/or "lounges". (Ord. No. 2014-1, § 1, 1-10-2014)
Sec. 22-433. - Hours of operation.     Entertainment establishments shall not operate during the following hours: (1)	Monday: 12:00 midnight - 10:00 a.m.; (2)	Tuesday - Saturday: 2:00 a.m. - 10:00 a.m.; and (3)	Sunday: 2:00 a.m. - 12:30 p.m. Additional alcohol sales on Sunday shall be governed by chapter 6, article III of this Code. (Ord. No. 2014-1, § 1, 1-10-2014)
Secs. 22-434—22-455. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - CEMETERIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 86.State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; disposition of unclaimed dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-20 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.; Georgia Cemetery Act of 1983, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 26-1. - Permits for burial.     The city will not issue any permit for burial except upon lots in the city cemetery. (Code 1976, § 6-2001)
Sec. 26-2. - Interments and disinterments. (a)	All funeral processions upon entering the cemetery shall be under the control and subject to the direction of the supervisor or his designated representative. (b)	The supervisor is authorized to refuse interment of any body unless the proper certificate is furnished. Eight hours' daylight notice must be given before interment. (c)	The supervisor may require written authority from the owner or one of the owners of the lot in which interment is to be made before the interment. (d)	Not more than one body shall be interred in any one grave space, size five feet by ten feet, except in cases where a parent and infant child or two infants are buried at the same time. In such cases, only one memorial shall be permitted. (e)	Plot owners shall not allow interments on their plots for a remuneration.(f)	No disinterments shall be made except by cemetery employees or designated persons with the consent of the supervisor. Disinterments shall be made only upon the written request of the lot owner and the next of kin of the deceased. (g)	When making interments upon any lot, the cemetery or its representatives may temporarily pass over or erect temporary canopies upon neighboring plots. (h)	All receptacles for human remains shall be at least 12 inches below grade.(i)	All interments in perpetual care sections shall be made in approved, permanent type vaults. (Code 1976, § 6-2004)
Sec. 26-3. - Monuments. (a)	To avoid the appearance of congestion, only one central or family memorial shall be placed on a family lot. When the central memorial is set at the rear of the lot, it shall be at least three inches from the rear line. (b)	Memorials constructed of artificial stone, composition, wood, tin or iron shall not be permitted except for temporary use not exceeding 90 days. (c)	Mausoleums or tombs either wholly or partially above ground shall be constructed only on lots designated by the supervisor. (d)	All die-stones shall be finished smooth on front and back and shall be at least six inches thick. (e)	While a funeral or interment is being conducted nearby, all work of any description shall cease in that immediate area. It shall also be required that trucks and workmen withdraw to a reasonable distance from the location of the funeral service. (f)	The size of a family memorial shall be governed according to the ratio of its face area (length multiplied by height) to the surface area of the lot and the ratio of its length (greatest horizontal dimension) to the average width of the lot. The face area of each piece of the memorial is to be figured separately. The face area of the memorial shall not exceed 15 percent of the surface area of the lot, and its length shall not exceed 70 percent of the average width of the lot. In the lawn section and perpetual care section, monuments shall not exceed four feet in height. (g)	Where foundations for monuments, markers, mausoleums, tombs, etc., are installed by the cemetery, the charges shall be reasonable, uniform and published. Where the cemetery does not install foundations, memorial contractors shall install such foundations in a manner approved by the superintendent. (h)	Only one marker shall be permitted on any one grave.(i)	Cradles or copings around individual graves or plots shall not be permitted.(j)	No exposed brick or concrete work will be allowed in any portion of the cemetery.(k)	The bottom of every stone shall be dressed or machined to an even, level bed so that it will stand plumb, resting firmly and level on its foundation. All joints on memorials shall be sealed against moisture and with nonstaining material. (l)	Lot corner marker posts, whenever used, should be of monumental stone placed level with grade. Initials shall be incised; posts shall be finished where they abut on adjacent lots. Posts shall be of uniform size as required by the cemetery. (Code 1976, § 6-2005)
Sec. 26-4. - Rates, fees and charges.     The various rates, fees and charges for opening and closing graves, perpetual care or other services rendered in connection with cemeteries in the city shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1976, §§ 6-2006, 6-2007, 6-2012, 6-2020; Ord. No. 78-31, 10-4-1978; Ord. No. 78-32, 10-4-1978; Ord. No. 81-8, 2-19-1981; Ord. No. 84-26, 8-23-1984; Ord. No. 84-27, 8-23-1984; Ord. No. 89-29, 8-24-1989; Ord. No. 92-21, 5-7-1992) 
Secs. 26-5—26-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUNSET HILL CEMETERY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 26-41. - Rules and regulations generally.     The following rules shall apply to Sunset Hill Cemetery: (1)	All lots are sold subject to the beautification plan of the cemetery.(2)	No trees, shrubs or plants shall be planted, pruned or removed without the consent of the cemetery supervisor. The supervisor shall have authority to prune, remove or transplant any tree, shrub, plant or anything upon a lot when he may consider such a course necessary. (3)	The supervisor shall be responsible at all times for the operation of the cemetery. He is authorized to enforce the rules, to maintain order, to supervise all workmen and visitors, and to take such action as may be necessary to enforce the rules and regulations. (4)	No person shall enter the cemetery except through the gates or designated entrances.(5)	Grave mounds shall not be allowed. No lot shall be raised above the established grade.(6)	In cases where a lot is owned by more than one person, the supervisor may act upon the authority of any one of the owners. (7)	The supervisor shall have the right to correct any errors that may be made in good faith in making interments, disinterments or removals, or in the description, transfer or conveyance of any interment property. (8)	The supervisor shall take reasonable precaution to protect plot owners and their property rights within the cemetery from loss or damage, but shall not be responsible for any failure to do so. (9)	Each plot owner shall keep the supervisor informed as to his correct mailing address. Notice mailed to a plot owner at the last address on file with the cemetery shall be equivalent to delivery of the notice. (10)	No lot or plot can be resold except to the city.(11)	Only authorized vehicles will be allowed off of paved or grass road surfaces. Unless written, special exception is given by the cemetery supervisor, city maintenance vehicles will be exclusively authorized. (12)	Burials shall be only with an east-west orientation of the longest dimension of the vault. (13)	Only the number of burials equal to the number of spaces that were purchased from the city shall be allowed on a lot. The burial of cremated remains or infants with an at-grade marker shall be the only exceptions. (Code 1976, § 6-2002)
Sec. 26-42. - Rules regarding section I, sections G1 and G2.     The following rules shall apply to section I, sections G1 and G2 of Sunset Hill Cemetery: (1)	All markers and monuments must be at the head of the graves.(2)	No monument, including the base, will exceed 30 inches in height from the ground.(3)	No permanent flower containers shall be placed on the ground. Temporary placement of arrangements or plants is permitted for up to two weeks. (4)	All vases or urns must be on the monument bases that are permanently constructed.(5)	No monument shall be large enough to serve more than one companion lot.(6)	The width of the monument and base shall not exceed 70 percent of the average width of the lot. (7)	No marker shall be flat on the ground unless it has a base at least six inches in depth to protect leveling. Leveling shall be done by memorial companies. (8)	No corner markers are permitted, except at ground level. Corner markers may only be used on lots of two or more spaces. (9)	No slabs or copings are permitted.(10)	Nothing except grass can be planted on a lot.(11)	Nothing other than a monument and/or markers may be placed on a lot, and cemetery personnel may require removal at the expense of the owner or may remove a nonconforming object charging time and material to the owner. (Code 1976, § 6-2003; Ord. No. 78-30, 10-4-1978)
Secs. 26-43—26-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERPETUAL CARE 
Subdivision I. - In General 
Secs. 26-71—26-90. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Sunset Hill Trust Fund[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Finance, § 2-491 et seq.
Sec. 26-91. - Established.     There is created and established a trust fund to be known as the Sunset Hill Trust Fund, and all moneys received by the city pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision shall be a part of and be deposited in the trust fund, and shall be kept separately and apart from all other funds of the city; however, half the purchase price of cemetery lots shall be paid into the Sunset Hill Trust Fund, and half deposited into the general fund. (Code 1976, § 6-2011)
Sec. 26-92. - Receipt of payment; records.     Upon receipt by the city of any payment for perpetual care in Sunset Hill Cemetery, the clerk or other authorized officer or agent of the city shall issue to the person making such payment an appropriate receipt which shall describe or designate the lot with respect to which such payment is made; and henceforth such lot shall be included in and covered by the perpetual care plan established by this subdivision. The city shall make and keep appropriate records of every lot with respect to which such a payment is made. (Code 1976, § 6-2013)
Sec. 26-93. - Disposition of funds; power of city as trustee.     Payments for perpetual care in Sunset Hill Cemetery shall not be held separately as separate trust funds for the several lots but shall be all deposited in the same Sunset Hill Trust Fund and be held by the city as trustee to provide perpetual care for all of the lots with respect to which such payments are made and subject to the uses and purposes and the powers and authority of the city as trustee, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 49-3-134. (Code 1976, § 6-2014)State Law reference— Perpetual care trust fund, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-134. 
Sec. 26-94. - Records; use of income and trust fund.     The records of the city shall at all times show the amount of principal held in the Sunset Hill Trust Fund and the amount of accumulated income, if any; and only the income shall be used or expended to provide the perpetual care and maintenance contemplated in this subdivision. (Code 1976, § 6-2015)
Sec. 26-95. - Premium or discount; treatment by trustee.     In arriving at the income on behalf of the Sunset Hill Trust Fund from any investment, the trustee may treat any premium or discount on such investment as principal or as income, or may apportion the income between the principal and income, at its election. (Code 1976, § 6-2016)
Sec. 26-96. - Use of excess funds.     Should the income of the Sunset Hill Trust Fund at any time prove to be more than is needed to care for and to maintain the lots then included in and covered by a perpetual care plan, the trustee shall be authorized to use or expend all or any part of such excess income in improving, beautifying or maintaining the streets, parks and other public portion of such cemetery, thereby benefiting indirectly the lots covered by such plan. (Code 1976, § 6-2017)
Sec. 26-97. - Nature of agreement, amendments.     This subdivision shall constitute a contract and trust agreement between the city as trustee and each of the persons who make payments into the trust fund provided for in this subdivision, but this subdivision may be amended and modified by the mayor and council so long as such amendments do not adversely affect the perpetual care plan with respect to lots covered by such plan at the time such amendments are enacted. (Code 1976, § 6-2018)
Secs. 26-98—26-110. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Sections H and I 
Sec. 26-111. - Trust fund established.     There is created and established a trust fund to be known as the Sunset Hill Trust Fund, and all moneys received by the city pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision shall be a part of and be deposited in the trust fund and shall be kept separate and apart from all other funds of the city; however, half the purchase price of cemetery lots shall be paid into the Sunset Hill Trust Fund and half shall be deposited into the general fund. (Code 1976, § 6-2019)
Sec. 26-112. - Receipt of payment; records.     Upon receipt by the city of any payment into the Sunset Hill Trust Fund, the clerk or other authorized officer or agent of the city shall issue to the person making such payment an appropriate receipt which shall describe or designate the lots with respect to which such payment is made, and thenceforth such lots shall be included in and covered by the perpetual care plan established by this subdivision. Both the clerk and supervisor shall make and keep appropriate permanent records of every lot with respect to which such a payment is made. (Code 1976, § 6-2021)
Sec. 26-113. - Disposition of funds; power of city as trustee.     Payments into the Sunset Hill Trust Fund shall not be held separately as separate trust funds for the several lots, but shall be all deposited in the Sunset Hill Trust Fund and to be held by the city as trustee to provide perpetual care for all of the lots with respect to which such payments are made and subject to the uses and purposes and the powers and authority of the city as trustee. (Code 1976, § 6-2022)
Sec. 26-114. - Records; use of income of trust fund.     The records of the city shall at all times show the amount of principal held in the Sunset Hill Trust Fund; and the amount of accumulated income, if any, and only the income shall be used or expended to provide the perpetual care and maintenance contemplated in this subdivision. (Code 1976, § 6-2023)
Sec. 26-115. - Premium or discount; treatment by trustee.     In arriving at the income from any investment on behalf of the Sunset Hill Trust Fund, the trustee may treat any premium or discount on such investment as principal or as income, or may apportion the income between principal or income, at its election. (Code 1976, § 6-2024)
Sec. 26-116. - Use of excess funds.     Should the income of the Sunset Hill Trust Fund at any time prove to be more than is needed to care for and maintain the lots then included in and covered by such perpetual care plan, the trustee shall be authorized to use or expend all or part of such excess income in improving, beautifying or maintaining the streets, parks and other public portions of such cemetery, thereby benefiting indirectly the lots covered by such plan. (Code 1976, § 6-2025)
Sec. 26-117. - Nature of agreement; amendments.     This subdivision shall constitute a contract and trust agreement between the city as trustee and each of the persons who make payments into the trust fund provided for in this subdivision, but this subdivision may be amended and modified by the mayor and council so long as such amendments do not adversely affect the perpetual care plan with respect to lots covered by such plan at the times such amendments are enacted. (Code 1976, § 6-2026)
Chapter 30 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; court, ch. 34; fire protection and prevention, ch. 46; law enforcement, ch. 66.State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE OF EMERGENCY CURFEW 
Sec. 30-31. - Authorized. (a)	A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public emergency, for any reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or property. (b)	In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the city, or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the mayor is authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively protect the lives and property of people within the city, to place in effect any or all of the restrictions authorized in this article. (Code 1976, § 3-3001(a), (b))
Sec. 30-32. - Mayor's powers.     The mayor is authorized and empowered to limit by a state of emergency proclamation the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any area specifically designated or described within the corporate limits of the city and to specify hours of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such restrictions law enforcement officers, firemen and other public employees, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty military personnel, whether state or federal; on-duty employees of public utilities, public transportation companies, and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting, and television broadcasting corporations operated for profit; and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the city. (Code 1976, § 3-3001(c))
Sec. 30-33. - Proclamation ending state of emergency.     The mayor shall proclaim the end of a state of emergency or all or any part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the council. (Code 1976, § 3-3001(d))
Sec. 30-34. - Restrictions.     During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the mayor may impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions: (1)	Prohibit or regulate the possession on one's own premises of explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind, and prohibit their purchase, sale, transfer, or other disposition. (2)	Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine or intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off one's own premises. (3)	Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil or participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any public property. (4)	Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha or any other explosive or flammable fluids or substances. (5)	Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon any other public property, except by those in search of medical assistance, food, or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of themselves or their families or some member of the family. (6)	Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of business, places of entertainment, and any other places of public assembly. (Code 1976, § 3-3001(e))
Sec. 30-35. - Extensions, alterations, repeal.     Any proclamation of a state of emergency may be extended, altered or repealed in any particular during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the issuance of a subsequent proclamation. (Code 1976, § 3-3001(f))
Sec. 30-36. - Violations. (a)	During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized by this article. (b)	No person shall violate any provision of this article or any provision of any restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized by this article. (Code 1976, § 3-3001(g), (h))
Sec. 30-37. - Price gouging. (a)	During the existence of a state of emergency proclaimed by the mayor or a statewide emergency as defined under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3, it shall be unlawful for any person doing business in the city, for as long as such state of emergency exists, to rent or lease a hotel or motel room within the city at a price higher than the price of the operation's advertised rates (i.e., billboard, chain directory, internet, magazine, newspaper, etc.) prior to the declaration of the state of emergency. (b)	During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency or a statewide emergency as defined under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3, it shall be unlawful for any person doing business in the city, for as long as such emergency exists, to sale or offer for sale at retail any goods or services necessary to protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or their property at a price higher than the price of the operation's advertised rates (i.e., billboard, chain directory, internet, magazine, newspaper, etc.) prior to the declaration of the state of emergency; provided, however, that such price may be increased only in an amount which accurately reflects an increase in the cost of goods or services to the person selling the goods or services, or an increase in the cost of transporting the goods or services into the city. 
Secs. 30-38—30-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-71. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible; to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters or their imminent threat, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation: (1)	Firefighting services;(2)	Police services;(3)	Medical and health services;(4)	Rescue;(5)	Engineering;(6)	Warning services;(7)	Communications;(8)	Defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons;(9)	Evacuation of persons from stricken areas;(10)	Emergency welfare services;(11)	Emergency transportation;(12)	Plant protection;(13)	Temporary restoration of public utility services; and(14)	Other functions related to civilian protection;together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of these functions. Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-72. - Unlawful acts during emergencies.     It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency: (1)	Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management agency in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this article. (2)	Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy; imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this city; or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of the city. (3)	Wear, carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
Secs. 30-73—30-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 
Sec. 30-101. - Participation.     It is the desire and intent of the mayor and council that the city be a part of the county emergency management agency. 
Sec. 30-102. - Director—Appointment.     The chairman of the county commission, with concurrence of the mayors of cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment, by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. 
Sec. 30-103. - Same—Duties.     When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: (1)	Represent the mayor and council on matters pertaining to emergency management of a general nature. Direction and management of city department will be at the direction of the city manager; (2)	Assist city officials in organizing city department;(3)	Develop, in conjunction with city and county departments the county plan for emergency functions set forth in section 30-104, such plan to be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities therein for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval; (4)	Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency; (5)	Submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc.; (6)	Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center; and (7)	Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, under the supervision of the county governing officials. 
Sec. 30-104. - Composition, functions. (a)	The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing city and county departments. The emergency functions are assigned as follows: Department/AgencyFunctions(1)Mayor, chairman of the board of county commissionersDirection and control(2)Sheriff's department and police departmentPolice servicesSearch and recoverCommunications(3)Emergency management agencyPublic informationState military supportTrainingPreliminary damagePublic property assistanceSpecific preparednessSpecific hazards(4)Fire departmentSearch, rescue and recoveryFire servicesHazardous materialRadiological protection(5)Public worksEngineeringPetroleum and solid fuelServicesUtilities(6)School superintendentTransportation servicesFood services(7)Health departmentHealth and medical services(8)Clerk's officeAdministrative servicesResources management(9)Department of family and children servicesSocial servicesShelter and temporary housing (b)	Heads of city departments listed in subsection (a) of this section are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
Sec. 30-105. - Powers during an emergency, disaster.     Upon a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor separately, or jointly with the chairman of the county commissioners, or in their absences their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues the following powers: (1)	Enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; (2)	Seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public;(3)	Sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and (4)	Perform and exercise such other functions and duties and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
Sec. 30-106. - Volunteers.     All persons other than officers and employees of the city volunteering in service pursuant to the defense under this article shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such service, they shall have the same immunities as officers and employees of the city performing similar duties. 
Sec. 30-107. - Penalties.     Any person violating any provision of this division, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this division, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Chapter 34 - COURT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 30; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94.State Law reference— Contracts to furnish municipal court services authorized, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-80 et seq.; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 34-1. - Election, duties, jurisdiction of municipal court judge.     The office of judge of the municipal court is created to be filled by the election of the mayor and council. In addition, the office of judge of the municipal court pro tempore is created also to be filled by election of the mayor and council. Both the judge of the municipal court and judge pro tempore shall serve as the pleasure of the mayor and council. It shall be the duty of the judge of the municipal court to preside over the city court, known as the municipal court, with full and complete authority to try and dispose of all cases. The judge of the municipal court pro tempore shall serve in the absence or disqualification of the judge of the municipal court. (Code 1976, § 10-1001)
Sec. 34-2. - Sessions. (a)	A municipal court shall be convened and held at the direction of the municipal court judge and approved by the city manager. (b)	The regular weekly convening days or hour, may be changed by the judge of the municipal court when, in his discretion, such change may be necessary. In addition, additional sessions of the court may be scheduled and held at the discretion of the judge. 
Sec. 34-3. - Duties of police officers—Persons violating city ordinances.     Any police officer of the city shall arrest and confine in the county jail or other suitable facility or jail, when necessary, any offender against ordinances of the city, where such arrest and confinement is necessary to secure such offender's appearance before the municipal court to answer for his offense, or where it is necessary to preserve the peace and order of the city; or such police officer may take bond as otherwise provided in section 34-51. 
Sec. 34-4. - Same—Persons violating certain state laws.     Any person who shall, in the presence of any police officer, violate any penal laws of this state not punishable by city ordinances shall be arrested with or without a warrant and be carried before a committing magistrate for examination and prosecution. 
Sec. 34-5. - Docket.     It shall be the duty of the clerk of the municipal court to keep a docket showing the disposition of all cases brought before the municipal court. At the trial of all cases, the clerk shall record opposite the statement of the case the punishment inflicted and the date; and an entry shall be made under the sentence of the judge of the municipal court showing the final disposition of the case, that is whether the fine, if any, was collected, the date of such collection, and the disposition of such amounts. 
Sec. 34-6. - Warrant or summons; issuance.     It shall be the duty of any member of the police department, or where appropriate, city marshals, sanitation marshals, fire marshals, inspection officials and members of the county animal control staff in all cases where complaint is made or information obtained of any violation of any laws or ordinances of the city, to issue an accusation/summons in the name of the city and directed to the accused, requiring him to appear before the municipal court to answer such charge, which accusation/summons shall designate the time and place of trial. It shall be signed by the officer issuing the accusation/summons; and a copy shall be served upon the accused, either personally or by leaving a copy at his place of residence by the issuing officer. 
Sec. 34-7. - Service of summons generally.     A summons directed to any offender shall be served personally by some member of the city police department. 
Sec. 34-8. - Procedure for service of process on corporations. (a)	In addition to any other means provided by law, corporations may be served in accordance with the provisions of this section. (b)	Whenever any charges shall be preferred against a corporation doing business in the city for violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, the city clerk shall issue an original and copy notice to the defendant corporation for charges against such corporation, specifying the time when such charges will be heard by the municipal court, which copy notice shall be served by the chief of police or any police officer of the city, or the sheriff of the county, at least five days before the time fixed for trial in the municipal court upon such corporation to be found in the city or upon any agent of the corporation, or employee in charge of the business of such corporation in the city. The officer serving such copy notice shall make an entry of such service on the original notice and return the notice to the municipal court. Such service shall be service upon the corporation; and such case shall, upon the return of such notice as provided in this section, stand for trial before the municipal court at the time stated in the notice. 
Sec. 34-9. - Issuance of summons.     Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any fact, the city clerk shall issue a subpoena or summons directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties of the case, which shall be served as other process by the chief of police or any other officer or police officer. 
Sec. 34-10. - Failure of defendant to appear at trial; failure to plead; entry of plea; conviction.     At a time fixed for trial in municipal court, if a defendant corporation fails to appear, or appearing fails to plead, the municipal court judge or other officer presiding over the municipal court shall cause to be entered a plea of not guilty; and the trial shall proceed as though the defendant had appeared and pleaded. Upon the conviction of any corporation in such trial, there shall be rendered a judgment against it for the fine imposed, upon which an execution shall issue, signed by the municipal judge and city clerk in favor of the city against the property of the defendant corporation. 
Sec. 34-11. - Contempt for failure of witness to appear.     If any person summoned as a witness in any proceeding in the municipal court shall fail, neglect or refuse to attend trial, or render an excuse, sufficient in the judgment of the judge of the municipal court, the defaulting witness shall be liable for a fine as provided in section 1-11. If the cause shall be continued on account of the absence of the witness, the court may issue attachment against the witness, requiring him to show cause on the day appointed for trial why he should not be further dealt with for contempt. The chief of police shall, by virtue of the attachment, arrest such witness, or cause him to be arrested by some other officer or police officer and shall confine him so as to have him before the court at such time as may be appointed for further hearing on the original complaint. (Code 1976, § 10-1003)
Sec. 34-12. - Continuances.     When the ends of justice may require it, all cases may be continued. Applications for continuance shall be addressed in the sound discretion of the court, under the rules governing in superior courts of this state. All motions in the municipal court for a continuance of any case where the defendant is at liberty on bond shall be made by the defendant, his attorney at law, or his attorney in fact, which designation shall not include the surety of his appearance bond. No motion to continue a case shall be entertained except in open court and on the day set for trial. Where an appearance bond has been forfeited and the forfeiture subsequently set aside for cause, no further motion to continue the case for trial shall be entertained until the forfeiture fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk have been paid. 
Sec. 34-13. - Rules of practice.     The city shall have the opening and conclusion in each case unless the defendant introduces no evidence. The defendant shall then be entitled to the conclusion. The city shall announce first if it is ready for trial and, if not, it shall be held as a strict showing for continuances as the defendant. The rules of evidence and examination of witness shall be the same as in superior courts, so far as such rules are applicable to the case on trial. All officers, informers and persons injured shall be competent witnesses. In general, the municipal court shall be controlled by the rules of practice governing superior courts so far as they are applicable to municipal court and by sound construction of the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 34-14. - Guilty pleas.     Any party charged with violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances may file his plea of guilty under such rules as the court may direct. Upon a plea of guilty, the court shall pass sentence or judgment of the case as may appear reasonable and proper. 
Sec. 34-15. - Minimum costs; working out.     In case of conviction in the municipal court, the cost assessable shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. The costs shall go into the general fund of the city for general municipal purposes. Defendants unable to pay costs and compelled in lieu of payment to work on the public streets shall be each required to work sufficient time to cover costs. (Code 1976, § 10-1011)
Sec. 34-16. - Contempt.     Any person who, during a session of the municipal court, shall be guilty of contempt of court, or who refuses to abide by any sentence or order of the court, shall be punished for contempt of court. The maximum penalty for contempt shall be as provided in section 1-11. (Code 1976, § 10-1003)
Sec. 34-17. - Municipal court technology fee. (a)	Creation and purpose. The City of Valdosta hereby creates a municipal court technology fee ("technology fee") to assist in the provision of technological needs of the court including, but not limited to, computer hardware, computer software, imaging, scanning, facsimile, communication, printing and courtroom visual media. The Municipal Court for the City of Valdosta shall be entitled to collect, the technology fee for each criminal action, traffic action and violation of city ordinance. (b)	Amount. The technology fee shall be $2.50. (c)	Imposition. The technology fee shall be imposed upon each citation that results in: (1) a conviction; (2) accepted guilty plea; (3) accepted plea of nolo contendere; or (4) bond forfeiture or voluntary payment of fine. In the event of multiple citations against a defendant arising from the same transaction and occurrence, the technology fee shall be imposed on each separate citation which is resolved in accordance with the forgoing. Mandatory state add-ons shall be calculated based on the sum of the underlying fine and the technology fee. (d)	Applicability. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the technology fee shall not apply to offenses exempt from add-on fees by state law, nor shall the technology fee cause the total amount of fines to exceed that allowed by state law or the Charter of the City of Valdosta. (e)	Maintenance. The technology fee shall be appropriately collected and reported to the city manager or his designee and maintained separately from other city accounts. Accumulated technology fees shall be used exclusively for the purposes provided herein. (Ord. No. 2015-29, 11-19-2015)
Secs. 34-18—34-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPEARANCE BOND 
Sec. 34-51. - Discretion of officer on duty as to certain bonds.     When any arrest is made, the police chief or his designee may take bond with or without security, and, in his discretion, payable to the city, in any sum not exceeding state limits for the appearance of any person accused or suspected of being guilty of the violation of any provisions of this Code or ordinance of the city to stand to and abide his trial, and also of witnesses to testify in any case pending or about to be commenced. 
Sec. 34-52. - Persons refusing to give bond.     If any arrested person or necessary witness shall fail to give the bond and security required of him such person so refusing may be confined in the county jail, or be kept under guard so as to be present at his trial or to testify, as the case may be. 
Sec. 34-53. - Designation of bail; procedure upon failure of bonded person to appear.     Upon failure of any principal in any bond to appear where such principal is charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city, or upon the failure of any principal who is a witness to appear and testify as engaged, the judge of the municipal court shall issue a rule nisi requiring the principal and sureties on such bond or recognizance to show cause before him on a day certain named in the rule nisi why they should not be required to pay amount of such bond or recognizance and all costs of forfeiture. (Code 1976, § 10-1021)
Sec. 34-54. - Service of rule to show cause.     Any member of the police force of the city shall serve a copy of the rule described in section 34-53 upon the principal and surety, if to be found in the city, personally or by leaving a copy at their usual place of abode, at least five days before the time named in the rule nisi for hearing on the matter. (Code 1976, § 10-1023)
Sec. 34-55. - Entry of judgment against delinquent principal and sureties.     If no sufficient cause is shown to the contrary, the judge of the municipal court shall proceed to enter a judgment against the principal and sureties for the amount of such bond and costs; and the city clerk shall issue execution for the amount of the judgment and costs, which execution shall bear teste in the name of the judge, and place the execution in the hands of the city marshal, who shall proceed to collect the execution by levy and sale. (Code 1976, § 10-1023)
Sec. 34-56. - Delivery of principal prior to judgment and forfeiture; release of surety.     Any surety upon any bail bond of any person charged with a violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city may surrender his principal at any time before forfeiture to the chief of police, who shall confine such principal until discharged by order of the municipal court, or until such principal shall give other good and acceptable security; and the delivery of the principal by the surety shall discharge such surety from all liability upon the bond. 
Sec. 34-57. - Sureties residing beyond the county.     No officer of the city shall accept on any bail bond any surety residing beyond the limits of the county, except as authorized by the city council; but if he shall do so, the surety will be bound, and, upon entry of judgment against such surety, the judgment shall be collected as provided by law. 
Sec. 34-58. - Disposition of money pledges.     If the person arrested shall fail to appear at the place and time of trial so appointed, it shall be the duty of the judge of the municipal court to declare any pledge forfeited and to order the money to be paid into the city treasury as in other fines and forfeitures if it has not already been deposited in such treasury. If the person so arrested shall appear as engaged and is adjudged not guilty, the money and the property thus deposited shall be ordered by the court delivered up to the person making the deposit. Should any accused person be adjudged guilty and fined, the amount of the fine and costs of the trial shall be paid into the city treasury and the remainder, if any, refunded to the accused or to the person entitled to the fine and costs. (Code 1976, § 10-1033)
Secs. 34-59—34-80. - Reserved. 
Chapter 37 - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 37-1—37-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VALDOSTA SMALL EMERGING BUSINESS PROGRAM 
Sec. 37-31. - Definitions.     As used herein the following terms shall have the following meanings:     Access to capital program (AC program). A framework and set of guidelines adopted by participating area lenders and approved by the city to secure financial assistance providing the VSEBs essential credit, which will be used for a variety of necessary business costs and expenses related to a VSEB program project.     Capital project. A project set forth in the city's capital improvement program funded by the City of Valdosta through taxes, bonds, or other sources of revenue to provide adequate or enhanced services for the citizens.     Capital improvement program (CIP). An annual list of specific construction projects to be completed by the City of Valdosta.     Designated user department. The City of Valdosta department requisitioning the work or services to be performed as part of an overall capital project or VSEB eligible project.     Goal. Targeted outcome of the program. Also refers to the ratio or dollar amount of project potential for qualified, subcontracting VSEBs.     Independent firm. A business which is owned, operated, controlled and managed by an individual with at least 51 percent ownership, and upon whom the success and/or failure of the firm depends.     Price sharing. A form of collusion in which information is shared between two or more parties for a fraudulent, illegal or deceitful purpose.     Prime contractor. The principal contractor who has been awarded the contract for the capital project.     Prime contracts. Contracts to perform on whole or principal capital projects. A VSEB may receive up to five of these per year, but there is a monetary cap on participation.     Program. The components that comprise the VSEB program, including processes.     Program coordinator. City of Valdosta staff person who performs the day to day duties regarding the VSEB program, working directly with the purchasing agent and small emerging businesses and reporting directly to the deputy city manager for administration.     Project manager. City of Valdosta staff person who directly oversees the specific, ongoing capital project(s) for the user department(s).     Request for qualifications (RFQ). A competitive process conducted by the City of Valdosta whereby the purchasing division publicly advertises requests for businesses to submit a proposal outlining the entity's qualifications for the pre-qualification and procurement of professional services, service contracts, etc.     Subcontractor. The one who takes a portion of contract from principal contractor or another subcontractor.     Valdosta Metropolitan Statistical Area (Valdosta MSA). The area composed of Brooks, Echols, Lanier, and Lowndes Counties, as designated by the United States Department of Management and Budget in 2003.     Valdosta Small Emerging Business (VSEB). All businesses who meet all of the criteria established under this article and are certified hereunder.     Valdosta Small Emerging Business Advisory Committee. A five member group who advises and helps oversee the program, insuring that the program remains within the function and intent of the purpose of the program. (Ord. No. 2009-40, 9-24-2009)
Sec. 37-32. - Purpose and overview of the program.     The purpose of the program is to provide opportunities for qualified VSEBs to conduct business with the City of Valdosta. Valdosta Small Emerging Businesses must meet a series of qualifications and be certified by the city as having adequately met those criteria as defined herein to qualify to participate in the program prior to gaining access to the program's bidding opportunities. A series of key assistance areas have been assembled to support the VSEBs. In addition to requirements for certification prior to participation, the program provides ongoing rules and expectations for both the VSEBs and the city. Accountability, processes of appeal, and an end-date graduation of participation are clearly defined within the program. (Ord. No. 2009-40, 9-24-2009)
Sec. 37-33. - Criteria for certification.     Certification will be granted only in those areas for which the owner has the ability and expertise to manage and control the firm's operations and work. (1)	To be certified as a VSEB, an individual owner must meet the following criteria:a.	Reside in one of the counties in the Valdosta Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) for a minimum of one year at the time the application is submitted; or have an established business headquartered for a minimum of three years in Valdosta, and reside in one of the surrounding counties; b.	Have a personal net worth less than $750,000.00, excluding personal residence, including but not limited to, business value and assets (measured as book value), ownership in other businesses and all other assets personally owned, held in trust for the individual owner's benefit, or held by a spouse. Provided, however, that the following caps apply: 1.	For capital improvement, $3,000,000.00 in annual gross receipts on average, over the immediately preceding three-year period; 2.	For suppliers, $2,000,000.00 in annual gross receipts on average, over the immediately preceding three-year period; 3.	For professional services, $2,000,000.00 in annual gross receipts on average, over the immediately preceding three-year period; and 4.	For contractual services, $1,000,000.00 in annual gross receipts on average, over the immediately preceding three-year period. These amounts shall be subject to annual analysis by the DCMA or his designee who, should the annual gross receipts in any category change by five percent, will recommend to the mayor and council amounts that may be more appropriate. c.	Have not been in the program for a total of more than eight years; provided, however, that participation may be increased by two, one-year periods for good cause; d.	Own and control more than 51 percent of the business entity being certified;e.	Own any license required by local, state or federal law;f.	Have expertise normally required by the industry for the field for which certification is sought; g.	Be a for-profit small business concern;h.	Not be a front, a broker or a pass-through;i.	Perform a commercially useful function typical of the field for which certification is granted; j.	Not be controlled or operate as front by non-VSEB family, former or present employers. Familial relationships where capital is provided for the business will be subject to scrutiny and possible rejection; k.	The VSEB owner(s) contributions of capital or expertise to acquire the ownership interest must be real and substantial; and l.	Be a business, including a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or any other business or professional entity: 1.	Which is at least 51 percent owned by one or more of the individuals identified in this section, the ownership of any such business that has been in existence for a year or over must have maintained such 51 percent ownership for at least one year; and 2.	In the case of a publicly owned business, at least 51 percent of all classes of the stock of which is owned by one or more of such persons each of whom meets the personal net worth criteria set forth above; and 3.	Be a citizen or lawfully admitted permanent resident of the United States and be compliant with the residency requirements of the VSEB program. (2)	Only a firm that is managed and controlled by a VSEB may be certified under the VSEB program. The VSEB owner(s) must actually exercise control over the firm's operations, work, management and policy. Evidence of such controls is as follows: a.	A firm must not be subject to any formal or informal restrictions that limit the customary discretion of such owner. There can be no restrictions through corporate charter provisions, bylaw provisions, contracts or any other formal or informal devices that prevent the VSEB owner, without the cooperation or vote of a nonqualifying person or entity from making any business decision of the firm. b.	The VSEB owner may delegate various areas of the management or daily operations of the firm to persons who would not qualify to be VSEBs only if such delegation is typical in the industry for such businesses. Such delegations of authority must be revocable, and the VSEB must retain the power to hire and fire any such person. The VSEB owner must have an overall understanding of, and managerial and technical competence, experience and expertise, directly related to the firm's operations and work. c.	The VSEB owner cannot engage in outside employment or other business interests that conflicts with the management of the firm or prevents the owner from devoting sufficient time and attention to the affairs of the firm to manage and control its activities unless such activities would be appropriate with commensurate businesses, in order to avoid sham or fraudulent certifications. (3)	Only an independent firm may be certified as a VSEB. An independent firm is one whose viability does not depend on its relationship with another firm. Recognition of an applicant as a separate entity for tax or corporate purposes is not necessarily sufficient to demonstrate that a firm is independent. In determining whether an applicant is an independent business, the VSEB program coordinator will: a.	Scrutinize relationships with non-VSEBs in such areas as personnel, facilities, equipment, financial and/or bonding support, and other resources. b.	Consider whether present or recent family, or employer/employee relationships between the applicant compromises the applicant's independence. c.	Examine the applicant's relationships with non-VSEB prime contractors to determine whether a pattern of exclusive or primary dealings with a prime contractor compromises the applicant's independence. d.	Consider the consistency of relationships between the applicant and non-VSEBs with normal industry practices. e.	An owner shall be certified only for specific types of work for which the owner(s) has the ability and expertise to manage and control the firm's operations and work. (Ord. No. 2009-40, 9-24-2009)
Sec. 37-34. - Program administration guidelines. (a)	Valdosta Small Emerging Business Program. (1)	The city shall identify at least a cumulative total of ten percent of its work in its CIP program during the annual budget submission which shall be accomplished with VSEBs, using sheltered opportunities, prime contracting opportunities and subcontracting goals. The city, through each department head shall commit in its budget to award at least ten percent of its contracts for services, and nonconstruction contracts to VSEBs; provided, however, that such awards shall comply with local, state and federal law and that there exist certified VSEBs to perform the work. These goals are established for the first year of the VSEB program and will be revised based on measurable results after year one. (2)	In implementing the program, the VSEB program coordinator shall first provide opportunities for direct or prime contracting. Such opportunities should be created by breaking procurement/contracting opportunities packages into smaller components, and separating work that requires licenses from that which does not in separate bid or proposal requests where feasible. (3)	Subcontracting opportunities should be provided within vertical construction projects, with horizontal construction project opportunities being provided to the maximum extent possible, by prime or direct contracting. Nevertheless, the subcontracting opportunities shall be provided to those trades typically established as subcontractors. (4)	The city may issue joint checks upon the request of the VSEB in order to facilitate bonding, financing, or other requirements of contracting with the city. (b)	VSEB program administration. The deputy city manager for administration or designee shall manage and direct the program through supervision of the VSEB program coordinator. (c)	Access to capital. An access to capital program may be established by the city in conjunction with lending institutions to assist VSEBs with obtaining essential access to capital. Refer to subsection 37-37(d). (d)	Numerical goals. The percentages set forth below for VSEBs are annual goals and are considered to be targets, not quotas, set to achieve participation levels commensurate with available businesses. The following goals shall pertain to all of the following subsections as applicable: Construction (ten percent); construction-related professional services (ten percent); contractual services (ten percent); and commodities contracts (ten percent). (1)	Review provision. The goals outlined in subsection (d) above, shall be reviewed on an annual basis and any changes recommended to the DCMA to legislation to modify the goals as applicable. (e)	Valdosta Small Emerging Business goals. The following goals are for VSEBs in the program: (1)	The overall small business goal is at least ten percent of the total dollar amount of all eligible contracts on a project by project basis, such that the city may award at least ten percent of total city contracts to VSEBs; provided that such awards do not violate state or federal law and provided further that there are certified VSEBs to perform the work. (f)	Contract pre-award compliance procedures. (1)	For all solicitations, the bidder/proposer shall submit a schedule of participation detailing all VSEB and non-VSEB subcontractors from which the bidder/proposer solicited bids or quotations. The entities comprising the VSEB goal of at least ten percent goals as set forth supra shall be identified, or the basis for a waiver for good faith efforts shall be provided with the bid or proposal. The list of VSEBs posted on the city's website establishes the group from which a bidder/proposer must solicit subcontractors under this program. The VSEBs participation shall be due at the time established in the solicitation documents. (2)	Any agreement between a bidder/proposer that prevents a VSEB from providing quotations to other bidders/proposers is prohibited. (3)	Joint ventures shall only be allowed under this program in cases that demonstrate legitimate, detailed VSEB partnerships with non-VSEBs, proof of which shall be provided to and approved by the coordinator. (4)	Where the bidder/proposer cannot achieve the project specific goal(s), the coordinator and DCMA will determine whether good faith efforts have been made. In making this determination, the staff will consider, at a minimum, a matrix to determine the bidder/proposer's efforts to: a.	Solicit certified subcontractors in the scopes of work of the contract. The bidder/proposer shall provide interested VSEBs with timely, adequate information about the plans, specifications and other such requirements of the contract to facilitate their quotation. The bidder/proposer must follow up initial solicitations with interested VSEBs. b.	Identify a portion of the work available to VSEBs consistent with their availability.c.	Negotiate in good faith with interested VSEBs. Price sharing is prohibited in negotiations. Evidence of such negotiation includes the names, addresses and telephone numbers of VSEBs that were contacted; a description of the information provided regarding the plans and specifications for the work selected for subcontracting; and why agreements could not be reached with them. The ability or desire of a bidder/proposer to perform the work of a contract with its own organization does not relieve it of the responsibility to make good faith efforts on all scopes of work subject to subcontracting. d.	Facilitate the leasing of equipment supplies or equipment when they are of such a specialized nature that the VSEB could not readily and economically obtain them in the marketplace, where feasible. (g)	Good faith efforts in lieu of meeting program goals. For a contract with VSEB subcontracting goals, a contractor must comply by either meeting the goal or demonstrating good faith efforts to achieve it that are consistent with the requirements set forth in this chapter. In determining whether a bidder/proposer has made good faith efforts, in lieu of achieving the stated goals, the coordinator, in conjunction with the DCMA, shall consider all relevant factors, which include: (1)	The ability of other bidders/proposers in meeting the project specific goal(s) may be considered. a.	A contact log showing the name, address and contact number (phone or fax) used to contact the proposed certified subcontractors, nature of work requested for quote, date of contact, person making the effort; b.	The description of work for which a quote was requested;c.	The amount of the quote given, if one was obtained;d.	The list of departments of work not subcontracted and an explanation why not; ande.	Subcontractor information as requested by forms developed by the purchasing department.(2)	For contracts other than for construction related professional services, a signed letter of intent from all listed VSEBs describing the work, materials, equipment or services to be performed or provided by the VSEBs and the agreed upon dollar value shall be due with the bid documents but in no event before the expiration of 48 hours after the submission of the bid. (3)	For construction related professional services contracts, the highest ranked proposer must deliver at the time of fee and contract negotiations signed letters of intent between itself and the VSEBs to be utilized. If the purchasing agent finds that a bidder/proposer did not make sufficient good faith efforts, the purchasing agent shall communicate this finding to the user department and recommend that the bid/proposal be rejected. A bidder/proposer may protest this determination pursuant to the city's bid protest procedures. (h)	Continuing obligations of VSEBs and graduation. The certification status of all VSEBs shall be reviewed annually by the program coordinator through recertification application. Failure of the firm to seek recertification by filing the necessary documentation with the program coordinator within 60 days from the date of receipt of written notification from program coordinator may result in being removed from the list of certified VSEBs. (1)	It is the responsibility of the VSEB to notify the finance department of any change in its circumstances affecting its continued eligibility for the program. Failure to do so may result in the firm's decertification and preclusion from future participation. (2)	The VSEB that no longer meets certification may be decertified at any time.(3)	A firm, or qualifying individuals, who have participated in the VSEB program for a total of eight years shall graduate from the program. (i)	Contract performance compliance procedures. (1)	Upon award of a contract by the city that includes project specific goal(s), the prompt pay obligations in the city's contract with the prime contractor, and the contract between the prime contractor and the subcontractors and subconsultants named in response to this act become covenants of performance by the contractor in favor of the city. (2)	The contractor shall provide a listing of all VSEBs and any other subcontractors to be used in the performance of the contract, and subcontractor payment information to the city with each request for payment submitted to the city. The coordinator and the user department shall monitor subcontractor participation during the course of the contract and shall have reasonable access to all contract-related documentation held by the contractor. (3)	The contractor cannot make changes to the schedule of participation or substitute subcontractors named in the schedule of participation without the prior written approval of the DCMA or designee upon recommendation of the coordinator or designated staff person. Unauthorized changes or substitutions shall be a violation of this chapter, and may constitute grounds for rejection of the bid or proposal or cause termination of the executed contract for breach, the withholding of payment and/or subject the contractor to contract penalties or other sanctions. a.	All requests for changes or substitutions of the subcontractors named in the schedule of participation shall be made to the coordinator or designated staff person with a copy to the DCMA in writing, and shall clearly and fully set forth the basis for the request. A contractor shall not substitute a subcontractor or perform the work designated for a subcontractor with its own forces unless and until the DCMA or designated staff person approves such substitution in writing. A contractor shall not allow a substituted subcontractor to begin work until both the DCMA and the user department have approved the substitution. b.	The facts supporting the request must not have been known, nor reasonably should have been known by either party prior to the submission of the schedule of participation. Bid shopping is prohibited. The contractor must bring this dispute to the coordinator or designated staff person for resolution. c.	The DCMA's final decision whether to permit or deny the proposed substitution, and the basis therefore, will be communicated to the parties in writing by the program coordinator. d.	If the city requires the substitution of a subcontractor listed in the schedule of participation, the contractor shall undertake good faith efforts to fulfill the schedule of participation if the project specific goals would not otherwise be met. If the goal(s) cannot be reached and good faith efforts have been made, the contractor may substitute with non-VSEBs. (4)	If a contractor plans to hire a subcontractor on any scope of work that was not previously disclosed in the schedule of participation, the contractor shall obtain the approval of the DCMA or designee to modify the schedule of participation and must make good faith efforts to ensure that VSEBs have a fair opportunity to bid on the new scope of work. (5)	Changes to the scopes of work shall be documented by the user department at the time they arise, to establish the reasons for the change and the effect on achievement of the project specific goal(s). (j)	VSEB and program eligibility. (1)	Only businesses that meet the criteria of VSEBs may be certified for participation in the program. The applicant has the burden of persuasion. (2)	Only an independent firm may be certified as a VSEB. An independent business is one whose viability does not depend on its relationship with another firm. Recognition of an applicant as a separate entity for tax or corporate purposes is not necessarily sufficient to demonstrate that a firm is independent. The coordinator must determine that an owner has an independent business in order to certify the business as a VSEB. In doing so, the coordinator will take into account all reasonable criteria for reviewing control of a business. (3)	The certification status of all VSEBs shall be reviewed annually by the program coordinator. Failure of the firm to seek recertification by filing the necessary documentation with the division within 60 days from the date of receipt of written notification from the finance department may result in decertification. (4)	It is the responsibility of the VSEBs to notify the finance department of any change in its circumstances affecting its continued eligibility for the program. Failure to do so may result in the firm's decertification. (5)	The DCMA shall decertify a firm that does not meet the eligibility criteria.(6)	A VSEB may receive no more than five prime contracts per year or an aggregate total value of prime contracts per year in the amount of $4,000,000.00, whichever is greater. (7)	Joint ventures between VSEBs and non-VSEBs are not eligible for the program, unless they provide structured, detailed, mentoring opportunities, proof of which shall be provided to the coordinator. (Ord. No. 2009-40, 9-24-2009)
Sec. 37-35. - Counting subcontracting participation of VSEBs. (a)	The entire amount of that portion of a construction subcontract that is performed by the VSEBs own forces shall be counted, including the cost of supplies and materials obtained by the VSEBs for the work of the subcontract, and supplies purchased or equipment leased by the VSEBs, excluding supplies and equipment purchased or leased by the VSEBs from the prime contractor or its affiliate, which shall not count as VSEB participation. (b)	The entire amount of fees or commissions charged by VSEBs for providing a bona fide service, such as professional, technical, consultant or managerial services, or for providing bonds or insurance specifically required for the performance of a contract shall be counted, provided the fee is reasonable and not excessive as compared with fees customarily charged for similar services. (c)	If a firm ceases to be a certified VSEB during a contract, the dollar value of work performed under a contract with that firm after it has ceased to be certified shall not be counted in the city's internal accounting. No contractor shall be penalized in any way as a result of the failure of a project to achieve its project specific goals because of the operation of this section. (d)	In determining achievement of a subcontracting participation goal, the participation of a VSEB shall not be counted until the amount being counted has been paid to that entity. (e)	Achievement of project specific goal(s) shall be evaluated following the completion of the project. (Ord. No. 2009-40, 9-24-2009)
Sec. 37-36. - Acts which may result in expulsion from the VSEB program; fines and criminal offenses. (a)	The following violations of this chapter are unlawful:(1)	Providing information to the city in connection with an application for or challenge to certification, recertification or decertification as VSEBs that the providing party knew or should have known to be false or misleading. (2)	Providing information to the city in connection with submission of a bid, responses to requests for qualifications or proposals, good faith efforts documentation, post-award compliance, or other program operations that the providing party knew or should have known to be false or misleading. (3)	Falsely attesting to recertification under this program.(4)	Substituting VSEBs subcontractors without first receiving approval for such substitutions.(5)	Committing any other violations of the provisions of this article.(6)	Submitting false documentation for payments.(b)	A bidder, proposer, contractor or subcontractor is subject to withholding of payments under the contract, termination of the contract for breach, contract penalties, decertification as a VSEB, or being barred or deemed nonresponsive in future city solicitations and contracts for up to two years, if it is found to have: (1)	Provided information in connection with an application for certification or recertification that it knew or should have known to be false or misleading. (2)	Provided information in connection with the submission of a bid or proposal or documentation of good faith efforts, post-award compliance, or other program operations that it knew or should have known to be false or misleading. (3)	Failed in bad faith to fulfill the subcontracting participation goal, thereby materially breaching the contract. (4)	Repeatedly failed to comply in good faith with substantive provisions of this article.(5)	Failure to comply with remediation due to contract performance. If a vendor is removed from a project due to the inability to perform contracted job(s) and then neglects to comply with the staff's recommended remediation, the vendor may be expelled from the VSEB program. (Ord. No. 2009-40, 9-24-2009)
Sec. 37-37. - City responsibilities. (a)	VSEB program administration. (1)	The DCMA or designee shall manage the program, including:a.	Implementing and enforcing rules and regulations hereunder and, implementation and monitoring of the program. b.	Breaking larger contracts into smaller components where such actions will facilitate competition and provide opportunities under the program. c.	Providing information and assistance to VSEBs relating to city procurement opportunities, practices and procedures, and bid and proposal specifications, requirements and prerequisites. d.	Certifying businesses as VSEBs, maintaining certification records, and ensuring that such information is available on the city's procurement website identifying all such certified entities. e.	Establishing project specific goals after ensuring that adequate VSEBs are available to do the work. f.	Evaluating contractors' achievement of project specific goals or good faith efforts to meet project specific goals. g.	Working with city departments to ensure prompt, timely, payments to VSEBs for work performed herein. h.	Receiving, reviewing, and acting upon complaints and suggestions concerning the program. The VSEB program coordinator shall create a complaint form as part of this process that identifies both parties. i.	Providing bi-annual open houses to answer questions regarding the operation of the program. j.	Posting all contracting opportunities on the city's website under "VSEB Program".k.	Identifying all certified companies on its website within three business days of certification.l.	As appropriate, advertising all pre-bid conferences in applicable VSEB newspapers, direct-mail or e-mail notices to certified VSEBs, and otherwise seek to increase the interest of all VSEBs certified in the scopes of work of the contract. m.	The VSEB program coordinator shall provide interested VSEBs with timely, adequate information about the plans, specifications and requirements of the contract to allow them to respond to the solicitation either directly or by referral to the city department seeking the procurement. n.	The purchasing agent shall maintain a list of certified VSEBs, shall have copies available for distribution and shall post such information on the city's procurement website. o.	The DCMA shall be allowed to adjust the annual gross receipts for good cause shown. An appeal of the decision of the coordinator may be appealed to the DCMA or a designated staff person. (2)	Each city department shall identify to the purchasing agent the person with the responsibility of ensuring VSEB participation; said person shall receive diversity training and shall prepare quarterly reports to the purchasing agent identifying the extent of non-VSEBs and VSEBs participation in any procurement within their department each month. (b)	Project goals. (1)	The DCMA or designee shall establish project specific goal(s) based on the availability of at least normal industry practice, as determined in consultation with the user department, the availability of at least two VSEBs to perform the functions of those individual contracts and the city's utilization of such to date. (2)	Project specific goal(s) shall not be set on emergency contracts as defined by City Code or for purchases made in conjunction with the state although VSEBs shall be considered for such sole-source or emergency procurements if qualified. (c)	Creation of bond enhancement program. The city may, in its sole discretion, establish, develop and provide a bond enhancement program for the benefit of VSEBs as defined below, with an established bond enhancement program entity. The purpose of this program is to provide support services to assist vendors certified hereunder in their efforts to secure performance and payment bonds for public and private contracts. The program shall not provide the underlying bond but shall provide in-house technical assistance in securing bonding, small business support services and contractor monitoring necessary for such bond underwriting, as well as improvement plans for contractors who do not qualify. (1)	Georgia Code provides that VSEBs do not have to submit bid bonds for projects under $100,000.00. O.C.G.A. § 13-10-21(b) provides that VSEBs do not need to provide performance bonds for projects under $300,000.00, or such other minimum amount set by the Georgia legislature under O.C.G.A. § 13-10-20(a), as amended. (d)	Access to capital. (1)	The city will work in conjunction with lending institutions to assist VSEBs with obtaining access to capital (the "AC program"). A designated entity approved by the lending institutions may manage the distribution of said funds, in accordance with guidelines adopted by the lenders and approved by the city in order to ensure proper administration and monitoring and to ensure continuity for the program. a.	The city's VSEB program coordinator (coordinator) or designated staff person shall work closely with the existing business specialist and other key members or similar private entities when outsourcing program components to ensure that only certified VSEBs are receiving recommended assistance. b.	The coordinator or designated staff person working with government or similar private entities shall gather information on all available programs for access to capital, including but not limited to, local bank liaisons and any other program which assists small businesses to obtain capital. c.	The DCMA or designee shall provide biannual reports to the mayor and council, identifying the size and number of businesses assisted in the two preceding quarters. Said reports shall include the nature of the service or product provided; the program (whether VSEB or majority); the nature of the contracts awarded and the dollar value of each contract awarded. d.	The coordinator or designated staff person working with other local agencies/organizations shall also hold biannual open houses or workshops to showcase available assets and obtain information from VSEBs on available programs. (2)	The coordinator or designated staff person shall staff a series of meetings initiated by the DCMA between the city and any financial institutions with offices in Valdosta who wish to participate in the creation of VSEBs banking managers who will assist VSEBs in obtaining credit. (e)	Continuing education and mentoring programs. The city shall engage local educational institutions to advise and implement continuing education, training and mentoring programs, including but not limited to, training on doing business with the city, subcontracting documentation requirements, accounting for the small business, and related matters for construction related contractors and subcontractors, including technology, bidding and bonding, and project management. (f)	Semi-monthly payments to certified VSEBs. The city shall pay certified VSEBs semi-monthly, upon proper payment application to the applicable city department. City departments are to perform all necessary inspections and otherwise endeavor to ensure that prompt review and as applicable approval of certified VSEB work is paid within ten days of receipt of invoice. The city shall pay all approved invoices within five business days of receipt by the finance department. The finance department shall provide quarterly statements to the DCMA or designee identifying the timing of VSEB payments for contracts within their departments. These statements are to be organized and provided to the DCMA or designee. Prime contractors shall be obligated to pay subcontractors within three days of receipt from the city of funds, and must confirm payment to the city. (g)	Insurance program review. The VSEB program coordinator for the city shall prepare a report on available insurance programs for Georgia small businesses, and make recommendations regarding methods or programs to assist certified VSEBs in obtaining requisite insurance. Said report shall be provided to the DCMA or his designee, on or before January 15, 2010 and thereafter shall be prepared and submitted biannually, with a copy being sent to VSEBs. (h)	Pre-award review of compliance with numerical goals, including good faith efforts. (1)	The program coordinator shall timely review the schedule of participation prior to award, including the scope of work and the letters of intent from VSEBs. The program coordinator may request clarification in writing of items listed in the schedule of participation, provided such clarification shall not include the opportunity to augment listed VSEBs participation or good faith efforts. The program coordinator shall review all submittals and document the participation of each submittal. (2)	If the program coordinator determines that the schedule of participation demonstrates that the project specific goal(s) have been achieved or good faith efforts made, and the user department concurs, the purchasing agent shall recommend award of the contract to the appropriate approval authority based on the current city ordinance regarding contract awards. The program coordinator shall verify with each VSEB that a contract in the specified amount has been awarded. (i)	Collecting data to evaluate the VSEB program. (1)	City staff shall develop and use measures to quantify and categorize the contracts being awarded to all contractors and consultants, including VSEBs. The coordinator shall submit the format for its work to the city manager and DCMA with a copy to the mayor and council within 60 days of the adoption of the VSEB program. (2)	The coordinator shall prepare quarterly reports and shall include data on prime contractors and subcontractors bidding on and awarded city projects, including at a minimum without limitation, the race, gender, or nationality of the contractor or consultant, along with the scope of services, commodity code, size of contracts awarded in the categories used by Georgia Statute. The DCMA/designee shall report on a quarterly and an annual basis to the mayor and council on the number and value of contracts awarded, by category or work, contract size, and characteristic of company (i.e., African American, Hispanic, Native American, Asian, women, nonminority male-owned small businesses) and whether certified or not. (3)	There is established a VSEB advisory committee, following the second year of the program, consisting of five members to review the status of the goals of this program, including the number and dollar value of contracts awarded, the training, capital and bonding programs, and difficulties or accomplishments of the program, along with a comparison of the achievements under the program compared with the goals. This committee shall meet with the coordinator, who shall generate a report for the city manager, mayor and council within 14 days of each quarterly meeting. The mayor and council shall appoint five members. The committee shall be comprised of two non-VSEB contractors, two VSEB contractors and one private citizen for four-year terms. The mayor and council shall strive to reflect the diversity of the community in its appointments; each of the five members shall be confirmed by the mayor and council. The VSEB program coordinator shall serve as staff to the committee. (j)	Valdosta Small Emerging Business Advisory Committee. There is to be established, following the second year of the VSEB program, a VSEB support committee consisting of five members, appointed by the mayor and council, shall serve staggered four-year terms each and comprised of two non-VSEB contractors, two VSEB contractors and one private citizen for four-year terms. The terms shall be staggered with the first appointee serving one year before reappointment, the second two serving two years before reappointment, and the final two serving three years before reappointment. The mayor and council shall strive to reflect the diversity of the community in its appointments; each of the five members shall be confirmed by the mayor and council. The VSEB program coordinator shall serve as staff to the committee. Additional criteria can be found in the city's boards, authorities, and commissions policy on the city's website at www.valdostacity.com and in the city manager's office. The purpose of this committee is to review the status of the goals of this program, including the number and dollar value of contracts awarded, the training, capital, and bonding programs, and difficulties or accomplishments of the program, along with a comparison of the achievements under the program compared with the goals. This committee shall meet with the coordinator, who shall generate a report for the city manager, mayor and council within 14 days of each quarterly meeting. (k)	Continuing obligations of VSEBs and graduation. The certification status of all VSEBs shall be reviewed annually by the program coordinator through recertification application. Refer to subsection 37-34(h). (l)	Decertification, denial and appeal procedure. (1)	The DCMA or designee may move to decertify a VSEB that repeatedly fails to honor quotations in good faith, or otherwise comply with VSEB program requirements. (2)	A firm that has been denied certification or recertification or been decertified may appeal the denial or decertification as follows: a.	Within 15 days of receipt of denial of certification or recertification, or notice of intent to decertify, the firm may appeal such action in writing within 15 days to the office of the DCMA or designee. b.	An informal hearing shall be held by the DCMA, at which the firm may present additional facts and evidence in support of its eligibility. The DCMA may request the attendance of any witness and production of any documents concerning the applicant's affairs. The applicant's failure to comply promptly with these requests may be grounds for denial of the appeal. c.	The DCMA or designee shall determine the firm's eligibility on the basis of the information provided at the hearing. The DCNA's written decision shall be communicated to the firm within ten days of the hearing. d.	The presumption that the decertified firm is eligible shall remain in effect until the city renders a final decision. e.	A firm denied or found to be ineligible may not apply for certification for one year after the effective date of the final decision. (3)	A third party may challenge the eligibility of an applicant for certification or a certified firm. The presumption that the challenged firm is eligible shall remain in effect until the city renders a final decision. a.	The challenge shall be made in writing to the coordinator and shall include all information relied upon by the challenging party. b.	The DCMA or designee shall notify the challenged firm in writing of the challenge, identify the challenging party and summarize the grounds for the challenge. The notice may also require the challenged firm to provide the DCMA, within a reasonable time, any information requested to permit the DCMA to evaluate the eligibility of the firm. (Ord. No. 2009-40, 9-24-2009)
Secs. 37-38—37-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION AREA ENTERPRISE ZONE 
Sec. 37-61. - Findings of fact.     In the geographic area known as the neighborhood revitalization area enterprise zone expansion herein described in Exhibit A, a copy of which is attached to Ord. No. 2013-6 and hereby incorporated by reference, in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 36-88-6 and is subsequently amended, the following findings of fact are made: (1)	Pervasive poverty. The City of Valdosta suffers from pervasive poverty that is widespread throughout the nominated and surrounding areas and is evidenced and established by the following criteria: a.	In the following nominated Census Tract for Lowndes County, Georgia, the poverty levels exceed 15 percent as reported in the 2010 U.S. Census, prepared by the U.S. Bureau of Census (2010): 1.	Census Tract 108.00: 33.7 percent persons with income to poverty ratio <1.0.2.	Census Tract 114.02: 24.2 percent persons with income to poverty ratio <1.0.(2)	Unemployment. The nominated areas suffer from an average unemployment rate of 15.7 percent, which is 174 percent higher than the Georgia average rate of unemployment of 9.0 percent. (3)	General distress. The nominated areas suffer from general distress and adverse conditions as evidenced from data collected in February and March 2013. Indicators of distress and adverse conditions are outlined as follows: a.	A windshield survey of the nominated area on March 1, 2013 indicated that an average of 77.5 percent of the area's buildings showed signs of dilapidation, abandonment, and/or obsolescence. b.	The U.S. Census population data for Census Tract 108.00 shows a decline in population of 67 percent for the nominated area from 2000 to 2010. c.	The area experienced a 165 percent average increase in crimes from 2010 to 2011.(4)	Underdevelopment. The nominated areas suffer from underdevelopment, as evidenced by Valdosta building permit data collected for the years 2009, 2010, and 2011, which indicated that development activity in the nominated areas is more than ten percent lower than development activity elsewhere in the city. (5)	General blight. The nominated areas suffer from general blight as evidenced by an inclusion of the entire area within the designated urban redevelopment area as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-61-2(20) for which the Valdosta Urban Redevelopment Plan was adopted on March 5, 2009. (Ord. No. 2013-6, § 1, 4-11-2013)
Sec. 37-62. - Qualifications.     Based upon the findings of fact set forth in section 37-61 of this article the mayor and city council find that the neighborhood revitalization area enterprise zone expansion meets the qualifications of the Enterprise Zone Act. (Ord. No. 2013-6, § 2, 4-11-2013)
Sec. 37-63. - Designation.     In order to alleviate the above conditions the mayor and city council hereby designates the area as described in Exhibit A (attached to Ord. No. 2013-6) as the "neighborhood revitalization area enterprise zone expansion," attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein, as an amendment to the neighborhood revitalization area enterprise zone. (Ord. No. 2013-6, § 3, 4-11-2013)
Sec. 37-64. - Authorized agency.     The mayor and city council shall be the authorized agency to act in all matters pertaining to enterprise zones and reserves the power to grant the incentives listed below to qualifying businesses or qualifying service enterprises in accordance with the authorization granted local governments in the administration of the enterprise zone in the Enterprise Zone Employment Act. Qualifying businesses or service enterprises shall be new businesses or the expansion of an existing business that is located within an enterprise zone and meets other eligibility criteria as determined by the mayor and city council. (Ord. No. 2013-6, § 4, 4-11-2013)
Sec. 37-65. - Exemptions.     The mayor and city council may exempt qualifying businesses and service enterprises as outlined in the Act from state and municipal ad valorem property taxes, excluding property taxes imposed by school districts, that would otherwise be levied on the qualifying business and service enterprises in accordance with a schedule not to exceed the schedule as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-3, and meet the qualifying criteria outlined in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-4. (Ord. No. 2013-6, § 5, 4-11-2013)
Sec. 37-66. - Incentives. (a)	The mayor and city council may grant other incentives, as provided by O.C.G.A. §§ 36-88-7 and 36-88-9, and as may be subsequently amended from time to time. Such incentives will be negotiated by the mayor and city council on a case-by-case basis and may include, but not be limited to, exemptions from any or all of the following: (1)	Occupation taxes.(2)	Business license administrative fees.(3)	Building permit fees.(4)	Sign permit fees.(5)	Planning and zoning fees.(6)	Engineering fees.(7)	Other local fees authorized by the mayor and city council, as may be applicable.(b)	The mayor and city council may make determinations of eligibility for each business enterprise or service enterprise based on the quality and quantity of such additional economic stimulus as may be created within the City of Valdosta, which shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. Criteria for consideration may include, but will not be limited to, the following: (1)	The value of the business to the economic health and well-being of Valdosta and its citizens; (2)	Capital investment or reinvestment by the business equal to or greater than the amount of ad valorem tax abated over the first five years of the tax incentive; (3)	Locating in a vacant or historic building;(4)	Demolishing an obsolete, abandoned and/or deteriorating pre-existing structure;(5)	Enhancing the area by incorporating elements such as significant landscaping, area-compatible facade materials and exclusion of billboards on-premises; (6)	Assembling multiple tracts of land for one project;(7)	Creating jobs above the state threshold; and(8)	Creating jobs for residents of the designated revitalization area, enterprise zones and surrounding area. (Ord. No. 2013-6, § 6, 4-11-2013)
Sec. 37-67. - City liaison.     The mayor and city council further directs and designates its city manager as liaison for communication with the Georgia Department of Community Affairs; the Georgia Department of Economic Development; the business community; and all others to oversee enterprise zone activities and administration, and communication with qualified businesses, qualified service enterprises and qualifying residential developments as outlined in this article. (Ord. No. 2013-6, § 7, 4-11-2013)
Sec. 37-68. - Administrative powers.     The mayor and city council has the power to administer, require, and enforce compliance with the provisions of the ordinance and such administrative rules or regulations adopted hereinafter by way of resolution, including but not limited to, reports and data information from businesses within the enterprise zone to verify compliance with this article and state law. (Ord. No. 2013-6, § 8, 4-11-2013)
Sec. 37-69. - Contractual agreement.     A qualifying business enterprise or service enterprise shall enter into a contractual agreement setting forth the incentives offered to such entity and including the guidelines for the recapture, revocation, or reimbursement of the incentives should the terms of the contract be violated by the target business. (Ord. No. 2013-6, § 9, 4-11-2013)
Secs. 37-70—37-95. - Reserved. 
Chapter 38 - ELECTIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; mayor and council, § 2-31 et seq.State Law reference— Elections generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1 et seq.; Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.
Sec. 38-1. - Adoption of state rules, regulations.     The rules and regulations promulgated by the state election board that pertain to municipal elections, together with the provisions of the state municipal election code contained in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., are adopted as the rules, regulations and provisions that shall govern the conduct of municipal general and special elections in the city. 
Sec. 38-2. - Expenses.     Such funds as are necessary for the conduct of elections and for the performance of the duties that are specified by this chapter shall be budgeted and appropriated annually, and at other times when required. 
Sec. 38-3. - Polling places, voting precincts.     The polling places and voting precincts of the city shall be as shown on the official map on file in the office of the city clerk. State Law reference— Duty of superintendent to fix location of polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-265. 
Sec. 38-4. - Superintendent.     The council shall by ordinance as needed appoint a municipal election superintendent who shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in the Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. (Code 1976, § 2-2001)
Sec. 38-5. - Filing notice of candidacy; date.     The closing date for filing notice of candidacy by candidates or their agents shall be at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to general elections and at least ten but not more than 30 days prior to special elections. (Code 1976, § 2-2002)
Sec. 38-6. - Oath of office following special election.     Persons elected to the office of mayor or councilmember at a special election shall take the oath of office prescribed in subsection 2.4(b) of the Charter at the first regular meeting of the mayor and council following such election. (Code 1976, § 2-2004)
Sec. 38-7. - Soliciting votes near voting place.     It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for any person to solicit votes in any manner or by any means or method or to distribute or display any campaign literature, booklet, pamphlet, card, sign or written or printed matter of any kind in support of any person, party or proposition in any election or primary held in and for the city within 250 feet of any voting place or building within which such voting place is located. (Code 1976, § 2-3005; Ord. No. 76-19, § 1, 5-5-1976)
Chapter 42 - ENVIRONMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 54; historical preservation, ch. 58; landscape development, ch. 62; parks and recreation, ch. 74; solid waste, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; zoning ordinance, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B; airport zoning ordinance, app. C.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE CONTROL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within a motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler that causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c).
Sec. 42-31. - Persistent and excessive noises. (a)	Purpose. This section is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Valdosta, Georgia through the control of noise. It is the intent of this article to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals, businesses and the community as a whole through loss of enjoyment of life and property and disruption to the conduct of business. It is further the purpose to realize that acceptable noise standards vary throughout the city and are impacted by the type of primary use in those areas. (b)	Definitions. Plainly audible shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing source which can be can be heard by the auditory senses of a person at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the specific sound-producing source. Residential dwelling unit shall mean buildings or portions thereof such as homes, townhouses, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums, apartments, hotel and motel rooms, bed and breakfast rooms and other similar structures which contain habitable rooms for occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein. Outdoor entertainment shall mean any live act, including but not limited to, vocalists, actors, dancers, floor shows, instrumentalists, and reproduced music played by disc jockeys occurring outside the main structure housing the business. Zoning districts shall mean the applicable zoning district reflected by the official zoning map of the City of Valdosta, as amended. (c)	Sound measurement standards. For the purposes of this section "plainly audible" shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing source which can be heard by the auditory senses of a person at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the specific sound-producing source. If the sound-producing source is located on private property, the distance shall be measured from the applicable property line from which the sounds are emitting. If the sound-producing source is located on public property, the distance shall be measured from the sound-producing source itself. For music and other noise, words and phrases need not be discernible and bass reverberations are included. (d)	General prohibited conduct. (1)	Unless otherwise provided herein, no person, business, company or entity shall produce, create or amplify any noise or sound, either vocally or by any device, instrument, equipment or machine, any sound or noise that is plainly audible at a distance greater than those specified in subsection (e) below. (2)	Unless otherwise provided herein no person, business, company or entity shall allow their property, or property under their control, to be used by others to produce, create or amplify any noise or sound, either vocally or by any device, instrument, equipment or machine, any sound or noise that is plainly audible at a distance greater than those specified in subsection (e) below. (e)	Distances and times. (1)	Environmental Resource (E-R), Estate Residential (R-E), Single-Family Residential (R-25, R-15, R-10, R-6), Multi-Family Residential (R-M), and Residential Professional (R-P) zoning districts: For E-R, R-E, R-25, R-15, R-10, R-6, R-M, and R-P zoning districts, the measurement of the noise or sound prohibited in subsection (d) shall be measured in accordance with the following timeframes and distances: Sunday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:100 feet 7:01 a.m.—10:59 p.m.:300 feet 11:00 p.m.—11:59 p.m.:100 feetMonday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:100 feet 7:01 a.m.—10:59 p.m.:300 feet 11:00 p.m.—11:59 p.m.:100 feetTuesday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:100 feet 7:01 a.m.—10:59 p.m.:300 feet 11:00 p.m.—11:59 p.m.:100 feetWednesday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:100 feet 7:01 a.m.—10:59 p.m.:300 feet 11:00 p.m.—11:59 p.m.:100 feetThursday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:100 feet 7:01 a.m.—10:59 p.m.:300 feet 11:00 p.m.—11:59 p.m.:100 feetFriday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:100 feet 7:01 a.m.—11:59 p.m.:300 feetSaturday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:100 feet 7:01 a.m.—11:59 p.m.:300 feet (2)	Office Professional (O-P), Neighborhood Commercial (C-N), Community Commercial (C-C), Highway Commercial (C-H), Downtown Commercial (C-D), Adult Commercial (C-A) zoning districts: For O-P, C-N, C-C, C-H, C-D, C-A zoning districts, the measurement of the noise or sound prohibited in subsection (d) shall be measured in accordance with the following timeframes and distances: Sunday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:200 feet 7:01 a.m.—10:59 p.m.:450 feet 11:00 p.m.—11:59 p.m.:200 feetMonday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:200 feet 7:01 a.m.—10:59 p.m.:450 feet 11:00 p.m.—11:59 p.m.:200 feetTuesday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:200 feet 7:01 a.m.—10:59 p.m.:450 feet 11:00 p.m.—11:59 p.m.:200 feetWednesday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:200 feet 7:01 a.m.—10:59 p.m.:450 feet 11:00 p.m.—11:59 p.m.:200 feetThursday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:200 feet 7:01 a.m.—10:59 p.m.:450 feet 11:00 p.m.—11:59 p.m.:200 feetFriday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:200 feet 7:01 a.m.—11:59 p.m.:450 feetSaturday  12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m.:200 feet 7:01 a.m.—11:59 p.m.:450 feet (f)	Multi-family dwellings, apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, hotels, motels or other similar residential dwelling units. In addition to the general prohibition stated in subsections (d) and (e), it also shall be unlawful for any person to produce, create or amplify any noise or sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any other person at a distance of five feet beyond the adjoining party wall or structural boundary between any residential dwelling units with adjoining points of contact. When a residential dwellings unit has an adjoining property line wall, party wall or structural boundary that adjoins another structure that is not considered a residential dwelling unit, this subsection shall not apply. (g)	Downtown Commercial (C-D) zoning district. In addition the foregoing, the following activity is prohibited in C-D zoning: (1)	Outdoor entertainment on the premises of private businesses shall only be allowed to occur between the hours of 11:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays, and 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. (2)	No individuals shall play music in any automobile on public or private parking lots accessible to the public which is plainly audible for more than 100 feet. (3)	Businesses allowing music shall be required to keep all doors closed during said times while music is playing except for the ingress and egress of patrons. Doors shall not be propped open or be allowed to remain open. (h)	Exclusions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the following: (1)	Noises or sounds made by domestic animals;(2)	Sound volumes produced by radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within a motor vehicle on a public street or highway, which sound is controlled by the O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; (3)	Noises or sounds made by law enforcement and other public safety officials performing their public functions; (4)	Trains, trucks, aircraft, construction equipment, and site development or maintenance activities operating during approved hours; (5)	Organized school and college sporting events or practice including marching bands;(6)	Burglar alarms;(7)	Church chimes or church bells; or(8)	Outdoor concerts, special events or festivals permitted by the office of the city manager. (Ord. No. 2005-72, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2014-12, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-32. - Enumeration.     The acts contained in this article, among others, shall constitute a violation of this article; but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
Sec. 42-33. - Horns; signaling devices.     The following shall be a violation of this article: (1)	The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city except as a danger warning. (2)	The creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable period of time. (3)	The use of any signaling device, except a police whistle or one operated by hand or electricity. (4)	The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust.(5)	The use of any signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason.
Sec. 42-34. - Radios, phonographs, other machines or devices that produce or reproduce sound.     The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener shall be a violation of this article. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. (Code 1976, § 11-2010)
Sec. 42-35. - Loudspeakers; amplifiers; other devices for production or reproduction of sound for advertising.     The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure without a special permit from the city clerk or city council shall be a violation of this article. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer, in person, and without the aid of any mechanical device. (Code 1976, §§ 11-2008, 11-2009)
Sec. 42-36. - Yelling; shouting; hooting; whistling; singing.     Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 42-37. - Animals and birds.     The keeping of any animal or bird that will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise shall be a violation of this article. Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14. 
Sec. 42-38. - Steam whistle.     The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authorities shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 42-39. - Exhausts.     The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 42-40. - Defect in vehicle or load.     The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise shall be a violation of this article. Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
Sec. 42-41. - Loading; unloading; opening boxes.     The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 42-42. - Construction or repairing of buildings.     The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair, of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and sunset on weekdays, except on urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the city building official, shall be a violation of this article. Such permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and may be renewed by the building inspecting department for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building inspector determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways from sunset to 7:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the building inspector may grant permission for such work to be done from sunset to 7:00 a.m., upon application made at the time the permit for the work is applied for or during the progress of the work. Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Sec. 42-43. - Schools; courts; churches; hospitals.     The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while they are in session or adjacent to any hospital, and which unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed about such institutions indicating the presence of such institutions, shall be a violation of this article. (Code 1976, § 11-2007)
Sec. 42-44. - Hawkers; peddlers; vendors.     The shouting and crying of hawkers, peddlers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood shall be a violation of this article. Cross reference— Peddlers and solicitors, § 22-191 et seq. 
Sec. 42-45. - Noises to attract attention.     The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale by creation of noise shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 42-46. - Transportation of metal rails, pillars or columns.     The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places shall be a violation of this article. Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
Sec. 42-47. - Piledrivers, hammers, other such appliances.     The operation from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise without a special permit from the building inspector shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 42-48. - Blowers.     The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases of fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise, shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 42-49. - Sound trucks.     The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes and the use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during such hours or in such places or with such volume as would constitute such use a public nuisance shall be a violation of this article. Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
Secs. 42-50—42-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 42-81. - Definition.     A nuisance is anything within the city that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this article. Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 42-82. - Enumeration of nuisances. (a)	The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. (b)	The following are declared to be nuisances:(1)	Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the city. (2)	Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood. (3)	Discharging of offensive matter. The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. (4)	Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. (5)	Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United States Geological Survey shall be the standard for such grading; and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. (6)	Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. (7)	Nonconforming structures, machines, etc. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or city ordinance. (8)	Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. (9)	Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. (10)	Depositing trash, garbage, refuse, etc., on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the city or which unreasonably annoys others. (11)	Unoccupied buildings. Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed. (12)	Unsafe vehicles, machinery, etc. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards). (13)	Gutters or spouts. Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the city. (Code 1976, §§ 11-4001—11-4004)
Sec. 42-83. - Prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. 
Sec. 42-84. - Issuance of summons for abatement.     Whenever any nuisance exists within the city, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the city that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the city, and the owner or other responsible person refuses or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate the nuisance, the chief of police, or the officer having responsibility for enforcement, may issue a summons and cause the nuisance to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts of ordinances claimed to be violated, and requiring such person to appear before the municipal judge at a time, date and place specified in the summons, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
Sec. 42-85. - Order for abatement. (a)	If the municipal judge at the hearing required by section 42-84 shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code or the ordinances of the city is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his order and judgment so finding and shall order the property owner or other responsible person to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated, including but not limited to rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property owner or other responsible person shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the city shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever action is deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition; and the expense shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for city taxes. (b)	Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of city taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as in the case of city taxes. State Law reference— Authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 42-86. - Special provisions for old, unused, stripped, junked automobiles. (a)	Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within the corporate limits of this city is a nuisance. (b)	The owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of this city upon which the storage of property is made, and also the owners and/or lessees of the property involved in such storage shall jointly and severally abate the nuisance by the prompt removal of the property into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes, if within the corporate limits of the city, or otherwise by removing it to a location outside the corporate limits. 
Sec. 42-87. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger.     Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in sections 42-84 and 42-85. 
Sec. 42-88. - Service on nonresidents and others.     Whenever it shall be necessary for the city to proceed under sections 42-84 and 42-85 and the owner of the property or other responsible person resides outside the city limits, or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 42-85 shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved, and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the city once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to the hearing. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the city limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
Sec. 42-89. - Other powers preserved.     Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his order. 
Secs. 42-90—42-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEGETATION 
Sec. 42-111. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions. (a)	Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants growing to a height exceeding eight inches anywhere in the city are declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this division. (b)	Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section. (c)	The provisions of this division shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, and to the original city lots. They shall not apply to undeveloped areas of unsubdivided land within the city. (Code 1976, §§ 11-2001, 11-2005; Ord. No. 97-14, 4-10-1997)
Sec. 42-112. - Maximum height of weeds, grass, etc.     It shall be unlawful for the owner of improved property or previously improved property in the city, whether zoned residential, commercial, industrial or other, to have, place or allow grass, weeds and/or other undergrowth to exceed the height of eight inches or more on such property, including but not limited to, the front, side or rear yard, or right-of-way. Notwithstanding the above, grass, weeds and/or other undergrowth of a height of eight inches or more are declared to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. (Code 1976, § 11-2001; Ord. No. 97-14, 4-10-1997; Ord. No. 2010-30, 9-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-37, 11-10-2011) 
Sec. 42-113. - Notice to abate; violation of section 42-112. (a)	In the event of a violation of section 42-112, the record owner of said property shall be given notice to abate said nuisance within ten business days. Said notice shall be served by: (1) certified mail, return receipt requested forwarded to the record owner(s) of said property; and (2) physical posting of the subject property. The mailed notice shall provide a description of the location of the property, identification of this Code section and nature of the violation, and contact information of the enforcing agency. Said notices shall also state that unless corrective action is taken within ten business days from the date of the notices, the city will begin abatement proceeding against the property in accordance with section 42-114. (b)	If, in a calendar year, a property owner who has received the notice provided for in subsection (a) on a property and the subject property is determined by the Valdosta Community Protection Division to be in violation of section 42-112 for a second or subsequent time, the city may forgo the notice provisions specified in subsection (a) and proceed immediately to abatement proceeding as provided for in section 42-114. (Ord. No. 2006-46, 8-10-2006; Ord. No. 2011-37, 11-10-2011)
Sec. 42-114. - Hearing and abatement. (a)	Upon the second or subsequent violation of section 42-112 or the failure to comply with a notice of abatement pursuant to subsection 42-113(a), a citation shall be filed in the Municipal Court of the City of Valdosta and hearing scheduled to determine whether a violation of section 42-112 has occurred and/or whether said nuisance shall be abated. The property owner shall be served with the citation in the following manner: (1) certified mail, return receipt requested forwarded to the record owner(s) of said property; (2) first class mail to the persons in possession of the subject property; and (3) physical posting of the subject property. The citation shall provide a description of the location of the property, identification of the Code section and nature of the violation, and contact information of the enforcing agency. The citation shall specify the time and date of the hearing which shall be no less than 15 days prior to the date of certified mailing advising of the hearing date. Abating the nuisance after the filing of the citation shall not relieve the property owner from appearing at said hearing. (b)	If the property owner is found in violation of section 42-112, he/she may be fined in accordance with section 42-117, ordered to abate the violation within a reasonable time or a combination of both. If the property owner fails to abate said violation as ordered by the court, the city shall be allowed to enter said property to abate same. If the property owner fails to appear at said hearing after proper notice, and if the violation is proven by competent evidence, in addition to fines, the city may ask to immediately abate such nuisance. (c)	Costs of abatement incurred by the city shall be recorded and billed to the property owner. Failure to pay the costs within 30 days shall result in a lien being placed upon the real property. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of costs in the real estate records maintained by the Clerk of Superior Court of Lowndes County, Georgia. (Code 1976, § 11-2004; Ord. No. 2011-37, 11-10-2011)
Sec. 42-115. - Remedies.     The remedies provided in this division are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this article. Nothing in this division shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code, all ordinances, laws or regulations of the city, or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance; and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
Sec. 42-116. - Award of contracts for clearing of lots by city.     Prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, the city may obtain bids from contractors or other qualified persons for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation not in excess of two inches in diameter, and for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation in excess of two inches but not in excess of four inches in diameter; and the mayor and council shall award a contract to the lowest and best bidder, such contract to remain in effect during the ensuing fiscal year. 
Sec. 42-117. - Violations and contempt of abatement order. (a)	If the property owner is found to be in violation of section 42-112, the property owner shall be fined $150.00 for the first offense. If a property owner has had other violations of section 42-112 at the subject property or other properties within the calendar year, he/she shall be fined as follows: 2nd offense: $300.00; 3rd and subsequent offenses: $500.00. The date of offenses shall be measured from the date of the citations issued to the property owner. (b)	In addition to the fines referenced in subsection (a), nothing contained herein shall prevent or prohibit the municipal court from punishing by its contempt powers any owner that willfully fails or refuses to comply with an abatement or other order of the court. (Ord. No. 2011-37, 11-10-2011)
Secs. 42-118—42-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 
Sec. 42-141. - Nuisance declared.     A violation of any provision of this division is a nuisance. 
Sec. 42-142. - Keeping water in which mosquitoes may breed. (a)	It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed unless such collection of water is so treated as to effectually prevent such breeding. (b)	The collections of water prohibited by subsection (a) of this section shall be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, or other similar water containers. 
Sec. 42-143. - Treatment of collections of water.     The method of treatment of any collections of water that are specified in section 42-142 directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the health officer and may be one or more of the following: (1)	Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way, or with any other material that will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. (2)	Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough drying and cleaning. (3)	Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the health officer.(4)	Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven days. (5)	Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish. (6)	Filling and draining to the satisfaction of the health officer, his agent or accredited representative. (7)	Proper disposal by removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
Sec. 42-144. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding.     The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there; and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the health officer, his authorized agent or representative, shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
Sec. 42-145. - Failure to remedy conditions after notice.     Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes, within three days after due notice has been given to him, the city marshal or his authorized agent is authorized to do so; and all necessary costs incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. 
Sec. 42-146. - Right of entry of city marshal.     For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this division, the city marshal, or his duly accredited agent under his authority, may at all reasonable times lawfully enter in and upon any premises or structures within his jurisdiction. However, the city marshal, or his duly accredited agent under his authority, is required to seek permission from the owner, authorized agent, or tenant to gain entry onto private property. If permission is not given, the city marshal, or his duly accredited agent under his authority must seek an administrative search warrant from the municipal court judge or seek other remedies that might be available to the jurisdictions. 
Secs. 42-147—42-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94.State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.
Sec. 42-171. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer which: (1)	Has been left by the owner or some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman, or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of 30 days after the time agreed upon; or within 30 days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer, repairman, or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within 30 days after the completion of necessary repairs; (2)	Is left unattended on a public street, road, highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when it reasonably appears to an enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; (3)	Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of an enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim to the vehicle; (4)	Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without the owner's having made claim to the vehicle; or (5)	Has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim to the vehicle.     Motor vehicle or vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer.     Owner means the owner, lessor, lessee, security interest holders, and all lienholders as shown on the records of the state department of revenue. (Code 1976, § 11-2013; Ord. No. 86-42, 8-7-1986)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. 
Sec. 42-172. - Prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise, to store or deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, any abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the corporate limits of the city. (Code 1976, § 11-2018; Ord. No. 86-42, 8-7-1986)
Sec. 42-173. - Exception.     Nothing in this division shall apply to any vehicle in an enclosed building or any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of such enterprise or to any vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. (Code 1976, § 11-2014; Ord. No. 86-42, 8-7-1986)
Sec. 42-174. - Removal—Required.     Any abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle shall be removed upon ten days' written notice to the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the motor vehicle is stored or deposited, or to the owner if the identity of such owner of the motor vehicle can be ascertained through license plates or otherwise. If such motor vehicle is not removed after ten days' written notice, the police department or city marshal of the city shall remove or cause the removal and sale at the cost of the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of such motor vehicle, if such owner can be ascertained. Sale shall be made to the highest of two bids obtained from dealers in such property. (Code 1976, § 11-2014; Ord. No. 86-42, 8-7-1986)
Sec. 42-175. - Same—Notice to owner and state. (a)	Any person who removes a motor vehicle from public or private property at the request of someone other than the owner or who stores any motor vehicle which has been left unattended shall seek the identity of the owner of such vehicle and shall, within 15 days of the day such vehicle became an abandoned motor vehicle, give notice in writing to the state department of revenue and the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, stating the manufacturer's vehicle identification number, the license number, the fact that such vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle, and the present location of such vehicle, and requesting the name and address of all owners, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of such vehicle. If a person removing or storing the vehicle has knowledge of facts which reasonably indicate that the vehicle is registered or titled in a certain other state, he shall check the motor vehicle records of that other state in the attempt to ascertain the identity of the owner of the vehicle. (b)	Upon ascertaining the owner of such motor vehicle, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall, within three days, by certified or registered mail, notify the owner, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of the location of such vehicle and of the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of it not redeemed. (c)	If the identity of the owner of such motor vehicle cannot be ascertained, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall place an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such vehicle was obtained or, if there is no newspaper in the county, shall post such advertisement at the county courthouse in such place where other public notices are posted. Such advertisement shall run in the newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks or shall remain posted at the courthouse for two consecutive weeks. The advertisement shall contain a complete description of the motor vehicle, its license and manufacturer's vehicle identification numbers, the location where such vehicle was initially left unattended by the owner, the present location of such vehicle, and the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. (Code 1976, §§ 11-2014, 11-2015; Ord. No. 86-42, 8-7-1986)State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2. 
Sec. 42-176. - Lien for charges.     All towing, storage, advertising and other charges incurred by the city or imposed upon the owner or operator of the vehicle in connection with a vehicle towed or impounded under the provisions of this division shall constitute a lien upon such vehicle; and no such impounded vehicle shall have been paid. (Code 1976, § 11-2016; Ord. No. 86-42, 8-7-1986)
Sec. 42-177. - Redemption of vehicle.     The owner of any vehicle removed pursuant to this division may regain possession of the vehicle by paying to the city all reasonable costs incidental to the removal and storage of such vehicle as provided in this division. (Code 1976, § 11-2017; Ord. No. 86-42, 8-7-1986)
Secs. 42-178—42-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Cross reference— Floods, ch. 50.State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 42-211. - Title.     This article will be known as "City of Valdosta Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." (Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5001, 6-24-2004)
Sec. 42-212. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Best management practices (BMP's) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specification contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b).     Board means the board of natural resources.     Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.     Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission.     Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation.     Department means the department of ntural resources.     Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources.     District means the Alapaha soil and water conservation district.     Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources.     Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.     Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.     Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan".     Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground.     Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design.     Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.     Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.     Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 42-213(4).     Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot sakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot.     Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a).     Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins.     Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.     Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present.     Operator means the party or parties that have: (1) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (2) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions.     Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article.     Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.     Qualified personnel means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19.     Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.     Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.     Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity.     Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Alapaha soil and water conservation district.     Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.     State general permit means the national pollution discharge elimination system general permit for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f).     State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation.     Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are rip-rap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b)).     Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs.     Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: (1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover;(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b)).     Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or cash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.     Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. (Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5002, 6-24-2004)
Sec. 42-213. - Permit application exemptions.     This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: (1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act"; (2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying;(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; (4)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, definitions, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; (5)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 42-233(a)(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; (6)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service of the United States Department of Agriculture; (7)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state toll-way authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state toll-way authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and toll-way authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority. The local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; (8)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power, except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and (9)	Any public water system reservoir.(Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5003, 6-24-2004; Ord. No. 2006-1, 1-19-2006)
Sec. 42-214. - Inspection and enforcement. (a)	The city engineer or his representative will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. (b)	The city engineer or his representative shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. (c)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purpose of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out this official duties. (d)	The district or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any country or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. (e)	The board, on or before December 31, 2003, shall promulgate rules and regulations setting forth the requirements and standards for certification and the procedures for certification of a local issuing authority. The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. (Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5007, 6-24-2004)
Sec. 42-215. - Penalties and incentives. (a)	Failure to obtain a permit. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining a permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. (b)	Stop work orders. (1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. (2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order. (3)	All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. (4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. (c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 42-261(b)(7). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. (d)	Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation or law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under the county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. (Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5008, 6-24-2004)
Sec. 42-216. - Education and certification.     After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5009, 6-24-2004)
Sec. 42-217. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. (a)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council within 15 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice to appeal. (b)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. (Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5010, 6-24-2004)
Sec. 42-218. - Liability. (a)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. (b)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (c)	No provision of this article shall permit any person to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. (Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5011, 6-24-2004)
Secs. 42-219—42-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 42-231. - Generally.     Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of sections 42-232 and 42-233. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. (Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5004-1, 6-24-2004)
Sec. 42-232. - Best management practices. (a)	Best management practices as set forth in this section and section 42-233 shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). Any land disturbance activities associated with the construction of single-family homes shall adhere to best management practices. (b)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. (c)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. (d)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. (Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5004-2, 6-24-2004)
Sec. 42-233. - Scope. (a)	The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: (1)	Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; (2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum;(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; (4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented;(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; (6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; (8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; (9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this section, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; (10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations of the sloping of fills; (11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property;(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; (13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; (14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 42-232(b); (15)	Except as provided in subsection (a)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this section. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is let in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines; and(16)	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 1 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act" (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed or vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities; provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines.(b)	Nothing contained in this article shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 42-232 and 42-233. (c)	The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5004-3, 6-24-2004)
Secs. 42-234—42-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PROCEDURES 
Sec. 42-261. - Application/permit process. (a)	Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision regulations, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. (b)	Application requirements. (1)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity. (2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of division 2 of this article. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. A hydrology report and storm drainage plans are also required. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. (3)	An application fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges in the office of the city clerk, shall be charged. (4)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. (5)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by division 2 of this article, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(7) of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. (6)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), within three years prior to the date of filling of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. (7)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the size of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. (c)	Plan requirements. (1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in division 2 of this article. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," (specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b)) published by the commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. (2)	Data required for site plan:a.	Narrative or notes, and other information: notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. b.	Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project.c.	Name, address, and phone number of the property owner.d.	Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. e.	Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres.f.	Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities". g.	Stormwater and sedimentation management systems storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. h.	Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year round seeding. i.	Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow the guidelines set forth in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b)). j.	Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (3)	The certified plans shall contain:a.	Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north.b.	Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets.c.	Boundary line survey.d.	Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary.e.	Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following:Map ScaleGround SlopeContour Interval(in Feet)1 inch equals 100 feetor larger scaleFlat 0—2%Rolling 2—8%Steep 8%+0.5 or 11 or 22, 5 or 10  f.	Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. g.	Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas.h.	Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. i.	Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable.j.	Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," Chapter 6 (specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b)). (4)	Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. (d)	Permits. (1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, were necessary. (2)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by division 2 of this article, are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(7) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. (3)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. (4)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. (5)	No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the tax assessor that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. (Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5005, 6-24-2004)
Sec. 42-262. - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permitting. (a)	Exclusions. Those land-disturbing activities not subject to regulation under the state general permit are exempt from the fees required by this section. (b)	NPDES general permit for construction activity fees. The requirements of this subsection are applicable to primary permittees that own or operate a site at which land-disturbing activities occur in the state. (1)	For the purpose of determining the disturbed acreage to which the fees of this subsection apply, the primary permittee shall use the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan created in compliance with the state general permit showing the activities to be undertaken by any person at the site. This acreage shall be measured by methods that provide an appropriate measurement of the land area to the closest tenth of an acre of land-disturbing activity proposed. (2)	Any primary permittee who has submitted a notice of intent to disturb land under a state general permit, or who submits a notice of intent to disturb land under a state general permit, shall submit a fee on the schedules described in this section which will cover the fee requirements for all stages or phases of development or land-disturbing activity described in the notice of intent. (c)	Fee schedule for land-disturbing activities in a jurisdiction that is not regulated by a local issuing authority, after December 31, 2003. (1)	Determination of applicable fee. Each primary permittee shall determine the proposed extent of land-disturbing activities to be performed at the site covered by the permit in number of acres or fraction of acres to the nearest tenth-acre to be disturbed. When a primary permittee pays the applicable fee of this subsection, that primary permittee shall not pay any additional state general permit fees to the state unless the scope of work covered under the permit so paid for is increased. For each acre of proposed land-disturbing activity, each primary permittee shall pay the fee established by this section prior to the commencement of any land-disturbing activity. (2)	Primary permittees shall pay the state $80.00 per acre of land disturbed in a jurisdiction that is not regulated by a local issuing authority. (d)	Fee schedule for land-disturbing activities in a jurisdiction that is regulated by a local issuing authority, after December 31, 2003. (1)	Determination of applicable fee. Each primary permittee shall determine the proposed extent of land-disturbing activities to be performed at the site covered by the permit in number of acres or fraction of acres to the nearest tenth-acre to be disturbed. When a primary permittee pays the applicable fee of this subsection, that primary permittee shall not pay any additional state general permit fee to the state unless the scope of work covered under the permit so paid for is increased. For each acre of land disturbed, each primary permittee shall pay the fee established by this section prior to the commencement of any land-disturbing activity. (2)	Primary permittees shall pay the state $40.00 per acre of land disturbed in a jurisdiction that is regulated by a local issuing authority. (3)	Primary permittees shall pay the local issuing authority $40.00 per acre of land disturbed in a jurisdiction that is regulated by a local issuing authority. (e)	Fee schedule for land-disturbing activities performed by permittees exempt from local issuing authority regulation pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17, after December 31, 2003. (1)	Determination of applicable fee. Each primary permittee shall determine the proposed extent of land-disturbing activities to be performed at the site covered by the permit in number of acres or fraction of acres to the nearest tenth-acre to be disturbed. When a primary permittee pays the applicable fee of this subsection, that primary permittee shall not pay any additional state general permit fee to the state unless the scope of work covered under the permit so paid for is increased. For each acre of land disturbed, each primary permittee shall pay the fee established by this section prior to the commencement of any land-disturbing activity. (2)	Primary permittees shall pay the state $80.00 per acre of land disturbed regardless of jurisdiction. (f)	Payment of land-disturbing activity fees. (1)	Payment due date. All land-disturbing activity fees required by this section shall be paid to the division or to the local issuing authority, as appropriate, prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities at the site. Persons who fail to make appropriate payments and who commence work without payment shall be in violation of the state general permit and the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-20 et seq. (2)	Failure to make payments required under these rules is a violation of these rules for each day on which land-disturbing activity occurs on the site. (g)	Fees for land-disturbing activities by out-of-state businesses. The requirements of this subsection are applicable to any person performing land-disturbing activities in the state. Out-of-state businesses shall comply with all applicable state and local laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. No. 2004-28, § 9-5006, 6-24-2004)
Secs. 42-263—42-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94.State Law reference— Scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1.
Sec. 42-301. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     End user means the last person who uses the scrap tires, chips, crumb rubber or similar materials to make a product with economic value or, in the case of energy recovery, the person who utilizes the heat content or other forms of energy from the incineration or pyrolysis of waste tires, chips or similar materials.     EPD means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division.     Mixed tires means a heterogenous group of tires consisting of used, retreadable casings and scrap tires.     Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. Retail tire dealers may also be but are not limited to manufacturers, wholesalers and others who sell new replacement tires to the ultimate consumer.     Retreadable casing means a tire which has the quality and soundness of the tire structure to accept a retread or repair and provide additional service and is destined for retreading.     Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect.     Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in this section for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user or disposal facility.     Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include but are not limited to retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations and city, county or state governments.     Scrap tire processing means any method, system or other treatment designed to change the physical form, size or chemical content of scrap tires and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, buildings and other elements). Processing includes but is not limited to shredding, baling, recycling or sorting scrap tires.     Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the EPD to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing.     Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires.     Tire retreader means any person actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface treat and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire.     Ultimate consumer means the last person who receives and uses a new replacement tire. Ultimate consumers may be but are not limited to: (1)	An individual consumer;(2)	A leasing company purchasing tires from retailers for their vehicle fleet;(3)	A private company purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet; or(4)	A governmental agency purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet.    Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of 2/32 inch of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose. It must be inventoried and marketed in substantially the same fashion as a new tire, the dealer must be able to provide satisfactory evidence to the EPD and the special enforcement division that a market exists, and that the used tires are in fact being marketed. (Ord. No. 95-27, § 4-3001, 8-24-1995)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-302. - Scrap tire generators. (a)	Any person who generates scrap tires shall have a scrap tire generator identification number issued by the EPD. The identification number shall be used on scrap tire shipment manifests. Separate identification numbers shall be required for generators having multiple generation locations. (b)	Generators shall initiate a three-part manifest to transport scrap tires from the point of generation to an end user or to a scrap tire processing or disposal facility approved by the EPD. The manifest shall include the following information: (1)	Name and identification number of the generator;(2)	Number of total tons (accurate to within ten percent of actual number) of scrap tires to be transported; (3)	Name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier;(4)	Date of transport; and(5)	Destination of scrap tires.(c)	If a generator chooses to use tons of tires rather than actual numbers of tires on the manifest for passenger and truck tires, the following conversion factor must be used: (1)	Passenger tires, 2,000 pounds (one ton) = 100 tires @ 20 pounds per tire.(2)	Truck tires, 2,000 pounds (one ton) = 20 tires @ 100 pounds per tire.(d)	Unless otherwise approved in writing by the EPD, generators shall assure that any person collecting and transporting scrap tires holds a valid scrap tire carrier permit issued by the EPD. (e)	Generators shall maintain receipts (copies of the completed manifest) for a period of three years. (f)	A generator shall report to the special enforcement division any carrier who fails to return a properly completed manifest to the generator within 30 days of scrap tire pickup as provided for in section EPD rule 391-4-19. Such report shall be filed within 30 days of failure of the carrier to comply. (g)	Generators may choose to determine whether a tire, because of wear, damage or defect, is not suitable for classification as a used tire or retreadable casing. However, if a generator fails to sort or delineate which tires are "used," "retreadable casings," or "scrap tires," all tires transported shall be considered scrap tires and must be thus indicated on the shipment manifest. (Ord. No. 95-27, § 4-3002, 8-24-1995)
Sec. 42-303. - Scrap tire carriers.     Unless otherwise exempted, any person collecting or transporting scrap tires shall have a scrap tire carrier permit issued by the EPD. Those exempted from obtaining a scrap tire carrier permit are: (1)	Persons carrying only used tires or retreadable casings.(2)	A tire retailer or tire retreader transporting tires to or from a customer's place of operation or between branch offices of the tire retailer or tire retreader. (3)	A municipal solid waste collector holding a valid solid waste collection permit under authority of EPD rule 391-3-4-.19 whose primary business is the collection of municipal solid waste. (4)	A private individual transporting the individual's own scrap tires to a processor, permitted disposal facility, or other facility approved by the EPD. (5)	A company transporting the company's own tires to a processor for proper disposal, which company is not in the tire handling business; for example, a soft drink bottler who transports scrap tires generated by the bottler's own vehicle maintenance shop, or a company in the tire handling business who transports only its own scrap tires and which company generates less than 100 scrap tires per month. (6)	The United States, the state, or any county, municipality or public authority. Persons who generate less than 100 scrap tires per month and are exempt from having a carrier permit under this section are still required to comply with other applicable provisions of this article. (7)	Other persons, as approved by the EPD, on a one-time or temporary basis, as needed to further the intent of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. that scrap tires be reused or recycled rather than disposed of. (Ord. No. 95-27, § 4-3003, 8-24-1995)
Sec. 42-304. - Scrap tire storage. (a)	No person may store more than 200 scrap tires anywhere in the city. Any person storing in excess of 100 scrap tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. (b)	Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to:(1)	A solid waste disposal site permitted by the EPD if the permit authorizes the storage of scrap tires prior to their disposal; (2)	A tire retailer with not more than 2,000 scrap tires stored in a shipping container and not more than 1,000 scrap tires in storage, if such retailer complies with EPD rule 391-3-4-.19(3); (3)	A tire retreader with not more than 1,500 scrap tires in storage so long as the scrap tires are of the type the retreader is actively retreading; (4)	An auto salvage yard with not more than 500 scrap tires in storage; and(5)	A scrap tire processor approved by the EPD so long as the number of scrap tires in storage does not exceed the quantity approved by the EPD. (c)	Scrap tires illegally dumped or stored on private property shall be removed by the occupant, agent or owner of the property and transported to an end user, recycler, processor, sorter or disposal facility approved by the EPD. The person responsible for the abatement of illegally dumped or stored scrap tires shall retain copies of the manifest or receipt which shows the disposition of scrap tires. (Ord. No. 95-27, § 4-3004, 8-24-1995)
Sec. 42-305. - Criteria for approved processing, sorting and disposal facilities. (a)	Processing operations. Processing shall include but is not limited to shredding, chopping, chipping, baling, splitting and sorting operations, and pyrolysis, microwave and cryogenic operations. (1)	Scrap tire staged indoors will be managed under conditions that meet those in "The Standard for Storage of Rubber Tires," NFPA 231D-1986 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts. (2)	All scrap tire processing or disposal facilities which stage scrap tires or processed tires outdoors must comply with the following standards: a.	An outdoor scrap tire pile or processed tire pile will have no greater width than the following maximum dimensions: 1.	Width, 50 feet;2.	Area, 5,000 square feet; and3.	Height, 15 feet.b.	A 50-foot-wide fire lane will be placed around the perimeter of each scrap tire pile. Access to the fire lane for emergency vehicles must be unobstructed at all times. In the event of fire, the owner or operator shall, upon receipt of notification of a fire, immediately take all necessary steps to control and extinguish the fire, including all oil and other residue created by the fire. (b)	Staging standards. Processors staging scrap tires indoors and outdoors must meet the following standards: (1)	No operations involving the use of open flame will be conducted within 25 feet of a scrap tire pile. (2)	An approach and access road to the scrap tire processing facility will be kept passable for any motor vehicle at all times. (3)	Access to the facility will be controlled through the use of fences, gates or other means. (4)	An attendant will be present when the scrap tire processing facility is open for business if the facility receives tires from persons other than the operator of the facility. (5)	The facility will be bermed or given other adequate protection to keep liquid runoff from a potential tire fire entering waters of the state. (6)	Fire protection services for the facility will be assured through notification to local fire protection authorities. A fire safety survey will be conducted. (7)	Communication equipment will be maintained at the scrap tire processing facility to assure that the facility operator can contact local fire protection authorities in case of a fire. (8)	The scrap tire processing facility will be kept free of long grass, underbrush and other potentially flammable vegetation at all times. (9)	The operator of the facility will prepare and keep at the facility an emergency preparedness manual. The manual will be updated at least once annually or upon changes in operations at the site. The manual will contain the following elements: a.	A list of names and numbers of persons to be contacted in the event of a fire, flood or other emergency; b.	A list of the emergency response equipment at the facility, its location, and how it should be used in the event of a fire or other emergency; and c.	A description of the procedures that should be followed in the event of a fire, including procedures to contain and dispose of the oily material generated by the combustion of large numbers of tires. (10)	Any residuals from scrap tire processing must be managed so as to be contained on site and must be controlled and disposed of in a permitted solid waste handling facility or be properly recycled. (11)	A scrap tire processing facility may not accept any scrap tires for processing if it has reached its approved or permitted staging limit. At least 75 percent of both the scrap and processed tires that are accumulated by the scrap tire processing facility each calendar quarter and 75 percent by weight or volume of all scrap tires previously received and not recycled, reused or properly disposed during the preceding calendar quarter must be processed and removed from the facility for disposal or recycling during the quarter or disposed of in a permitted solid waste handling facility. (12)	The owner or operator of a scrap tire processing facility will record and maintain for three years records that will be available for inspection by the special enforcement division and the sanitation marshal during normal business hours and will include the following information regarding their activities: a.	For all scrap tires received and processed tires shipped from the facility, the name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier who accepted the scrap or processed tires for transport and the quantity of scrap or processed tires shipped with that carrier; and the place where the scrap or processed tires were deposited; b.	For all scrap and processed tires received at the facility, the name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier who delivered the scrap or processed tires to the facility, and the quantity or weight of scrap or processed tires received from that carrier, and, if more than five scrap tires were delivered by a person who is not a scrap tire carrier, the number of tires delivered and the person's name, address and telephone number; and c.	For all scrap tires removed for reuse or recapping, the quantity and type removed and the name and location of the user receiving the tires. (c)	Sorting operations. (1)	Persons engaged in sorting mixed tires into separate groups (used tires, retreadable casing tires, scrap tires) must meet the requirements of paragraph (7)(a) of EPD rule 391-3-4-.19. However, in lieu of the 75 percent recycled, used or reused provision, the person sorting mixed tires shall: a.	Hold no more than 3,000 mixed tires prior to sorting;b.	Hold no more than 3,000 scrap tires for consolidated transport to their final destination.(2)	Persons engaged in sorting mixed tires shall further:a.	Obtain a scrap tire generator identification number issued by the EPD;b.	Assure that the scrap tires are transported to a scrap tire end user, or recycler, processor, or disposal facility approved by the EPD; and c.	Comply with all other provisions applicable to scrap tire generators and processors.(Ord. No. 95-27, § 4-3005, 8-24-1995)
Sec. 42-306. - Reuse and recycling of scrap tires.     For purposes of this section, the following criteria will be used to determine if scrap tires are being reused or recycled: (1)	The scrap tires or processed scrap tires must have a known use, reuse or recycling potential; must be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and must have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. (2)	Scrap tires or processed scrap tires are not accumulated speculatively if the person accumulating them can show there is a known use, reuse or recycling potential for them; that they can be feasibly sold, used, reused or recycled; and, during the preceding 90 days, the amount of scrap tires or processed scrap tires recycled, sold, used or reused equals at least 75 percent by weight or volume of the tires received during the 90-day period. (3)	Proof of recycling, sale, use or reuse shall be provided in the form of bills of sale, or other records showing adequate proof of movement of the scrap tires in question to a recognized recycling facility or for proper use or reuse from the accumulation point. Proof must be provided that there is a known market or disposition for the scrap tires or processed scrap tires and must show that they have the necessary equipment to do so, prior to receiving scrap tires for processing. (4)	A scrap tire is sold if the generator of the scrap tire or the person who processed the scrap tire received consideration or compensation for the material because of its inherent value. (5)	A scrap tire is used, reused or recycled if it is:a.	Employed as an ingredient (including use as an intermediate) in a process to make a product (for example, utilizing crumb rubber to make rubber-asphalt); b.	Employed in a particular function or application as an effective substitute for a commercial product (for example, utilizing shredded tires as a substitute for fuel oil, natural gas, coal or wood in a boiler or industrial furnace) as long as such substitution does not pose a threat to human health or the environment, and so long as the facility is not a solid waste thermal treatment technology facility or utilizing shredded tires as a soil amendment, aggregate, etc.; or c.	Reused for its original intended purpose as a used tire or reused for other purposes approved by the EPD, such as playground equipment, offshore reefs, erosion control, etc. (Ord. No. 95-27, § 4-3006, 8-24-1995)
Secs. 42-307—42-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- Editor's note—Ord. No. 2014-14, adopted July 24, 2014, amended art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, §§ 42-341—42-353, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 2003-68, §§ 1—11, 13, adopted Dec. 18, 2003; Ord. No. 2004-2(1), §§ 2, 3, adopted Feb. 19, 2004; Ord. No. 2004-27, §§ 1—3, adopted June 24, 2004; and Ord. No. 2007-44, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 6, 2007.
Sec. 42-341. - Title.     This article shall be known, cited and referred to as the City of Valdosta Clean Indoor Air Ordinance. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-342. - Findings and purpose. (a)	The mayor and council do hereby find that: (1)	Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy non-smokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease and lung cancer. (2)	Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities and cancer. (3)	Secondhand smoke and the emissions of electronic or e-cigarettes, in addition to the health hazards, are nuisances to the patrons and employees of public businesses. (b)	Accordingly, the mayor and council find and declare the purposes of the ordinance codified in this article are: (1)	To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and public and private places of employment; and (2)	To guarantee the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air; and(3)	To recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-343. - Definitions.     Attached bar shall be defined as the bar area of a restaurant or anywhere in a restaurant where alcoholic beverages are sold.     Child care facility shall be defined as a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article the term children's day care facility shall include, but not be limited to the terms, nursery school, early learning center, pre-kindergarten, private kindergarten, play school or pre-school.     Dining area shall be defined as an interior area containing a counter or tables upon which food is served.     Downtown shall be defined as the legal boundary of the Central Valdosta Development Authority, which consists of the area bounded by Magnolia Street on the north, Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive on the south, Lee Street on the east and Toombs Street on the west.     E-cigarette shall be defined as any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, that provides a vapor of nicotine and/or other substances, and the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term shall include any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, or e-pipe, or under any other product name or descriptor.     Employee shall be defined as any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.     Employer shall be defined as any person who employs the services of an individual person.     Enclosed shall be defined as all space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling. It includes areas commonly described as public lobbies or lobbies when they are in an area that is enclosed as defined herein.     Establishment shall be defined as any business, store, office or other place where goods or services are sold or provided as part of a commercial venture. The term "establishment" includes but is not limited to the following: (1) automobile dealerships, furniture or other showrooms for the display of merchandise offered for sale; (2) grocery, pharmacy, specialty, department and other stores which sell goods or merchandise; (3) service stations, stores or shops for the repair or maintenance of appliances, shoes, motor vehicles or other items or products; (4) barbershops, beauty shops, cleaners, laundromats and other establishments offering services to the general public; (5) video arcade, pool hall, and other amusement centers; (6) offices providing professional services such as legal, medical, dental, engineering, and architectural services; (7) banks, savings and loan offices, and other financial establishments; (8) hotels and motels and other places that provide accommodations to the public; and (9) restaurants and cafeterias.     Freestanding bar shall be defined as an establishment that serves alcohol or alcohol and food and derives a minimum of 75 percent of its annual gross sales from the sale of alcoholic beverages only, including, but not limited to, taverns, night clubs, cocktail lounges and cabarets. Eligibility to be determined on an annual basis by the City of Valdosta based upon information submitted for a required occupational tax certificate which must be verified by a certified public accountant.     Health care facility means any licensed general or specialized hospital, institutional infirmary, public health center, or diagnostic and treatment center, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-7-1(2), as amended.     Intermediate care (nursing) home means any long-term custodial care facility that provides for the physical and mental welfare of the aged.     Outdoor area, the outdoor area of any public place, establishment or place of employment means the open area surrounding said facility, including the porch, deck, or covered entrance area.     Personal care home means a residential facility having at least 25 beds and providing, for compensation, protective care and oversight of ambulatory, non-related persons who need a monitored environment, but who do not have injuries or disabilities which require chronic or convalescent care, including medical, nursing, or intermediate care. Personal care homes include those facilities which monitor daily residents' functioning and location, have the capability for crisis intervention, and provide supervision in areas of nutrition, medication, and provision of transient medical care. Such term does not include old age residences which are devoted to independent living units with kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals, or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. Personal care homes shall also mean residential care facilities for the elderly.     Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, hallways, employee lounges, cafeterias and snack bars, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a child care facility, an adult day care facility, or a health care facility. The dining area of a restaurant shall be treated as a place of employment under this article.     Primary entrance shall be defined as the entrance designed and used as the main or most frequently used entrance for the public to an establishment, place of employment or public place. In the event there is more than one primary or frequently used entrance, that entrance facing the street address of the facility shall be the primary entrance.     Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted including, but not limited to, restaurants, stores, waiting rooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, public transit, restrooms, enclosed shopping malls, elevators, service lines, service stations, offices providing professional services, banks and other financial institutions, educational, recreational and health care facilities, child care facilities, auditoriums, theaters, arenas, meeting rooms, repair shops, automobile dealerships, convention halls, bowling facilities, polling places, and bingo games. Porches, courtyards or decks with a contiguous connection to a public place shall be considered a public place. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a child care facility, an adult day care facility or a health care facility.     Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, dining areas, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term restaurant includes an attached bar as defined in this section.     Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.     Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money.     Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco product intended for inhalation, in any manner or in any form. "Smoking" also includes the use of an e-cigarette that creates a vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this article.     Truck stop shall be defined as a commercial diesel and/or gasoline fueling facility also offering other trucking and related services designed to cater to tractor/trailer trucks and other vehicles weighing in excess of 10,000 pounds and located within one-half mile of an interstate highway. In addition the facility shall have a minimum of two fuel bays with width and height enough for tractor-trailer rigs and a paved parking area large enough to accommodate 25 tractor-trailer rigs for overnight parking. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-344. - Prohibited smoking.     Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in all public places, and places of employment within the City of Valdosta. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-345. - Prohibition of smoking applicable to city property.     This article shall apply to all enclosed facilities including buildings and vehicles owned or operated by the City of Valdosta. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-346. - Reasonable distance.     Smoking may occur outdoors, but not less than 25 feet from the primary entrance to any public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited, so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, windows and ventilation systems or other means. However, in downtown, the distance shall be ten from the primary entrance. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-347. - Exceptions. (a)	The smoking prohibition shall not apply in the following areas:(1)	Retail tobacco stores;(2)	Private residences, including private residences which may serve as an office workplace, except if used as a childcare, an adult day care or a health care facility; (3)	Any property owned or leased by Lowndes County, the State of Georgia, or the federal government; (4)	Designated smoking rooms in hotels and motels rented by guests, provided that such designated smoking rooms shall not comprise more than 25 percent of the total number of rooms available for rent; (5)	Outdoor areas of places of employment, except where an owner or employer declares that the outdoor area is a smoke-free environment as provided in this article. Smoking in outdoor areas of places of employment, restaurants, and public places shall allow smoking except compliance with section 42-346 of this article is required. (6)	Freestanding bars, provided, however, smoking shall not be allowed until after 8:00 p.m. in such establishments. In addition, a special ventilation system must be installed that is designated to remove smoke and pollutants from the air. Such ventilation system must meet the minimum standards as established under the 2000 Edition of the International Mechanical Code, Chapter 4, Ventilation, and the minimum ventilation rate as set forth in Section 403.3 of said code, and the accompanying Table 403.3 which requires ventilation for bars, cocktail lounges in the 2000 Edition of said code at the ventilation rate of an estimated maximum occupancy load, persons per 1,000 square feet of 100 with an outdoor air cubic feet per minute (cfm) per person of 30. Provided further that in order to comply with this section the owner or operator of a freestanding bar shall make application to the city for a smoking permit on the application form furnished by the city; in addition, applicants shall comply with the following requirements: a.	Meet the definition of a freestanding bar and furnish a certificate from a certified public accountant that during the last city occupational tax year the freestanding bar derived a minimum of 75 percent of its annual gross sales from the sale of alcoholic beverages only. b.	The establishment shall place a sign on its door or in a front window clearly visible to the public at a minimum size of 11 inches by 14 inches which shall state, "This is a smoking establishment. Enter at your own risk." c.	The permit shall be valid for one year and application shall be refiled annually and the requirements of this section met on an annual basis. d.	While not mandatory, it is the suggestion of mayor and council that the employer or owner of a freestanding bar may advise all applicants for employment in writing that he/she is seeking employment in a smoking establishment and that it is a health risk. (7)	Truck stop. Furthermore, any restaurant in said truck stop shall be exempt provided it meets the following criteria: a.	Any restaurant to which access is denied to any person under the age of 18 and that does not employ any individual under the age of 18; or b.	Private rooms in a restaurant if such rooms are enclosed and have an air handling system independent from the main air handling system that serve all other areas of the building and all air within the private room is exhausted directly to the outside by an exhaust fan of sufficient size and in accordance with the city's stated requirements for exhaust systems in smoking establishments. 1.	Provided the restaurant that meets said exemption shall place a sign on all public entrances clearly visible to the public at a minimum size of 11 inches by 14 inches which shall state, "This is a smoking establishment. Enter at your own risk." (b)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this article may declare that the entire establishment is a non-smoking establishment. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-348. - Employers' responsibility. (a)	It is the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees of public places, and places of employment but employers are not required to make expenditures or structural changes to create a smoke-free work area. (b)	An owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. (c)	All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be removed from an area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. (d)	Each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within the City of Valdosta is encouraged to adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy that incorporates the smoking prohibitions of this article. (e)	The written smoking policy should be provided to all employees.(Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-349. - Posting of signs and notification. (a)	"No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every building where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or area. (b)	Every public place where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance into a public place and place of employment a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. (c)	Notice of the provisions set forth in this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-350. - Enforcement. (a)	This article shall be enforced by the chief of police or his authorized designee.(b)	Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the chief of police or designee. (c)	The health department, fire department, or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article and forward along any notice of violation to the chief of police or his designee. (d)	An owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. (e)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this article. (f)	In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the chief of police, the city manager, or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this article may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-351. - Nonretaliation.     No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because such employee, applicant, or customer exercises any right to a smoke-free environment as afforded by this article, or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-352. - Violations and penalties. (a)	Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: (1)	A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation.(2)	A fine not exceeding $150.00 for a second violation within one year.(3)	A fine to be determined in the discretion of the municipal judge for the third violation within one year. (b)	A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: (1)	A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a first violation.(2)	A fine not exceeding $400.00 for a second violation within one year.(3)	A fine to be determined by the municipal judge for a third or more violation of this article. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-353. - Other applicable laws and disclaimer.     The ordinance codified in this article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. By regulating smoking, the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general health and welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, neither the city, its officers, nor its employees are liable in money damages to any person who claims that any breach of this article caused injury. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Sec. 42-354. - Severability.     Should any section or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole nor any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. All ordinances or resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict with the ordinance codified herein are repealed. (Ord. No. 2014-14, 7-24-2014)
Secs. 42-355—42-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
Sec. 42-401. - General provisions. (a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: (1)	Establish decision-making processes, standards and criteria surrounding land development activities that protect public safety, infrastructure and the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources and the environment. (2)	Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, nonpoint source pollution, increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats. (3)	Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality. (4)	Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards. (5)	Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of green space and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include green space, with the city's green space protection plan. (6)	Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety. (7)	Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. (b)	Applicability. (1)	This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b)(2) below. These standards shall apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: a.	New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that invoices other land development activities of one acre or more. b.	Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition of 5,000 square feet or more, or replacement of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more. c.	Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city engineer to be a hotspot land use. The GSWMM defines a hotspot land use based on water quality criteria, and the City of Valdosta can also consider flooding conditions to define hotspot areas where known flooding conditions and existing structural limitations should be considered. d.	Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (b)(1)a. and (b)(1)b. above, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. (2)	The following activities are exempt from this article:a.	Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project. b.	Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures.c.	Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities. d.	Land-disturbing activities conducted for the purpose of restoration of streams, stream banks, riparian zones, or other environmentally protected areas; and e.	Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city engineer. (c)	Designation of ordinance administrator. The city engineer or his/her representative is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of the ordinance codified in this article. (d)	Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. In accordance with the GSWMM Site Plan Checklist Vol. 2 B-6, the applicant shall provide evidence acquisition of state and federal permits if required. (e)	Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (f)	Stormwater Design Manual. The City of Valdosta will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the GSWMM and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. Engineers seeking guidance related to the items required for stormwater calculations, erosion and sedimentation control, and other development related criteria shall refer to the site development requirements letter issued by the city engineer, and the land development regulations. (Ord. No. 2006-71, § 1, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, 6-11-2015)
Sec. 42-402. - Definitions.     "Adverse impact" means pre-developed flows did not cause difficulties and post-development flows do.     "Applicant" means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval.     "Channel" means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.     "Conservation easement" means an agreement between a land owner and the City of Valdosta or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership.     "Detention" means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge.     "Detention facility" means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.     "Developer" means a person who undertakes land development activities.     "Development" means a land development or land development project.     "Drainage easement" means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement.     "Erosion and sedimentation control plan" means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities.     "Extended detention" means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater.     "Extreme flood protection" means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large, low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more.     "Flooding" means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands.     "Georgia Stormwater Management Manual" refers to the guidance document developed by the State of Georgia in 2001 available at www.georgiastormwater.org.     "Green space" or "open space" means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state.     "Hotspot" means an area were the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater, or an area observed to be prone to flash flooding as determined by the city engineer.     "Hydrologic soil group (HSG)" means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.     "Impervious cover" means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface.     "Industrial stormwater permit" means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.     "Infiltration" means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil.     "Inspection and maintenance agreement" means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project.     "Jurisdictional wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.     "Land development" means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover.     "Land development activities" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development.     "Land development project" means a discrete land development undertaking.     "National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)" means the ermit issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division on behalf of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to implement a stormwater management system as means to control polluted discharges.     "New development" means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site.     "Nonpoint source pollution" means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.     "Nonstructural stormwater management practice" or "nonstructural practice" means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels.     "Off-site facility" means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site.     "On-site facility" means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site.     "Overbank flood protection" means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events.     "Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site.     "Permit" See: Site development permit.     "Person" means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     "Post-development" refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require.     "Pre-development" refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions.     "Project" means a land development project.     "Redevelopment" means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution.     "Regional stormwater management facility" or "regional facility" means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced.     "Runoff" means stormwater runoff.     "Site" means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located.     "Site development permit" means the permit issued by the City of Valdosta Engineering Department. The approval of such permit is required for undertaking any qualifying land development disturbance.     "Stormwater better site design" means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and green space, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management.     "Stormwater management" means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, stream bank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare.     "Stormwater management facility" means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff.     "Stormwater management measure" means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice.     "Stormwater management plan" means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article.     "Stormwater management system" means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site.     "Stormwater retrofit" means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either a no stormwater management practice in pace or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site.     "Stormwater runoff" means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation.     "Structural stormwater control" means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff.     "Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or road.     "USACE" means United States Army Corps of Engineers.     "Waters of the state" means the jurisdictional waters that require a permit from the United States Corps of Engineers to obstruct, dredge, divert or rehabilitate any portions of them. For detailed definitions see the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3(16), and Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFS 230.3. (Ord. No. 2006-71, § 2, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 2, 6-11-2015)
Sec. 42-403. - Stormwater management. (a)	Stormwater management report requirements. (1)	Every non-exempt project shall provide a stormwater management site plan prepared by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia. The purpose of this report shall be to formulate a plan to manage stormwater runoff so that stormwater runoff hazards are not created and existing runoff-related problems are not exacerbated, either upstream or downstream from or within the boundaries of the property being developed. The engineer shall be responsible for obtaining all information necessary for the report. Hydrologic analysis and detention pond hydraulics pipe and open channel hydraulics, culvert hydraulics and water quality best management practices shall be certified by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia. Flood studies for any floodplain or flood-prone areas, and hydrologic and hydraulic analysis and design calculations which are performed for the design of a dam shall be certified by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia. Projects that include the design of a dam or levee shall be certified by a professional engineer registered with the safe dam program from the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD). (2)	The stormwater management site plan shall follow the technical guidance provided by the GSWMM, which provides details, examples and references to determine the following: a.	Selection of hydrologic and hydraulic methods and models shall be made in accordance with the GSWMM Volume 2, Section 1. b.	All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized based on all on-site upstream areas being developed per the development plans and the off-site upstream areas being fully developed with no detention. Upstream detention may be included when determining flows, provided the engineer calculates the reduced flows by routing the developed flows through any stormwater facility included in the analysis rather than assuming the reduction will occur. The engineer shall show that detention facilities used in the analysis will remain, be properly maintained and the storage volume and outlet structure is based on current conditions. c.	Detention facilities shall be designed using pre-development flows based on existing conditions for all upstream areas including existing on-site lakes and detention. Post-development flows, except the 100-year flow, shall be based on on-site upstream areas being developed per the development plans and existing conditions for off-site upstream areas. The 100-year flow shall be based on on-site upstream areas being developed per the development plans and the off-site upstream areas being developed with no detention. Upstream detention may be included if it meets the conditions as described for culverts and pipe systems. Existing conditions shall be defined as the conditions of the site at the time of application for a land disturbance permit. The existing condition includes on-site lakes and ponds. Pre-development flows shall be determined by routing the pre-development flows through these stormwater facilities. Flows used to size the outlet structures for detention facilities that exceed the 25-year design flow, shall be sized as described for culverts and pipe systems. d.	When more than 50 percent of the property of a developed project site is disturbed for either redevelopment or improvement, the stormwater management report shall be prepared for the entire site. When 50 percent or less of the property is disturbed, detention shall be provided as required by these regulations for the disturbed area and existing impervious areas which are disturbed. e.	The report shall contain drainage area delineation maps and other exhibits at satisfactory scale and sufficient in quantity and scope to define the boundaries of the site and off-site areas relative to the watercourses, drainage divide, drainage structures and other pertinent features. The Southern Georgia Regional Commission (SGRC) VALOR GIS mapping shall be used where appropriate. (3)	For the purposes of these regulations, the words "downstream" and "analysis" shall have the following meanings. The analysis of downstream conditions in the site plan shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage way "immediately" downstream from the project. The city engineer provides guidance to applicants on how to apply the GSWMM criteria in the City of Valdosta, and the conditions requiring watershed evaluations beyond the site being developed. Hydrographs shall be analyzed as follows: a.	The study will compare pre-developed hydrographs with post-developed hydrographs; and b.	Comparison of peak flows shall include the timing of the hydrographs; andc.	Hydrographs shall be based on a 24-hour storm.(4)	The following elements shall be evaluated by the engineer preparing the stormwater management site plan and in determining whether or not detention should be required for any portion of a site: a.	Existing land uses downstream;b.	Anticipated future land uses downstream;c.	Magnitude of increase in peak flows due to development;d.	Presence of existing drainage problems;e.	Capacity of existing and anticipated drainage systems;f.	Creation of concentrated flows where none had occurred previously;g.	Availability of feasible locations for detention facilities;h.	Existing flows generated off-site which pass through the project site; andi.	The nature of the receiving watercourse.The city engineer provides additional guidance on the items above in the site development permit document. (5)	Where detention for a proposed project is provided in a regional detention facility that was previously permitted, the developer shall provide a copy of the original study that met the regulations at the time the facility was permitted. If the approved study cannot be found, then the engineer shall. prepare a new site development study for the entire regional facility. The project shall be exempt from restudy and any modifications required to meet regulations, provided the proposed project is in keeping with the intent of the original detention study and the detention facility is maintained in agreement with the design and maintenance criteria set in subsections (f)(1)—(4) and (g)(1)—(7) of this section and sections 310.51(A)—(D) and 310-54(A) and (B) of the city's land development regulations. (6)	When a development uses an existing facility where the last approved certification and record drawing of the facility was over 36 months prior to the new development's submittal, the engineer shall provide one of the following: a.	A new survey, drawing and certification showing that the outlet structure is constructed as approved and the flood storage and water quality volume of the facility is equal to or greater than the volume required when the facility was approved. b.	Construction plans and calculations showing that the outlet structure will function as designed and the flood storage and water quality volume of the facility will be equal to or greater than the volume required when the facility was approved once the proposed maintenance has been performed. c.	A new record survey, drawing, study and certification showing that the facility meets the development requirements when the facility was approved. (7)	Design criteria—General. All design related to stormwater shall be in accordance with the GSWMM. (8)	Evidence of acquisition of applicable non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the site development plan. (b)	Stormwater detention required. (1)	Whenever a site development plan indicates that an adverse impact from stormwater runoff related impact is expected to result from the development of a property, that project shall be required to provide stormwater detention facilities. The meaning of "adverse impact" shall apply when pre-developed flows did not cause difficulties and post-development flows do. Difficulties shall include, but not be limited to, situations where 25-year velocities exceed the non-erosive velocity of the stream, habitable structures are shown to be subject to increased depth of flooding for any frequency up to and including the regulatory flood and stormwater facilities that cannot carry the design storm in accordance with these regulations. (2)	Should the professional engineer conclude that stormwater detention might not be necessary rigid compliance with all of the following criteria is mandatory: a.	A site development plan shall always be required whether or not stormwater detention is required. b.	If the applicant proposes to show that the detention requirement may be eliminated for all or a portion of a project, then a pre-submittal conference with the city engineer is required prior to preparation and submittal of construction plans for the project. (c)	Detention design criteria—General. (1)	All stormwater detention design calculations shall be certified by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia. (2)	Design plans, survey, and engineering calculations shall be based on the North American Vertical Datum 1988 and Georgia State Plane (West), datum NAD 1983 coordinates. The City of Valdosta has developed a benchmark network to allow surveyors to obtain reference benchmarks at multiple locations within the city limits. (3)	All stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to detain the one-year storm runoff, for the area draining to the pond, for 24 hours. For the project, this volume called the channel protection volume, shall be equal to or greater than the one-year storm runoff volume from the project. In addition, these facilities shall control the peak flow rates associated with storms having two-year, five-year, ten-year, and 25-year return frequencies so that flows from the developed site do not exceed those associated with pre-development conditions at the project boundary, nor increase the peak flows downstream from the project to the point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basins. Where adverse impacts, as defined in subsection (b)(1) above, occur during the 100-year storm, the 100-year storm shall also be regulated. (4)	A variety of methods of achieving stormwater management goals shall be acceptable in providing detention facilities. The type of facility provided shall be based on the following criteria: a.	The type of development for which the detention facility is being provided.b.	The type of development for which the detention facility is intended to protect.c.	Volume of stormwater to be stored.d.	Origin and magnitude of the flows to be managed.e.	Topographic opportunities and limitations.f.	Safety considerationsg.	Maintenance requirements.h.	Aesthetic considerations.i.	Likelihood of facility operation interfering with access to public or private facilities.j.	Proximity of facility to property lines, utilities, buffers, etc.k.	Similar site-specific constraints.(5)	Detention facilities may be of any of the following types, and two or more types may be used in combination with one another: a.	Normally-dry basins, whether excavated or created by damming a natural drainage feature, or a combination of both methods. b.	Lakes and ponds, whether excavated or created by damming a natural drainage feature, or a combination of both methods. c.	Parking lot facilities.d.	Underground facilities.e.	Roof top facilities.(6)	Reservoir routing methods shall be used for all detention facility design. The maximum size of the orifice to detain the one-year storm for the facility shall be computed using the following orifice equation with a 24 hour draw-down time from the elevation of the total channel protection volume (CPV) and an orifice coefficient of 0.60. The minimum elevation of the two-year control shall be at the maximum routed pool elevation of the one-year storm. h =  Head measured in feet from the elevation needed to store the total one-year runoff volume (CPV) to the centroid of the orifice Qa = Average CPV outflow rate in cfs Qa = CPV/3600 x 24 A = Required orifice area in square feet A = Qa/(0.6 x (64.4 x h/2)0.5) (7)	The detention methodology used for any given project shall conform to the GSWMM.(8)	Runoff coefficients and runoff curve numbers used for pre- and post-development conditions shall be consistent with those shown in the GSWMM. The SCS method shall be used where applicable to check the magnitude of peak flows when other hydrologic methods recommended in the manual are used. (9)	Calculations shall be provided showing how all times of concentration or lag times were computed, both for pre-development and post-developed conditions. Likewise, adequate support must be provided for all composite runoff coefficients or curve numbers used. (10)	If a computer program is used for hydrologic and hydraulic analysis and design, including generating and routing hydrographs, the output from the program shall be summarized in the stormwater management report and the name and version of the program shall be indicated. Computer output sheets shall be attached to the report as required to substantiate the input parameters used in the computer evaluation. (11)	Prior to beginning the design of the stormwater detention facility, the design engineer shall submit a concept plan outlining the proposed system which will include as a minimum the following items: a.	Pre-development, post-development drainage basin maps.b.	Proposed site plan sketch (to scale) showing major site items, contours and all impervious areas. c.	Locations, approximate size and type of all BMP and detention facilities.The concept plan will be reviewed and agreed upon between the city engineer or his designee and the design engineer, and will form the basis for the final stormwater facility design. (12)	In residential subdivisions, no more than 50 percent of the detention facility perimeter may be a wall of any type (unless approved by city engineer). (d)	Detention facility location criteria. (1)	For purposes of these regulations, a detention facility shall be deemed to consist of the area within the maximum design ponding limits (100-year ponding limit unless a modification application is approved), the dam (if one including all embankment slopes and wall footings if applicable), primary and emergency outlet works, any drainage and access easements, and any energy dissipation devices. The intent of these regulations is to ensure that the extent of the facility is defined to allow flooding, access and maintenance. Granting of a modification will not nullify these regulations. When the facility is a wet pond or lake, the area within the maximum design ponding limits is reduced to a few feet inside the normal pool elevation, and easements are provided on the perimeter properties to allow for flooding, access and maintenance around the lake. In addition, granting of the modification shall only be considered when the wet pond is an amenity and under no circumstances shall the dam and outlet structure lie on private property outside of a drainage easement. (2)	Detention facilities, to the greatest extent feasible, shall be located so as to minimize the amount of flow generated on-site which by-passes the facility. (3)	No portion of any detention facility shall disturb any required (as opposed to voluntary) buffer, or tree protection area, except that natural bottom detention ponds and its appurtenant structures, which require no grading and removal of trees, may encroach into a required construction buffer. (4)	The 100-year ponding limits of a detention facility shall not encroach upon a public right-of-way. (5)	Detention facilities may be located within required landscape areas or utility easements or rights-of-way, or encroach upon utility easements or rights-of-way, upon receipt by the city engineer of written permission from both the property and utility owners. (6)	Detention facilities may be constructed within required recreation areas, if the following criteria are met: a.	Ownership of the area will be held by a qualified property owners association, homeowners association, or similar private parties. b.	Permanent structures, such as buildings and swimming pools, will not be constructed within the boundaries of the detention facility. c.	Detention facilities within recreation areas will be approved only if the design of the area includes recreation amenities such as ball fields, tennis courts, grassed open areas or other similar improvements. The intent is to provide recreation facilities with detention as a secondary feature. d.	Permanent detention features shall not interfere with the intended use of the recreation amenity, (i.e., a ditch or large swale shall not traverse a ball field, an inlet structure shall not be in a tennis court, etc.). (7)	If a residential subdivision is provided with an on-site detention facility not located within a recreation area, a mandatory property owners' association shall be established for its ownership and maintenance. The facility shall be located on a single lot within the development and owned by the property owners' association. The lot shall have a minimum of 30 feet of public road frontage and a minimum lot width of 30 feet. If the project is provided with an off-site detention facility, a mandatory property owners' association shall be established for its maintenance. The association by-laws shall be recorded concurrently with the recording of a final subdivision plat. (e)	Detention facility easement requirements. (1)	In a nonresidential subdivision or project, an easement at least 20 feet in width shall be required so as to provide access to all detention facilities from a public street. (2)	In a residential subdivision, an easement at least 20 feet in width shall be required so as to provide access to all detention facilities from a public street. (3)	Access easement:a.	The access easement shall be cleared, grubbed and graded so that it can be utilized by rubber-tired construction vehicles. b.	The minimum drive width shall be 15 feet.c.	The drive shall be grassed or paved.d.	The maximum slope shall be 20 percent (5H:1V).e.	Access easements may be combined with drainage easements containing an open channel; however, the combined easement shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width and shall be wide enough for the drainage channel and the drive. (4)	Every normally dry detention basin, lake, or parking lot detention facility shall be completely enclosed within a drainage easement. The drainage easement shall extend at least ten feet beyond the 100-year flooding limits of the detention facility. (f)	Detention facility maintenance. (1)	The detention storage capacity or function of any detention basin, pond or other impoundment, whether natural or manmade, shall not be removed or diminished without the express approval of the city engineer. (2)	In a residential subdivision, it shall be the responsibility of the mandatory property owners' association to maintain the operational characteristics of any facility constructed on their property for stormwater detention pursuant to city requirements, to keep the access drive free of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of excessive vegetation, overgrowth, trees, obstructions, silt or debris. (3)	In a nonresidential subdivision or project served by a detention facility that provides detention for more than one property or by an off-site facility, the property owners shall be responsible for maintenance of the facility. The property owners shall develop and submit to the city engineer an operational and maintenance plan for maintenance of the operational characteristics of the facility pursuant to city requirements, to keep the access drive free of excessive vegetation, overgrowth, trees, obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of obstruction, silt or debris. (4)	In a nonresidential project with an on-site detention facility which serves only that project, the property owner shall be responsible to maintain the operational characteristics of the facility pursuant to city requirements, to keep the access drive free of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of excessive vegetation, overgrowth, trees, obstructions, silt or debris. (g)	Detention facility construction standards. (1)	Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed in accordance with plans reviewed and approved by the city engineer, and shall be in place and inspected prior to the initiation of other improvements for disturbed areas greater than one acre. If the detention facility is planned to be a lake, temporary detention facilities shall be provided and shall remain in place until such time as the lake has become effective in providing stormwater management. (2)	Within a detention basin, all stumps are to be cut flush with the ground or removed and all debris is to be removed below a 1.2-inch rainfall event ponding elevation. Trees or shrubs may be allowed to remain below this ponding elevation only upon certification of the survivability of the vegetation. (3)	Detention slopes that are disturbed are to be grassed. The ground cover within the basin shall be well established with all exposed areas covered prior to the end of the maintenance period. (4)	If the developer desires to place a fence around a detention facility, it shall be a minimum four-foot high fence of durable material, with a 12-foot wide access gate. The fence shall be contained within an easement at least 20 feet wide, shall not encroach upon the detention facility (although their easements may overlap by up to ten feet), and shall comply with the locational requirements of title 2 of the city's land development regulations (LDR). (5)	The side slope in graded areas is to be 3H:1V or flatter. The normal pool ponding surface elevation shall be defined as the elevation when the volume contained in the facility equals the runoff from a 1.2-inch rainfall event. When the depth to the normal ponding surface is greater than four feet and the side slope is steeper than 4H:1V, a bench shall be provided. The bench shall be at least ten feet in width and is recommended to be 15 feet in width. The slope of the bench shall be 10H:1V. The bench shall be located so that the normal ponding surface elevation is between the top and bottom edge of the bench. (6)	The bottom of the pond shall be sloped at one percent or 0.5 percent if a paved channel is proposed. (7)	Permanent fencing at least four feet in height shall be required around all these facilities having a 100-year stormwater depth of four feet or more or bank slope greater than 2H:1V or those designated by the city engineer as constituting a public health hazard. The fence shall be contained within an easement at least 20 feet wide, shall not encroach upon the detention facility (although their easements may overlap by up to ten feet), and shall comply with the locational requirements of title 2 of the city's LDR. This fencing shall be designed, installed, and maintained to allow the free flow of runoff and sediment into the facility. Gate latches shall be locked with a key, a copy of which must be supplied to the city. The fence shall include a 12-foot gate to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities. Fencing may be waived by the city engineer or his designee in nonresidential areas when the pond is more than 500 feet from a residential district and in residential districts when retention is provided in natural areas such as stream channels and fencing, when in the opinion of the engineer or his designee, it would damage the environment or affect stream flow. (h)	Detention facility engineer's certification and record drawings. (1)	When a new facility is constructed in a development, a certified record survey of each detention facility shall be prepared by a land surveyor currently registered in the State of Georgia. A certified record drawing of the facility shall be prepared based upon this survey. Based on the actual parameters established on the record drawing, an addendum to the stormwater report shall be prepared which demonstrates that the facility, as constructed, complies with the requirements of these regulations. The amended stormwater report shall be certified by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia. The survey shall be performed after substantial completion and stabilization of the project has occurred. The record drawing and addendum to the stormwater management report shall be submitted to the city at least one week prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval (as appropriate to the project). (2)	When a development uses an existing facility without an existing stormwater maintenance bond, the facility shall be cleaned out if necessary and a new record survey, drawing and certification showing that the outlet structure exists as approved and the flood storage and water quality volume of the facility is equal to or greater than the volume required when the facility was approved. As an alternative, a new record survey, drawing, study and certification showing that the facility meets the development requirements when the facility was approved shall be submitted. The survey shall be performed after substantial completion and stabilization of the project has occurred. The certification and supporting data shall be submitted to the city at least one week prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval (as appropriate to the project). (Ord. No. 2006-71, § 3, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 3, 6-11-2015)
Sec. 42-404. - Culverts and piped drainage systems.     Public drainage systems include any stormwater drainage structure located within the public right-of-way (ROW) engineered and constructed for the purpose of managing stormwater passing parallel to or crossing the public ROW. These structures include, but are not necessarily limited to, catch basins, drop inlets, curb and gutter, culverts and headwalls under roadways, culverts and headwalls under driveways within the ROW, and open, vegetated channels within the ROW. Public drainage systems shall also include stormwater drainage directed from the ROW through piped systems (including headwalls) within dedicated drainage easements to locations outside the ROW, as necessary, for the efficient management of stormwater.     Piped drainage systems that originate and terminate on private property, or piped systems that depart the roadway ROW but are not in a dedicated drainage easement, will not be maintained by the city without establishment of the appropriate easement. If a private piped system crosses roadway ROW, only that portion of the drainage structure located within the ROW will be maintained by the city. (1)	Drainage improvements required. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to, culverts, storm drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, and ditches, shall be provided for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the requirements of these regulations. (2)	Standard specifications. a.	Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein or in the City of Valdosta standard drawings, all of the materials, methods of the construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to stormwater conveyance facility construction shall conform to the most recent Standard Specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT). b.	Allowable pipe material for all applications in drainage easements and public street rights-of-way, except as specified below, are smooth, lined corrugated polyethylene pipe (PE), or reinforced concrete pipe (RCP). c.	For roads constructed with public funds, either wholly or in part, or roads classified as major thoroughfares, materials which meet the Georgia DOT Design Standards shall be used unless an alternative is specifically approved by the city engineer. d.	Only reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) shall be used for all dams nine feet or more in height with an impounding capacity of 20 acre-feet or more unless the Georgia Safe Dams Program requires another material. e.	Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) shall be used under roads.f.	The city engineer may approve an alternative pipe material.(3)	Design criteria—General. a.	All stormwater conveyance facility design calculations shall be certified by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia. b.	Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the City of Valdosta Stormwater Ordinance. The SCS method shall be used where applicable to check the magnitude of peak flows when other hydrologic methods recommended in the manual are used. c.	All portions of a stormwater conveyance system which drain areas falling within the same size category above shall be analyzed using the same methodology. d.	Runoff coefficients used for the rational method and runoff curve numbers used for the SCS method shall be consistent with those shown in the Georgia Stormwater Manual. e.	Smooth interior corrugated polyethylene (PE) pipe shall not be used or installed under the road surface of existing or proposed streets. (4)	Design criteria—Culverts. a.	Culverts or pipe systems (designed to convey water from one side of a public right-of-way to the other) shall be designed to pass the fully developed peak flow associated with a 100-year storm with at least 1.5 feet of freeboard between the 100-year ponding elevation and the centerline of the road, without raising the 100-year flood elevation on upstream properties, and in accordance with floodplain management ordinance. b.	The 100-year ponding limits above the culvert shall be shown on the development plans and on the final plat (if applicable). c.	The minimum allowable culvert diameter shall be 15 inches (unless approved by city engineer). d.	Culvert design is to be in accordance with the methods contained in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and shall include a thorough analysis of both inlet and outlet control conditions. (5)	Piped collection systems. a.	The preliminary design (initial pipe sizing and profile design) of piped collection systems required herein shall be based upon conveyance of the peak flows associated with a fully developed 25-year storm with the hydraulic grade line (HGL) being one foot or more below the top of each structure, gutter line or proposed final ground surface elevation, whichever is lowest. b.	Once the preliminary design of a piped collection system has been prepared, it shall be analyzed for its behavior during conditions of 100-year flow, with the objective of this analysis being to ascertain the quantities of flow and flow paths followed by flows exceeding the capacity of the system, whether these pond at inlets or flow along the ground's surface. c.	Based on the analysis of 100-year conditions, the preliminary design shall be revised where necessary to produce a final design for which the likelihood of dwelling flooding, major property damage, or substantial public access and/or utility interruption shall be less than one chance in 100 years. d.	The minimum allowable pipe diameter shall be 15 inches.e.	Catch basins shall be spaced so that the spread in the street for a ten-year design flow shall not exceed eight feet, as measured from the face of the curb. Gutter spread calculations shall be submitted to the department for review and approval prior to issuance of a permit. f.	Complete flow, velocity, and hydraulic grade line computations, shall be provided for all portions of a piped collection system. Hydraulic grade lines shall be shown on the storm drainage profiles contained with the development plans for the 25-year storm. (6)	Energy dissipation—Piped systems and culverts. a.	Energy dissipation devices, such as splash pads, rip-rap, stilling basins, etc., shall be provided at the outlet of every culvert and piped collection system. Velocity protection shall be in accordance with the City of Valdosta Stormwater Ordinance. Velocities for the fully developed 25-year flow shall not exceed the non-erosive velocity as shown in the design manual for the receiving conveyance. b.	Energy dissipation devices shall be located entirely within the project site, and shall not encroach upon any required buffer. c.	When uniform, grade stone rip-rap is used for energy dissipation, ultraviolet-resistant filter fabric (200-pound test) shall be used between the stone layers. d.	Both minimum and maximum velocities should be considered when designing a culvert. The maximum velocity should be consistent with channel stability requirements at the culvert outlet. The maximum allowable velocity for corrugated metal pipe is 15 feet per second. There is no specified maximum allowable velocity for reinforced concrete pipe, but outlet protection shall be provided where discharge velocities will cause erosion problems. To ensure self-cleaning during partial depth flow, a minimum velocity of 2.5 feet per second, for the two-year flow, when the culvert is flowing partially full is required. e.	The culvert length and slope should be chosen to approximate existing topography and, to the degree practicable, the culvert invert should be aligned with the channel bottom and the skew angle of the stream, and the culvert entrance should match the geometry of the roadway embankment. The maximum slope using concrete pipe is ten percent and for CMP is 14 percent before pipe-restraining methods must be taken. Maximum drop in a drainage structure is ten feet. (7)	Minimum pipe and pipe coating requirements. a.	Galvanized corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches are not approved for use in the City of Valdosta. b.	Reinforced concrete pipe shall be in not less than eight-foot joint lengths. All joints shall be bell and spigot type, using an O-ring gasket conforming to ASTM C-443. Pipe shall be manufactured in accordance with AASHTO -170 and/or ASTM C-76. Class of pipe and wall thickness shall be in accordance with 1030-D, Georgia DOT Specification, Table 1. c.	Aluminized steel-coated pipe is not accepted by the city.d.	Smooth interior corrugated polyethylene pipe (must adhere to the following conditions):1.	This specification applies to high-density polyethylene (PE) corrugated pipe with an integrally formed smooth interior. PE pipe manufacturers shall be approved by the city engineer or his designee. 2.	This specification is applicable to nominal sizes 15-inch through 48-inch diameter. Requirements for test methods, dimensions, and markings of pipe sizes 15-inch through 36-inch diameter are those found in AASHTO designation - 294 and AASHTO MP7, Type S and D. 3.	Pipe and fittings shall be made of polyethylene compounds that meet or exceed the requirements of Type III, Category 4 or 5, Grade P33 or P34, Class C per ASTM D-1248 with the applicable requirements defined in ASTM D-1248. Clean reworked material may be used. 4.	The pipe and fittings shall be free of foreign inclusions and visible defects. For pipe sizes 15-inch diameter and greater, designed drainage perforations shall be permitted in corrugation valleys only. All holes of any kind in the corrugation crests or sidewalls shall be considered unacceptable. The ends of the pipe shall be cut and connected as recommended by the manufacturer. 5.	The normal size for the pipe and fittings is based on the nominal inside diameter of the pipe. Corrugated fittings may be either molded or fabricated by the manufacturer. Fittings supplied by manufacturers other than the supplier of the pipe shall not be permitted. 6.	Joints shall be made with split couplings, corrugated to engage the pipe corrugations, and shall engage a minimum of four corrugations, two on each side of the pipe joint. Where required by the city engineer or his designee, a neoprene gasket shall be utilized with the coupling to provide a soil-tight joint. Gaskets shall conform to ASTM F-477. 7.	Installation shall be in accordance with ASTM recommended practice D-2321 AASHTO Section 30, or as specified by the city engineer. 8.	Certification from the manufacturer that the product was manufactured, tested, and supplied in accordance with this specification shall be furnished to the city upon request. (8)	Pipe length. a.	Culverts carrying live streams shall extend to where the crown of the pipe intersects the roadway slope. b.	Pipes that do not carry live streams shall extend at least 50 feet beyond the front building setback lines, and may be required to extend farther where necessary to provide an adequately protected building site on the property. In nonresidential subdivisions, these pipes may temporarily end at the right-of-way line, but shall be extended as part of a subsequent development permit approved for the individual site. c.	The length requirement, shall be subject to requirements for maintaining stream buffers required by state law and city ordinances and regulations. (9)	Pipe installation. Reinforced concrete pipe, and smooth interior corrugated polyethylene pipe shall be installed in accordance with Section 550 of the Georgia DOT Standard Specifications, Construction of Roads and Bridges. Prior to approval of a final plat, the city may require the submittal of certification from a mandrel testing agency indicating that all installed pipe does not exceed five percent deflection. Based on field inspections, video surveillance may be required by the city on storm drain installations before approval of the final plat or issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If required, video surveillance should be done after completion of all activities that may damage the pipe but prior to placement of base, paving or landscaping over or near the pipe. If video surveillance indicates problems such as pipe deformation, cracking or joint separation, the pipe shall be removed and replaced before approval. a.	Bedding: All pipe structures shall be placed on stable earth or fine granular foundation, the characteristics of which would be expected to provide long-term stability. In all live stream pipe installations, in areas of low bearing solid or non-uniform foundations, in area where rock is encountered at the foundation level, or in other locations where conditions warrant, a minimum of six inches of crushed stone bedding is required (maximum size of stone shall be ¾"). The city may also require geotextiles or geogrids in problem areas. b.	Backfilling: Backfill on all pipe installations shall be constructed using foundation backfill material Type I or Type II, as specified in Sections 812.01 and 812.02 respectively, in Georgia DOT Standard Specifications. These materials shall be placed in layers of not more than six inches loose. Compaction of these materials shall be accomplished by hand tamping or machine tamping. Required compaction levels are as follows: 1.	Backfill within all street rights-of-way shall be compacted to 95 percent maximum density, tested using the AASHTO Method T-99. 2.	Backfill in all other areas shall be compacted to 85 percent maximum density, tested using the ASSHTO Method T-99. c.	Construction loads and minimum covers: If drainage pipe is installed prior to the completion of grading, a minimum of four feet of fill should be provided where needed to adequately protect the drainage structure during the land development phase, unless the structure itself is designed to withstand the anticipated live load during construction. (10)	End finish. Headwalls or other end treatments are required on all culverts (except under residential driveways) and at the outlet of all piped collection systems. a.	Headwalls are to be precast concrete, stone masonry with reinforced concrete footings, or poured-in-place, reinforced concrete with reinforced concrete footings. b.	End treatments that conform to the slope may be masonry, pre-cast concrete end sections, PE end sections, reinforced poured-in-place slope collars, or grouted rip-rap. Concrete flared end sections shall conform to Georgia DOT Specifications 1120. (11)	Junction boxes and catch basins. a.	Junction boxes and catch basins shall have metal manhole frames and lids for access.b.	Lids for storm drainage facilities shall be engraved in accordance with City of Valdosta Standard Specifications. (12)	Other structures. Box culverts may be used in accordance with the latest Standard Specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation. (Ord. No. 2006-71, § 4, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 4, 6-11-2015)
Sec. 42-405. - Surface drainage.     Natural drainage swales, creeks, streams or other natural paths for water movement outside the ROW, whether in a drainage easement or not, are not considered public drainage systems. Maintenance of these natural drainage paths is the responsibility of the property owner on which that drainage course traverses. The city may direct stormwater into open drainage swales, creeks, streams, etc., outside the ROW in order to maintain suitable drainage for roadway and ROW areas. The property owner is responsible for maintaining the drainage course open and in a free flowing condition through the use of periodic clearing of vegetation, mowing, and removal of debris to maintain efficient movement of water. (1)	Design standards. a.	All new proposed channels shall be designed to carry at least the fully developed 25-year storm with freeboard equal to 20 percent of the design flow depth. b.	Transition channels shall be provided at the inlet and outlet ends of all culverts and pipe systems, unless otherwise provided herein. c.	The maximum flow velocity at the project site's downstream property line shall not exceed the predeveloped velocity. d.	In cases of potential erosion due to irregular channel alignment, extreme velocities, or excessive slopes, a paved ditch may be required. However, if, in the opinion of the city engineer, the expected long-term maintenance of a surface drainage system could prove impractical, a pipe design may be required. e.	The cross-sectional shape of channels shall be as found in the standard drawings. "V" shaped cross-sections are not permitted in grassed channels. f.	If the channel will be affected by backwater from culverts, bridges, other structures or floodplains, backwater curves shall be shown in profiles of the channel. g.	All channels must be capable of conveying flows sufficient to ensure that overflow of the channel would not result in a likelihood of dwelling flooding, property damage or public access and/or utility interruption shall be greater than one chance in 100 years. h.	Channels shall be designed to carry the fully developed 25-year flow in accordance with City of Valdosta Stormwater Ordinance. (2)	Construction standards. a.	The channel shall be shaped to the dimensions specified on the approved plans and shall be free of over falls, gullies, or other irregularities. b.	Channels in fills shall be lined.c.	Protective cover in grassed channels shall be installed as soon as the earthwork is completed. (Ord. No. 2006-71, § 5, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 5, 6-11-2015)
Sec. 42-406. - Erosion control. (a)	Design standards. The procedures and requirements of the City of Valdosta Soil and Erosion Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time, shall be applicable whenever any land disturbance is proposed to occur which requires a permit to be obtained by these regulations and shall continue to apply until the project has been completed. (b)	Abandoned projects. Any project whose permit has lapsed shall immediately have all disturbed areas stabilized. This responsibility shall fall upon the owner, developer, contractor, or any and all other responsible parties involved in the land disturbance activity. (Ord. No. 2006-71, § 6, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 6, 6-11-2015)
Sec. 42-407. - Dam. (a)	In general. New dams which become subject to the requirements of the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety. Dams proposed to be 25 feet or more in height or proposed to have an impounding capacity of 100 acre-feet or more at maximum water storage elevation shall be subject to the following: (1)	The developer of any new dam in which development exists within the proposed breach zone shall be subject to the requirements of the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety adopted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. The developer shall obtain necessary approvals and permits from the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for the project and the dam prior to securing a permit from the engineering department. The developer of any new dam as to which development does not exist within the proposed breach zone shall submit construction plans to the city for review of the project and the dam prior to securing a permit. (2)	If the developer elects to construct the new dam in accordance with the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety, then new development shall be permitted within the dam breach zone. However, the dam shall meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety if development currently exists or is proposed in the dam breach zone. (3)	If the developer elects not to construct the new dam to the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety, then a dam breach analysis for the dam shall be submitted along with the construction plans for review prior to securing a permit. The design engineer shall utilize the computer model entitled "DAMBRK" for the dam breach analysis. (4)	Should the new dam not meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety, then only the following uses and structures shall be permitted within the dam breach easement: a.	Agriculture which requires no structures for human habitation within the dam breach zone including forestry, livestock raising, and agriculture and forestry access roads. b.	Fences.c.	Outdoor advertising signs provided they are located no closer than 100-feet from any residence or place of business. d.	Roads, driveways and parking areas.e.	Utility poles, towers, pipelines, water treatment outfalls and facilities, or other similar facilities and structures. (5)	For any new dam that is proposed not to meet the design for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety, the developer shall obtain a dam breach easement, recorded with the clerk of superior court, from any off-site property owner where it is proposed for the dam breach zone to extend off the property where the dam is being construction. The developer shall also cause a dam breach easement to be recorded upon the property being developed. (6)	Prior to recording of a final plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as appropriate, an as-built certification from a registered professional engineer shall be submitted to the city engineer. The certification shall state that the dam is constructed in accordance with the provisions of these regulations as well as the authorized construction plans. If the project is for the development of a subdivision, the developer shall also establish a legal entity, acceptable to the city, such as a mandatory property owners association, at the time of the recording of the final plat, responsible for the maintenance of the dam and its impoundment. (b)	New dams subject to regulation by the City of Valdosta. Dams proposed to be nine feet or more in height, but less than 25 feet in height, in combination with an impounding capacity proposed to be 20 acre-feet or more at maximum water storage elevation, but less than 100 acre-feet, shall be subject to the following: (1)	If the developer elects not to construct the new dam to the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety, then a dam breach analysis for the dam shall be submitted with the construction plans for review and authorization prior to securing a permit. The design engineer shall utilize the computer model entitled "DAMBRK" for the dam breach analysis. (2)	Should the new dam not meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety, then only the following uses and structures shall be permitted within the dam breach zone: a.	Agriculture which requires no structures for human habitation with the dam breach zone including forestry, livestock raising, and agricultural and forestry access roads. b.	Fences.c.	Outdoor advertising signs provided they are located no closer than 100 feet from any residence or place of business. d.	Roads, driveways and parking areas.e.	Utility poles, towers, pipelines, water treatment outfalls and facilities, or similar facilities and structures. (3)	If the developer elects to construct the new dam in accordance with the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety, then new development shall be permitted within the dam breach zone. However, the dam shall meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety if development currently exists or is proposed in the dam breach zone. (4)	Construction plans for new dams defined herein shall be submitted to the city for review for the project and the dam prior to securing a permit. (5)	For any dam that is proposed not to meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety, the developer shall obtain a dam breach easement, recorded with the clerk of superior court, from any off-site property owner where it is proposed for the dam breach zone to extend off the property where the dam is being constructed. The developer shall also cause a dam breach easement to be recorded upon the property being developed. (6)	Prior to recording of a final plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as appropriate, an as-built certification from a registered professional engineer shall be submitted to the city engineer. The certification shall state that the dam is constructed in accordance with the provisions of these regulations as well as the authorized construction plans. If the project is for the development of a subdivision, the developer shall also establish a legal entity, acceptable to the city, such as a mandatory property owners association, at time of recording of the final plat, responsible for the maintenance of the dam and its impoundment. (c)	Existing dams. Existing dams that are located on a project site and will remain after construction is completed shall comply with the provisions of this article and all reference articles as if they were new dams. (d)	Existing Category II dams. When an existing Category II dam may be classified to a Category I dam because of a proposed development downstream of the dam, the following shall be provided by the developer for review by the safe dams program: (1)	Location of the Category II dam and the proposed development.(2)	A surveyed cross-section of the stream valley at the location of the proposed development including finished floor elevations. (3)	A dam breach analysis using the Dambreak computer model to establish the height of the flood wave in the downstream floodplain. The dambreak modeling shall be completed in accordance with the safe dams program quality assurance program by a qualified registered engineer. (Ord. No. 2006-71, § 7, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 7, 6-11-2015)
Sec. 42-408. - Extended detention. (a)	Extended detention facility design requirements. Wet detention facilities shall be designed and constructed to meet the following requirements: (1)	Storage volume of permanent pool: The permanent pool storage (Vb) shall be at least 50 percent of the Water Quality Volume (WQV). The part of the WQV (50 percent or less) not used in the permanent pool shall be detained for 24 hours and the storage volume may be used as part of the detention requirements. The WQV to be stored shall be based upon the project area. The project area compensated for in a pond shall not exceed the total drainage area draining to the pond. Off-site areas that do not drain through other water quality BMP's may be used to compensate for areas that by-pass the pond. By-passed areas shall be minimized as much as practical. Off-site areas exceeding the project site area may by-pass the pond. (2)	Depth of permanent pool: a.	Mean depth: The mean depth (Z) of the permanent pool shall be between three feet and seven feet and is calculated by dividing the permanent pool storage volume (Vb) by the surface area (As) [(Vb)/(As) = Z]. b.	Maximum depth: The maximum depth of the permanent pool shall be no greater than 13 feet unless a modification is approved. The intent of these regulations is to ensure that the depth of the facility is not out of proportion with the surface area of the facility. Granting of a modification will not nullify these regulations when the depth and surface area of the facility is based on existing natural topography. (3)	Minimum surface area of permanent pool: The minimum surface area (As) of the permanent pool shall be 0.25 acres. The minimum ratio of surface area to drainage area used to calculate the permanent pool (Aw) in residential watersheds shall be one percent unless a modification is approved. The intent of these regulations is to ensure that the depth is minimized to increase removal efficiencies. Granting of a modification will not nullify these regulations when the depth and surface area of the facility is based on existing natural topography. As/Aw ratios in excess of three percent are desirable for nonresidential watersheds with relatively high levels of imperviousness. (4)	Side slopes along the shoreline: a.	The side slope in graded areas is recommended to be 3H:1V or flatter. When the depth of the permanent pool is greater than four feet and the slope is steeper than 4H:1V, a bench shall be provided. The bench shall be ten feet in width and is recommended to be 15 feet in width. The bench shall have a slope of 10H:1V. The bench shall be located so that the permanent pool elevation is between the top and bottom edge of the bench. b.	Side slopes shall be top soiled, nurtured or planted from two feet below to one foot above the permanent pool control elevation to promote wetland vegetative growth. Below the safety ledge, the pond side shall be sloped to meet topographic or volumetric constraints. (5)	Length to width ratio of permanent pool: The minimum length: width ratio of the permanent pool shall be 2:1. The length shall be measured at the shortest flow path from the inlet to the outlet. The width shall be calculated as the surface of the pond divided by the length. In addition, the location of the outlet structure within the basin shall maximize travel time from the inlet to the outlet. Baffles or islands may be installed within the permanent pool to increase the flow path length and to minimize short-circuiting. (6)	Soil permeability: In some cases where relatively permeable soils are encountered, water drawdown rates shall be minimized by either compacting the permanent pool soils during construction, incorporating clay into the soil or by installing an artificial liner. (7)	Spillway and dam design: The principal spillway, emergency spillway and dam shall be designed in accordance with these regulations. (8)	Forebay: a.	To facilitate major cleanout activities, a sediment forebay shall be constructed near the inlet to the permanent pool to trap coarse sediment particles. The forebay volume may be included in the permanent pool volume requirements. The forebay storage capacity shall be ten percent of the runoff from 1.2 inches of rainfall draining to the facility to accommodate sediment accumulations. The forebay should not exceed ten percent of the permanent pool. The volume shall be calculated as: FBV = (0.1) 1.2 (Rv) AS/12 (ft3) Where Rv = 0.05 +I(0.009) I = Percent impervious as a whole number AS = Total on-site area draining to facility (ft2) b.	The facility shall be dredged to ensure that all of the permanent pool storage volume is available after the upstream area has been stabilized. All temporary sediment control measures employed during land-disturbing activities to trap sediment shall be located outside of state waters. c.	The forebay shall be distinguished from the permanent pool. Options which may be used include: a lateral sill with wetland vegetation; two ponds in series; differential pool depth; rock-filled gabions or a retaining wall; or a horizontal rock filter placed laterally across the permanent pool. (9)	Inlet and outlet structures: a.	The lnlet design shall dissipate flow energy and diffuse the inflow plume where it enters the forbay or permanent pool. Options which may be used include: drop manholes; energy dissipaters at the bottom of paved ditches; a lateral bench with wetland vegetation and the placement of large rock defectors at each inlet. b.	The outlet design shall consist of a riser with a hood or trash rack to prevent clogging and an adequate antivortex device for facilities serving large drainage areas. The outlet may be sized to achieve the flood control performance standards contained in these regulations. An emergency spillway shall be provided in accordance with these regulations. c.	The channel which receives the discharge from the basin's outfall pipe shall be protected from erosive discharge velocities. Options which may be used include: rip-rap lining of the channel; the provision of stilling basins, check dams, rock deflectors or other devices to reduce outfall discharge velocities to non-erosive levels. d.	An orifice for any required extended detention volume shall be sized using the same criteria in the section for dry extended detention facilities. (10)	Access: Access requirements shall be as specified in the section of these regulations for detention facility easement requirements. (11)	Easement requirements: Easement requirements shall be as specified in the section of these regulations for detention facility easement requirements with the change that the easement enclosing the facility shall be named as best management practice (BMP) easement. (12)	Engineer's certification and record drawings: A certified record survey of each facility shall be prepared by a land surveyor currently registered in the State of Georgia. A certified record drawing of the facility shall be prepared based upon this survey. The design engineer shall certify that the facility functions hydraulically as designed. The record drawing shall be submitted to the city at least one week prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval (as appropriate to the project). Record drawings of off-site facilities shall be recorded at least one week prior to the recording of the subdivision final plat. (b)	Dry extended detention facilities. Extended detention facilities with wetland plantings shall be designed and constructed to meet the following requirements: (1)	Storage volume: The water quality volume (WQV) to be stored is defined in these regulations under treatment of runoff. Up to 50 percent of the storage volume shall be detained for 24 hours and may be used for detention requirements. The remaining portion (50 percent or greater) shall be drained through a filter drain in 24 hours. The filter drain shall be the only outlet draining the WQV. S - BMP storage volume in cubic feet. (2)	Minimum surface area: The facility should have a minimum surface area of one percent of the total drainage area when the volume contained in the facility equals the required BMP storage volume. (3)	Side slopes along the shoreline: The side slope in graded areas shall be 3H:1V or flatter. The normal ponding surface elevation shall be defined as the elevation when the volume contained in the facility equals the required water quality volume. When the depth to the normal pond surface is greater than four feet and the side slope is steeper than 4H:1V, a flat bench shall be provided. The bench shall be at least ten feet in width and is recommended to be 15 feet in width. The slope of the bench shall be 10H:1V. The bench shall be located so that the normal ponding surface elevation is between the top and bottom edge of the bench. (4)	Length: width ratio: The length: width ratio shall be maximized. The length shall be measured as the shortest flow path from the inlet to the outlet. The width shall be calculated as the surface area of the pond divided by the length. (5)	Depth of facility: The average cross-sectional area of the facility shall be calculated as the volume of the pond divided by the length. The water velocity shall be determined by dividing the maximum outflow rate by the average cross-sectional area. The maximum desired water velocity shall be 0.5 feet per second. (6)	Spillway and dam design: The principal spillway, emergency spillway and dam shall be designed in accordance with these regulations. (7)	Forebay: The forebay requirements are the same as for wet extended detention. (8)	Inlet and outlet structures: a.	Inlet and outlet structures shall meet the same requirements as wet detention facilities.b.	The size of the orifice for the facility shall be computed using the following orifice equation with a 24 hours draw down time from the full pool BMP volume (S) and an orifice coefficient of 0.60: h =  Head measured in feet from the elevation at the required BMP storage to the centroid of the orifice Qa = Average BMP outflow rate in cfs Qa = S/3600 x 24 A = Required orifice area in square feet A = Qa/(0.6 x(64.4 x h/2)0.5) c.	An allowance for base flow shall be provided. The design engineer either shall determine the base flow using a factor of 1.6 cfs per square mile or may use another standard engineering practice if warranted. (9)	Access requirements: Access requirements shall be specified in detention facility easement requirements of these regulations. (10)	Easement requirements: Easement requirements shall be as specified in detention facility easement requirements of these regulations with the exception that the easement enclosing the facility shall be named a best management practice (BMP) easement. (11)	Engineer's certification and record drawings: A certified record survey of each facility shall be prepared by a land surveyor currently registered in the State of Georgia. A certified record drawing of the facility shall be prepared based upon this survey. The design engineer shall certify that the facility functions hydraulically as designed. The record drawing shall be submitted to the department at least one week prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval (as appropriate to the project). Record drawings of off-site facilities shall be recorded at least one week prior to the recording of the final subdivision plat. (12)	Wetland plantings: The facility bottom shall be planted with plantings indigenous to local wetlands per recommendation of the city arborist. (13)	The bottom of the pond shall be graded for positive drainage.(c)	Wet and extended detention facility maintenance. Maintenance requirements shall be as specified in detention facility maintenance of these regulations. (Ord. No. 2006-71, § 8, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 8, 6-11-2015)
Sec. 42-409. - Water quality best management practices. (a)	Treatment of runoff. (1)	All projects, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (a)(4)below, that meet one or more of the following criteria shall provide water quality treatment based on the modeled total suspended solids (TSS) load off the project for post-construction conditions. The determination of the TSS load shall be in accordance with the stormwater ordinance. The modeled TSS load shall not exceed 850 pounds/acre/year. a.	New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more. b.	Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more. c.	Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (a)(1)a. and b. above, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. (2)	The water quality volume (WQV) shall be the runoff from 1.2 inches of rain from the project site. The volume shall be calculated as: WQV = 1.2(Rv)As/12 (ft3) Where Rv = 0.05 +I(0.009) I = Percent Impervious as a whole number A;sub§\sub; = On-site area to be treated(ft2) (3)	Runoff from any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city engineer to be a hotspot land use or activity shall be adequately treated and addressed through the use of structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. (4)	The following activities are exempt from providing treatment:a.	Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project. b.	Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures.c.	Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city engineer. (b)	Facility location criteria. (1)	Facility location criteria shall be as specified for detention facilities in detention facility location criteria of these regulations. (2)	In a residential subdivision, the following best management practices must be located on a separate lot in accordance with these regulations, if not located on a recreation area as specified in these regulations. a.	Extended detention ponds;b.	Retention ponds;c.	Sand filters;d.	Constructed wetlands;e.	Infiltration trenches;f.	Oil/grit separators.(c)	Easement requirements. (1)	Easement requirements shall be as specified in detention facility easement requirements of this article with the exception that the easement enclosing the facility shall be named a best management practice (BMP) easement. (2)	Stream buffer easements shall be shown on the final plat for areas that are claimed in the TSS model as undisturbed stream buffers for the site. These areas shall be left in a natural, undisturbed condition except for walking rails. Trails shall not be allowed within 25 feet of a stream bank without a state waters buffer variance. (3)	Upland area easements in nonresidential subdivisions that are claimed as undisturbed upland areas for the site, shall be recorded in an easement acceptable to the city. These areas shall be left in a natural, undisturbed condition except for walking trails. (d)	Facility maintenance. (1)	Maintenance requirements shall be as specified in detention facility maintenance section of these regulations. (2)	Prior to or concurrent with the recording of a final plat for a subdivision, or issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a non-subdivision project, the developer shall provide acceptance surety such as a bond or letter of credit providing for the maintenance of the facility for a period of not less than 18 months. The amount of the surety shall be the greater of 50 percent of construction costs of the facility or 100 percent of the cost to clean out the facility. At the end of 18 months, the city may require the surety to be renewed due to anticipated maintenance caused by such concerns as future construction activity in the basin draining to the facility. A renewed surety may be required up to a total maximum of ten years. The surety for a facility shall be renewed during the ten years until: a.	The surface water drainage area within the project has undergone final stabilization and all planned construction activity has been completed. b.	All stormwater runoff in the surface water drainage area within the project is coming from undisturbed or stabilized areas. c.	At least 90 percent of the lots in that surface water drainage area within the project have been sold to an unrelated party, permanent structures completed and final stabilization achieved. d.	The accumulation of acreage of undeveloped lots, lots with no completed permanent structure and no final stabilization, within the surface water drainage area within the project is less than five acres or ten percent of the total area of the common development draining to the facility, whichever is greater. e.	Within two months of surety release, the facility shall be cleaned out if necessary and a new record survey, drawing and certification showing that the volume of the facility is equal to or greater than the volume shown in the record survey, drawing and certification when the facility was approved. As an alternate, a new record survey, drawing and certification showing that the facility complies with these regulations. (e)	Facility certification and record drawings. Requirements for a certified record survey and addendum to the stormwater management report shall be the same for water quality facilities as for detention facilities. (f)	Existing subdivision with regional water quality facilities. Where the drainage is treated in a regional water quality facility previously approved, lots in nonresidential subdivision shall either conform to the permit and water quality regulations at the time of approval or conform to the current water quality regulations. (g)	Existing subdivisions without regional water quality facilities. Where drainage is treated in a regional detention facility previously approved, lots in nonresidential subdivisions (or phases in residential subdivision) shall conform to the current water quality regulations. (h)	Retrofitting of existing detention facilities for water quality treatment. If water quality treatment for a proposed development is to be provided in an existing detention basin then treatment must be provided for the entire original project basin. A modification to the 25-year detention requirement may be granted for the purpose of retrofitting the detention pond to meet current water quality regulations. Granting of a modification will meet the intent and purpose of these regulations when: (1)	The detention requirements of the current regulations are provided in the facility for the one-year, two-year, five-year and ten-year storm. For a retrofitted basin, the volume of the one-year storm shall be based on the original project area being detained instead of the total area draining to the basin. (2)	The water quality requirements of the current regulations as stated in these regulations are provided for the original project area in the facility. (3)	The ponding limits create a hardship if no modification is granted.(4)	The outlet structure meets the requirements of the current regulations.(i)	Retrofitting of existing water quality facilities. If water quality treatment for a proposed development is provided in an existing water quality facility then water quality treatment conforming to the current regulations must be provided for the entire original project basin. (j)	Redevelopment. (1)	When 5,000 square feet or more of new impervious surface area is added or one acre or more of a developed project site is disturbed for redevelopment and the disturbed area is more than 50 percent of the property, the water quality requirements of this section must be met for the entire site. (2)	When less than 5,000 square feet of new impervious surface area is added, or less than one acre of land of a developed project site is disturbed for redevelopment, the project is exempt from having to provide the water quality requirements of this section for the project or for the rest of the site. (3)	When 5,000 square feet or more of new impervious surface area is added or ine acre or more of a developed project site is disturbed for redevelopment and the disturbed area is less than 50 percent of the property, the project shall provide water quality treatment for just the improvements on the site. (Ord. No. 2006-71, § 9, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 9, 6-11-2015)
Sec. 42-410. - Violations, enforcement and penalties.     Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. (1)	Notice of violation. If the city engineer determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: a.	The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person.b.	The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring.c.	A statement specifying the nature of the violation.d.	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action. e.	A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. f.	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city engineer by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient). (2)	Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city engineer shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days to cure such violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient). In the event the application or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city engineer may take any one or more of the following actions. a.	Stop work order. The city engineer may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. b.	Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city engineer may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. c.	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city engineer may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city engineer may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. d.	Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city engineer shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city engineer has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city engineer may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. e.	Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city engineer may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 2006-71, § 10, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 10, 6-11-2015)
Secs. 42-411—42-430. - Reserved. 
Chapter 46 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 30; fires restricted at parks, § 74-3.State Law reference— The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 46-1. - Additional standards adopted.     For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, there is adopted the state rules and regulations of the safety fire marshal, and by adopting the Life Safety Code, current edition (NFPA 101), and the whole thereof, of which one copy each is filed in the office of the city clerk. Such code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section, and the provisions of such code shall be controlled within the limits of the city. (Code 1976, § 3-2024)Cross reference— Construction codes, § 18-41. 
Sec. 46-2. - Use of fire hydrants.     It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from any fire hydrant, whether public or private, for any purpose other than for the extinguishment of fires, or lawful city purposes. (Code 1976, § 3-2005)
Sec. 46-3. - Tampering with hydrants.     It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper or interfere with any hydrant of the city, except by authority of the city. (Code 1976, § 3-2006)
Sec. 46-4. - Obstructing fire station.     It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner the entrance to any fire station house. (Code 1976, § 3-2007)
Sec. 46-5. - Fire department responsibility regarding hazardous material emergency response; recovery of cost. (a)	Whenever there shall occur within the boundaries of the city any incident involving a chemical or material defined by federal, state or local law as a hazardous substance, or which is in fact hazardous in the natural state to the public health or safety, or when such chemical or material is involved in a release to the atmosphere, fire, chemical reaction, or detonation, and when the incident shall endanger any portion of the population or property of the citizens of the jurisdiction or shall expose anyone within such boundaries to potentially toxic or lethal agents, the fire department is authorized and directed to mitigate the incident. (b)	Within this section, the "responsible person" shall be defined as the person or company operating any facility or vehicle involved in the incident or the property owner upon whose property the involved chemicals or materials were stored at the time of the incident. (c)	All costs incurred by the city or any other agency or person involved in the mitigation of incidents defined in this section shall be borne by the responsible person. (Ord. No. 96-11, § 3-2027, 3-21-1996)
Secs. 46-6—46-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Departments, § 2-231 et seq.State Law reference— Local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; local fire safety standards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4.
Sec. 46-41. - Personnel.     The fire department of the city shall consist of such officers and members as the mayor and council may prescribe. (Code 1976, § 3-2001)
Sec. 46-42. - Selection and government of members.     The fire chief and the other officers and members of the fire department shall be selected by the city manager and shall be subject to such lawful rules and regulations as may be adopted by the mayor and council. (Code 1976, § 3-2002)
Sec. 46-43. - Fire chief's duty at fires.     The fire chief, and in his absence his designee, shall have sole direction of the operation and management of the fire department at fires, subject at all times to the orders of the city manager, and shall be clothed with the powers of a police officer of the city at fires. (Code 1976, § 3-2003)
Sec. 46-44. - Power and duty of fire inspector as to flammables.     The fire marshal or fire inspector shall have the right and authority and it shall be their duty or that of either of them, upon discovering any unnecessary rubbish or other flammable or ignitable matter accumulated or stored in any building or on any premises described in this chapter, to order in writing that the matter be removed at once by the occupant of the building or premises or, if the building is unoccupied, by the owner or other person in charge. (Code 1976, § 3-2004)
Sec. 46-45. - Hiring procedures for employment with the Valdosta Fire Department. (a)	Purpose. The purpose is to establish a hiring procedure for employment with the City of Valdosta Fire Department. This procedure shall be consistent with the employment guidelines of the City of Valdosta and all applicable federal and state laws. (b)	Scope. The City of Valdosta and Valdosta Fire Department seek qualified and the best fit personnel for the organization based on individual merit without regard to gender, ethnicity, religion, or any other status protected under Title VII. (c)	Process. The hiring process will consist of three levels: human resources, evaluation, and selections. (d)	Level One - (human resources department). (1)	When a vacancy occurs, the fire chief has two options:a.	Option 1: Utilized the current active pool within the past six months of selection. If this option is selected, the human resources department and evaluation levels are skipped, and the fire chief proceeds to the selection level. b.	Option 2: The fire chief must notify the City of Valdosta Human Resources Department to initiate the hiring process. The notice of intent to accept applications shall be made in the legal organ of the City of Valdosta for a minimum of 30 days. The job announcements may consist of advisement on city's internal job announcements bulletin, in the Valdosta Daily Times Newspaper, on the city and fire department's webpage, local media (news and radio) and external fire service websites. The announcement will consist of an opening and closing date for receipt of applications. (2)	To apply for employment with the Valdosta Fire Department, applicants must meet and/or agree to the following requirements: a.	Eighteen years of age prior to the established closing date.b.	Possess a high school diploma or a general education development equivalency (GED).c.	Possess a valid driver's license.d.	Must live within 20 miles of City Hall (216 E. Central Avenue, Valdosta, Georgia) within one year of employment date. e.	Sign and agree to the Valdosta Fire Department Training Agreement upon employment (See appendix A, attached to Ordinance 2014-17). (3)	In addition to the Valdosta Fire Department requirements for employment, the Georgia Firefighters Standards and Training Council require the following employment standards: a.	No felony conviction within 10 years prior to employment as a firefighter.(4)	At the closing of the application process, the human resources department will ensure the applicants meet the pre-employment requirements and have submitted all necessary documents. All applicants meeting the pre-employment requirements will be notified by the human resources department to commence the evaluation process. (e)	Level Two - (evaluation). (1)	The evaluation level will consist of three events: the national fire select test, the physical agility test and oral interviews. (2)	The human resource department will notify all applicants interested in participating in the national fire select test and the physical agility test. The national fire select test will be held at the Lowndes County EOC (250 Douglas Street, Valdosta, Georgia) and the physical agility test will be held at the Valdosta Fire Department Regional Training Center (200 N. Blanchard Street, Valdosta, Georgia). Both tests will be administered on the same day. The national fire select test will be administered first and all candidates who successfully pass will advance to the physical agility test. (3)	Candidates that successfully passed both test will be notified to participate in an oral interview event on at a later date. a.	The national fire select test. 1.	Candidates will be responsible for paying a one-time test administrative fee of $15.00. The total amount due must be paid during the check-in process. The following methods of payment will be accepted: o	Casho	Money order (payable to City of Valdosta)o	Cashier's check (payable to City of Valdosta)*** Personal checks and/or debit/credit cards will not be accepted *** 2.	The national fire select test is an entry-level firefighter written test consisting of 166 items with a maximum time of two hours and 30 minutes (2 ½ hrs). The test is divided into two sections: a general aptitude test and a personality inventory. The constructs measured by the test included: o	Reading abilityo	Mathematical reasoningo	Map readingo	Writing abilityo	Human relations:□	Interpersonal skills□	Teamwork□	Commitment□	Honesty□	Integrity□	Emotional stabilityo	Reasoning skills□	Reasoning□	Vocabulary□	Mechanical aptitude□	Spatial rotationo	Work style□	Critical work styles and behaviors3.	NFST disqualifying factors: The following items will automatically disqualify candidates from participating in the national fire select test section of the hiring process. o	Not providing one of the following valid photo ID's during check-in□	Drivers' license□	Government issued ID□	Passporto	Tardiness for your scheduled time (the official time clock will be located on the check-in computer) □	Candidates must be seated at their assigned station no later than their scheduled time. □	Candidates entering the parking lot, and/or building at their scheduled time will be considered tardy and will not be admitted into the NFST. o	Non-payment of the $15.00 test administrative feeb.	Physical agility test. 1.	Candidates participating in the physical agility test will be required to complete the following stations continuously in chronological order: o	Aerial ladder climb ten minutes (maximum)o	Ladder climb with confined space crawl one minute and 30 seconds (maximum)o	Stair climb with high-rise hose hoist one minute and 45 seconds (maximum)o	Forcible entry chopping simulator 22 seconds (maximum)o	Fire hose carry one minutes and 30 seconds (maximum)o	Rescue drag one minutes and 30 seconds (maximum)o	One-half-mile (walk and/or run) six minutes and 30 seconds (maximum)2.	All candidates will complete each station wearing gloves and a rescue helmet, except when participating in the one-half-mile (walk and/or run) station. The constructs measured by the test include: Station 1: o	Climb a 75-foot aerial ladderStation 2: o	Climb up a flight of stairs, climb a 12-foot ladder to the top of the building, climb over the railing then crawl through a confined space tube before safely climbing down a 24-foot ladder. Station 3: o	Place a high-rise pack section of 1 ¾-inch hoseline (with nozzle) over the shoulder and climb three flights of stairs. Place the high-rise hose on the landing, immediately hoist a rolled 2 ½" hose up to the third floor, and pull the hose over the railing dropping it on the landing. Once the hose touches the landing, immediately hoist the hose over the railing until it touches the ground. Once the hose touches the ground, place the high-rise pact over the shoulder and descend down the three flights of stairs. Station 4: o	Strike a large tractor-size tire with a sledgehammer, moving the tire two feet.Station 5: o	Place a charged 1 ¾-inch hoseline over the shoulder and carry for 125 feet.Station 6: o	Lift a 175 lbs. (estimated) rescue mannequin and drag for 100 feet.Station 7: o	Walk, run or a combination of both for a total of one-half-mile without stopping.c.	Oral interviews. 1.	The candidate will participate in an oral interview with a fire department panel. The fire department panel will consist of an internal team of five members varying from battalion chiefs to sergeants. 2.	Oral interviews disqualifying factors. The following items will automatically disqualify candidates from participating in the oral interviews section of the hiring process: o	Not providing one of the following valid photo ID's during check-in:□	Drivers' license□	Government issued ID□	Passporto	Tardiness for your scheduled time (official time clock will be located on the check-in computer) □	Candidates must be seated at their assigned station no later than their scheduled time. □	Candidates entering the parking lot, exiting their cars and/or building at their scheduled time will be considered tardy and will not be admitted into the interview process. (f)	Level Three - (selection). (1)	At the conclusion of the evaluation process, the fire chief will submit a final list of candidates recommended for hire. The human resources department will contact the candidate to make a conditional employment offer, pending the final satisfactory completion of the background checks, substance screen and pre-employment physicals. (Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 8-7-2014)
Sec. 46-46. - Promotional procedures for the Valdosta Fire Department. (a)	Purpose. The purpose is to establish promotional procedures and a succession planning matrix for the ranks of firefighter, sergeant, lieutenant, captain and battalion chief within the Valdosta Fire Department. These procedures shall be consistent with the employment guidelines of the City of Valdosta and all applicable federal and state laws. (b)	Scope. The Valdosta Fire Department seeks to promote the most qualified and best fit for the organization based on individual merits without regard to gender, ethnicity, religion, or any other status protected under Title VII. (c)	Definitions. (1)	Accredited institution - Organizations that establish operating standards for educational professional institutions that determines the extent to which the standards are met. The Valdosta Fire Department will recognize the following regional and national institutional accrediting agencies (http://ope.ed.gov/accreditation/): •	Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges•	Accrediting Council for Continuing Education and Training•	Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools•	Council on Occupational Education•	Distance Education and Training Council, Accrediting Commission•	Middle State Commission on Higher Education•	Middle State Commission on Secondary Schools•	New England Association of Schools and Colleges, Commission on Institutions of Higher Education •	New York State Board of Regents, and the Commissioner of Education•	North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, The Higher Learning Commission•	Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities•	Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Commission on Colleges•	Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools, Accreditation Commission•	Western Association of Schools and Colleges, Accrediting Commission for Community and Junior Colleges •	Western Association of Schools and Colleges, Senior Colleges and University Commission(2)	Assessment center - This includes job related exercises to assess a level of proficiency for a promotional position. (3)	Assessment center orientation - An information session to receive a brief overview of the assessment center. (4)	Assessment center reviews - A review of the candidates' outcome during the assessment center. (5)	Continuous service - No interruption of service from your start date. (6)	Disqualification - Candidates will automatically be disqualified and/or no longer eligible for the promotional process if they received disciplinary actions above a written reprimand: a.	One year prior to the effective start day of the promotional process.b.	During the promotional process.c.	While on the current promotional list.(7)	Effective date - The effective date is the date established for a candidate to obtain the required certifications and/or degree to meet the eligibility requirements. Candidates promoted prior to the effective date are not required to obtain the required certifications and/or degree; however are strongly encouraged to pursue the requirements. (8)	Eligibility requirement - The minimum criteria established for personnel to participate in the promotional process. The promotional process is not a mandatory process for Valdosta Fire Department employees; therefore, it will be the responsibility of each individual to obtain the necessary eligibility requirements. (9)	Evaluation Process - Level Two of the promotional process. (10)	NPQ - National professional qualification. (11)	Oral interviewers - A panel(s) of internal and external individuals. (12)	Promotional list - An alphabetical list of successful candidates upon completion of the evaluation process from which promotions may be made as vacancies occur. The promotional list will consist of two bands based on the average tabulation of the total evaluation process. o	Band A - will consist of the top 50 percent.o	Band B - will consist of the bottom 50 percent.(13)	Related fields - Any degree or major that enhances firefighter's knowledge, skills and abilities to provide the highest quality of service. The following list of degrees and majors included but not limited to: o	English;o	Mathematics;o	Science (chemistry, physics, biology);o	Computer science;o	Medical emergencies.(14)	Reference list - A list of books that will assist the candidate in properly preparing for the written examination. A reference list will be available 60 calendar days prior to the written examination. (15)	Written examination - A job related examination to assess a level of proficiency for a promotional position. (d)	Eligibility requirements. (1)	Firefighter. a.	Eighteen years of age prior to the established closing date.b.	Possess a high school diploma or a general education development equivalency (GED) from an accredited educational institution. c.	Possess a valid driver's license.d.	No felony convictions within ten years prior to employment date.e.	Must live within 20 miles of City Hall (216 E. Central Avenue) within in one year of employment date. f.	Sign and agree to the Valdosta Fire Department Training Agreement upon employment.(2)	Sergeant. a.	Three years of continuous service as a firefighter with VFD.b.	Two years as an apparatus relief driver.c.	NPQ Firefighter II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).d.	Fire Instructor I (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).e.	Fire Officer I (Effective Date - December 31, 2017).(3)	Fire lieutenant. a.	Operations division: 1.	Three years of continuous service as a sergeant with VFD.2.	NPQ Firefighter II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).3.	Incident Safety Officer (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).4.	Fire Instructor II (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).5.	Hazardous Materials Technician Certification (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).6.	Fire Officer II (Effective Date - December 31, 2017).b.	Prevention division: 1.	Three years of continuous service as a sergeant with VFD. External candidates must have a minimum of three years of fire service experience working in a fire prevention bureau at a rank equivalent to a sergeant. 2.	Fire Inspector I.3.	NPQ Firefighter II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).4.	Fire and Life Safety Educator I (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).5.	Arson Investigator I (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).6.	Fire Officer II (Effective Date - December 31, 2017).c.	Training division: 1.	Three years of continuous service as a Sergeant with VFD.2.	NPQ Firefighter II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).3.	Fire Officer II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).4.	Fire Instructor II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).5.	Incident Safety Officer (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).6.	Hazardous Materials Technician Certification (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).(4)	Captain. a.	Operation division: 1.	Two years of continuous service as a lieutenant with VFD.2.	NPQ Firefighter II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).3.	Incident Safety Officer (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).4.	Health and Safety Officer (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).5.	Fire Instructor II (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).6.	Fire Officer III (Effective Date - December 31, 2017).7.	Associate's degree in fire science/administration/protection or related field (Effective Date - December 31, 2019). b.	Fire prevention (fire marshal): 1.	Three years of continuous service as a Lieutenant with VFD. External candidates must have a minimum of three years of fire service experience working in a fire prevention bureau at a rank equivalent to a lieutenant. 2.	Life Safety Educator II.3.	Fire Inspector II.4.	Arson Investigator II.5.	Basic Public Information Officer.6.	NPQ Firefighter II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).7.	Fire Instructor II (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).8.	Fire Officer III (Effective Date - December 31, 2017).9.	Associate's degree in fire science/administration/protection or related field (Effective Date - December 31, 2019). c.	Training division: 1.	Three years of continuous service as a lieutenant with VFD.2.	NPQ Firefighter II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).3.	Incident Safety Officer (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).4.	Fire Instructor II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).5.	Health and Safety Officer (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).6.	Fire Officer III (Effective Date - December 31, 2017).7.	Associate's degree in fire science/administration/protection or related field from an accredited institution (Effective Date - December 31, 2019). d.	Special operations: 1.	Three years of continuous service as a lieutenant with VFD.2.	NPQ Firefighter II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).3.	Incident Safety Officer (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).4.	Health and Safety Officer (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).5.	Hazardous Materials Technician Certification (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).6.	Fire Instructor II (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).7.	Fire Officer III (Effective Date - December 31, 2017).8.	Technical Rescue: Rope Techniques (Effective Date - December 31, 2017).9.	Associate's degree in fire science/administration/protection or related field from an accredited institution (Effective Date - December 31, 2019). (5)	Battalion chief. a.	Two years of continuous service as a captain or five years of continuous service as a lieutenant with VFD or a combination of both equivalent to five years of continuous supervisory experience at the rank of lieutenant or above within VFD. b.	Fire Instructor I.c.	NIMS 300 (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).d.	NIMS 400 (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).e.	NPQ Firefighter II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).f.	Basic Public Information Officer (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).g.	Incident Safety Officer (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).h.	Health and Safety Officer (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).i.	Fire Officer II (Effective Date - December 31, 2015).j.	Fire Officer III (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).k.	Fire Instructor II (Effective Date - December 31, 2016).l.	Fire Officer IV (Effective Date - December 31, 2017).m.	A bachelor's degree in fire science/administration/protection, business administration, public administration or related field from an accredited institution (Effective Date - December 31, 2020). (e)	Promotional process. The promotional process will consist of three levels: human resources, evaluation process and selection process. (1)	Level One - (human resources). When a vacancy occurs, The fire chief has two options: a.	Option 1: Utilize the current active pool within the past six months of selection (hiring process only). b.	Option 2: The fire chief must notify the City of Valdosta Human Resource Department to initiate the promotional process. Depending on the vacant position, the position may be posted both internally and externally for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days. 1.	At the closing of the application process, the human resource department will submit the names/applications of all personnel that meet the eligibility requirements for the posted position. 2.	The training division will validate all the candidates' certification requirements.3.	All eligible candidates will be notified of their eligibility to participate in the promotional process and any additional information pertaining to the process: o	Written examination date(s);o	Reference list;o	Evaluation process dates (Level Two);o	Assessment center orientation date(s);o	Assessment center review date(s).(2)	Level Two - (evaluation process). a.	Firefighters: 1.	Participate in the VFD Fire Recruit School.2.	Must successfully pass and/ or possess the following certifications within 30 calendar days of completion of VFD Fire Recruit School. (i)	NPQ Firefighter I;(ii)	NPQ Firefighter II;(iii)	EMR (Emergency Medical Responder);(iv)	Haz-Mat Operations;(v)	Haz-Mat Awareness.b.	Sergeant: 1.	Participate in the following three evaluations processes:Participate in a written examination .....40 percent Participate in an assessment center .....40 percent Participate in an oral interview .....20 percent c.	Lieutenant: 1.	Participate in the following three evaluations processes:Participate in a written examination .....30 percent Participate in an assessment center .....40 percent Participate in an oral interview .....30 percent d.	Captain: 1.	Participate in the following two evaluations processes:Participate in an assessment center .....60 percent Participate in an Oral interview .....40 percent e.	Battalion chief: 1.	Participate in the following two evaluations processes:Participate in an assessment center .....50 percent Participate in an oral interview .....50 percent 2.	At the completion of the evaluation process a final promotional list will be available and effective for one year. In the event, that the current promotional list is depleted, a new promotional process will be initiated to accommodate any current and/or foreseeable vacancies. 3.	A copy of the eligibility list will also be sent to the human resources department.(3)	Level Three - (Selection Process). a.	The fire chief shall make the final promotional decision to recommend the candidate who has demonstrated they are the best fit for the department's mission, visions and goals. Candidates in Band-A will be considered first; however at the fire chief's discretion candidates can be considered in Band-B after reviewing and considering the relevant factors identify below: b.	Relevant factors that may include, but not limited to the final recommendation:o	Overview of the evaluation process;o	Consultation with the command staff;o	Letters of recommendations;o	Work history/absenteeism.c.	The final name(s) will be submitted to human resources for the necessary paperwork and background checks. (Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, 8-7-2014)
Secs. 46-47—46-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING 
Sec. 46-81. - Permits and fees. (a)	Permits for open burning at or on development sites for the purpose of clearing land for new construction shall be obtained from the office of the fire marshal. (b)	The applicant shall complete an application for an open burning permit issued by the fire marshal's office. The applicant shall submit a plat or site plan showing the proposed location of the pit and information relating to the proximity of any occupied or unoccupied structure. (c)	No burning shall commence prior to an inspection of the site and the pit by a representative of the fire marshal's office. Upon approval of the pit, the permit shall be valid for a period of 30 days. Permits may be extended for increments of 15-day periods, maximum of two extensions. (Ord. No. 96-12, § 3-2030, 3-21-1996)
Sec. 46-82. - Fires requiring written permits. (a)	The only type of fires permitted for the purpose of land clearing are pit fires. Nonpit fires are not permitted for land clearing within the city limits. All pit fires shall be conducted in strict accordance with the "Air Curtain Destructor Operating Guide and Procedures," as published by the Environmental Protection Division, attached to Ordinance No. 96-12 as exhibit A. (b)	Pit fires shall comply with the following stipulations:(1)	The pit shall be at least 300 feet from any occupied or habitable structure. This distance may be increased if need is assessed by the fire marshal's office and validity exists. (2)	Where a site cannot be excavated to the recommended depth due to high water table and/or subsurface rock, the pit may be constructed above ground level, subject to the same state standards and procedures for a pit below ground level. (3)	Only wood wastes consisting of trees, logs, large brush, stumps, leaves, and untreated lumber may be burned in the pit. (4)	Leaves, sawdust or other densely packed wood wastes, paper (any type), chemically treated, coated or impregnated wood, or nonwood construction materials shall not be burned. The amount of dirt/soil mixture shall be kept to a minimum. (5)	No more than one air curtain destructor is allowed to be operated within a ten-acre permitted site at one time. The air curtain destructor must be under the supervision of a trained operator at all times during operation. If there is a need for multiple burning pits, there shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet between each burning pit. (6)	Air curtain destructors shall be able to pass an even, nonturbulent flow of air across the top of the pit. Air curtain destructors with an air duct or manifold that has been altered by bends, dents, holes, etc., and are incapable of providing an even and nonturbulent flow of air across the top of the pit shall not be approved for use. (7)	The air curtain destructor shall be operated in a manner to prevent air, land or water pollution, safety/health hazards or nuisances. (8)	Tires or other rubber products, plastics, heavy oils or asphaltic base or impregnated materials shall not be used to start or maintain air curtain destructor operations. (9)	No smoke emissions exceeding 40 percent opacity may be produced during operation except for a reasonable period during ignition and charging of the pit. (10)	When the pit is cleared of ash, airborne particulate is to be minimized by wetting or mixing the ashes with dirt. (11)	Diesel fuel or kerosene may be used to start pit fires.(Ord. No. 96-12, § 3-2031, 3-21-1996)
Sec. 46-83. - Types of burning allowed without a written permit. (a)	Fires for the purpose of keeping warm. Warming fires shall be contained within a metal barrel of 55-gallon capacity or less. Untreated wood or lumber shall be the only material or substance permitted to be burned. The container for the warming fire shall be not less than 50 feet from any structure. No on-ground warming fires shall be permitted. The outside temperature shall be at 50 degrees Fahrenheit or less. (b)	Fires for cooking. Fires for the purpose of cooking food for human consumption do not require a written permit. (c)	Bonfires. (1)	No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any private or public land unless the location is no less than 50 feet from a structure with a size not to exceed 50 cubic feet (measuring two feet by five feet by five feet) of combustible materials and 100 feet from a structure with a size not to exceed 250 cubic feet (measuring ten feet by five feet by five feet) of combustible materials. (2)	For purpose of clarification, bonfires shall be limited to activities sponsored by civic, educational, religious or other groups for purpose of celebration, etc. An example would be a high school pep rally. (3)	Bonfires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such fire is extinguished. Such person shall have a garden hose connected to a water supply, or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use. Access to communications to the fire department shall be maintained within 500 feet of the bonfire. (Ord. No. 96-12, § 3-2032, 3-21-1996)
Sec. 46-84. - Burning restrictions.     The following rules govern all burning within the city limits, whether or not a written permit is required: (1)	The fire marshal's office may temporarily prohibit any and/or all outdoor fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. (2)	No burning is permitted on Sundays or nights. Burning at construction sites for the clearing of land for new development shall not be conducted before or after daylight hours. (3)	No burning is permitted when prevailing winds are in excess of 15 miles per hour in the direction of populated areas immediately adjacent to the permitted site. (4)	No burning is permitted during an air pollution episode, such as an air pollution alert/warning/emergency declared by proper authorities. (5)	No burning is permitted when there is a fog, rain or cloud bases that are diffused, or ill defined, or for at least one day following the passage of a cold front. (6)	No burning of solid waste or household garbage is allowed.(7)	No burning of any materials that emit a heavy dark smoke, such as rubber products, oils, roofing material, petroleum based products, etc., is allowed. (8)	No burning when smoke presents a health hazard to persons in the vicinity of the fires is allowed. (9)	No burning shall be conducted within 20 feet of flammable, combustible or explosive materials unless otherwise specified by the NFPA or Standard Fire Prevention Codes. (10)	All fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until extinguished.(11)	There shall be a garden hose connected to a water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use. (Ord. No. 96-12, § 3-2033, 3-21-1996)
Sec. 46-85. - Summary abatement.     The staff of the fire marshal's office and personnel of the fire department shall have the authority to summarily abate any conditions which are in violation of any of the provisions of this article, and which may constitute an immediate threat to life and property. In no event shall a pit fire or other open burning continue after the fire marshal's office has revoked the permit. (Ord. No. 96-12, § 3-2034, 3-21-1996)