Chapter 82 - SOLID WASTE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 54; littering in parks, § 74-9; utilities, ch. 98.State Law reference— Solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 82-1. - Littering. (a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Household garbage means animal, vegetable, and fruit refuse matter and other refuse matter ordinarily generated as by-products of a household or restaurant, such as tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics, and wrapping or packaging materials.     Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, any glass bottle, jar or other container or any other glass, any cans or paper or plastic container, or any other rubbish, refuse or substance or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6).     Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or the shores, any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential properties. (b)	Prohibition; penalty for violation. (1)	It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit litter upon any street, street right-of-way, sidewalk or other public place within the city. (2)	It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, leave, cause, or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any water in this city, unless: a.	The property is designated by the city or by any of its departments, for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; b.	The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or c.	The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. (3)	It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to scatter, throw, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the city any litter in such a manner that it may be carried by wind, rain, water, or animals upon any public or private property. Where commercial or public litter receptacles are not available, all such litter shall be carried away by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere and in appropriate containers. (4)	It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to trespass on the rights of another through the neglect of property by causing or allowing unsightly litter, weeds and grass, yard waste, foul odor, dead animals, junk, unsecured appliances, or potentially dangerous devices to remain on or emanate from property, or to discard or abandon or cause such on public property, private property, vacant lots or any pond, stream, or body of water or banks thereof within the city limits. a.	Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. b.	Lighted cigarettes, cigars and other flammable materials liable to start litter on fire shall not be placed in receptacles until completely extinguished. (5)	The owner, occupant and lessee of all property, including, but not limited to, parking lots, not otherwise described herein, jointly and severally are required to remove all litter from any source, from their property and to place same in appropriate containers. Vacant lots, borders, embankments, fences, walls, driveways and sidewalks shall be kept free of litter. (6)	No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk adjacent to their business, all off-street parking areas, all loading and unloading areas, and all landscaped areas associated with their business premises free of litter. (7)	Every owner, manager, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any commercial, institutional or individual building or property shall be obligated jointly or severally to provide an appropriate number of litter receptacles maintained in good, clean condition. The size, type and number shall be as specified by the director of public works to be reasonably required to hold litter generated by operation of the business between periods in which they are emptied into a bulk container for regular city refuse collection. Such containers shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. Commercial sites where there are a large number of individual stores bound together by association or lease, such as malls, shopping centers or the downtown shopping area may consider the requirement for the number and placement thereof in the total picture rather than on an individual basis. (8)	Containers shall be made available for customers to extinguish cigarettes, cigars, lighted matches, etc., at a convenient-to-the-customer location at the entrance of stores, or when smoking is permitted, inside. (9)	Commercial sites with on-site parking shall, at a minimum, have its parking area cleaned or swept as needed to prevent an accumulation of litter and to maintain a neat and orderly appearance. Furthermore, said sites shall provide and maintain litter receptacles that are strategically placed throughout the parking lot for individuals using same to properly deposit litter and other refuse. The number of receptacles shall be determined as follows: One receptacle for establishments with one to 25 parking spaces; Two receptacles for establishments with 26 to 50 parking spaces; One additional receptacle for each additional 100 parking spaces at any location. (10)	Any person convicted of a violation of any portion of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, or be required to work by removing litter, cutting grass or participating in other beautification projects as directed by the court or it's designee, on the public streets or highway or public right-of-way, and public property in the city not exceeding 30 days or any combination of both in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court. In the sound discretion of the judge of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. The court may, in its discretion, require any person convicted of a violation of any portion of this article to publish said person's name and photograph, at the violator's expense, in the legal organ for the city. (c)	Abandonment of iceboxes, refrigerators, etc. (1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of said icebox, refrigerator or container. (2)	It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandonment, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door with snap lock or other similar device thereon without removing said snap lock or other similar device on the doors from said icebox, refrigerator or container. (d)	Issuing citation; accused before judge. Any city police officer, marshal, firefighter, employee of the parks and recreation department of the city, code inspector, or building code inspector is empowered to enforce the provisions of this section by issuing a citation and bring the accused before the judge of the municipal court for the city. (e)	Enforcement of section; person appointed; restriction; liability. (1)	The city manager may, in his discretion, appoint any person who is a citizen of the United States, is of good moral character, and has not previously been convicted of a felony to enforce the provisions of this section within the city limits. Each person appointed pursuant to this section shall take and subscribe an oath of office as prescribed by the judge of the municipal court of the city. Any person appointed and sworn pursuant to this subsection shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this section in the same manner as any police officer of the city. (2)	No person appointed pursuant to this subsection (e):a.	Shall be deemed a peace officer under the laws of this state;b.	Shall be deemed to be an employee of or receive any compensation from the city;c.	Shall be required to complete any training or be certified pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. title 35, ch. 8; d.	Shall have the power or duty to enforce any other ordinances as the result of this appointment; e.	Shall have the power to possess and carry firearms and other weapons for the purpose of enforcing the littering laws; or f.	Shall be entitled to any indemnification from the state, county, or city for any injury or property damage sustained by such person as a result of attempting to enforce the littering laws of the city. (3)	Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, neither the city, nor any department, agency, board, or officer of the city, shall be liable or accountable for or on account of any act or omission of any person appointed pursuant to this section in connection with such person's enforcement of the provisions of this section. (4)	It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, resist, impede, or interfere with any person appointed pursuant to this subsection (e) in connection with such person's enforcement of this section or to retaliate or discriminate in retaliation for such enforcement. (f)	Evidence and presumption of littering. (1)	Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this section. (2)	Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43 is discovered to contain any article, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this section. (g)	Receptacles and signs required on city property. All city departments having supervision of properties of this city are authorized, empowered, and instructed to establish and maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where the property is frequencted by the public, to post signs directing persons to the receptacles and serving notice of the provisions of this subsection, and to otherwise publicize the availability of litter receptacles and requirements of this subsection. (h)	Vandalizing trash containers prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any containers provided for the dumping of trash or garbage. (Ord. No. 2005-1, 1-6-2005; Ord. No. 2007-45, § 11-1013, 9-6-2007)State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 
Sec. 82-2. - Solid waste management plan; adopted.     The City of Valdosta Mayor and Council do hereby adopt the Greater Lowndes Solid Waste Management Plan and amend the South Georgia Multi-Jurisdictional Solid Waste Management Plan and transmit notification to the South Georgia Regional Development Center and the Georgia Department of Community Affairs for certification of completion. (Res. No. 2007-11, 3-22-2007)
Secs. 82-3—82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note—Ord. No. 2013-30, adopted Dec. 5, 2013, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 82-31—82-45, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1976, §§ 4-2001—4-2008; Ord. No. 92-16, § 4-2009, Apr. 23, 1992; Ord. No. 95-38, adopted Nov. 9, 1995; Ord. No. 99-5, §§ 4-2001—4-2002, adopted Feb. 11, 1999; Ord. No. 2006-2, adopted Jan. 19, 2006; Ord. No. 2006-23, adopted Apr. 20, 2006; Ord. No. 2006-49, adopted Aug. 24, 2006; and Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 2010.
Sec. 82-31. - Definitions.     For the purpose of these regulations the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:     "Appliances, furniture or white goods" means items or rubbish that weigh more than 25 pounds gross weight.     "Central downtown area" shall mean that area consisting of the area bounded on the north by Magnolia Street, on the east by Lee Street, on the south by Branch Street, and on the west by Toombs Street. Said area shall include all properties abutting on the north side of Magnolia Street, the east side of Lee Street, the south side of Branch Street, and the west side of Toombs Street in the area described.     "City" means the City of Valdosta, Georgia.     "City manager" means the person occupying this position as provided in the Charter of the city, or his representative.     "Collector" means the person or persons, as defined herein, who under formal agreements, verbal or written with or without remuneration, do the work of collecting and/or, hauling solid wastes.     "Construction site" means any private or public property upon which repairs or renovations to existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing structures is taking place.     "Construction waste" means solid waste that is produced or generated during construction, demolition, remodeling, or repair of pavements, houses, commercial buildings, or other structures. Construction waste includes, but is not limited to, scrap lumber, wire, sheet rock, broken brick, shingles, glass, pipes, concrete, paving materials, and metal and plastics if the metal or plastics are a part of the material of construction or empty containers of such materials.     "Disposal area" means a site, location, tract of land, or facility, used or intended to be used for the final disposal of solid waste, garbage, putrescible waste, hazardous waste, or other waste, except that it shall not include, the land or facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling on which the owner, occupant or lessee of said land or facility resides.     "Garbage" means food, waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used for or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables.     "Hazardous waste" means material in a solid or semi-solid state resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides or drugs (other than normal household use), pathological wastes, chemical wastes, flammable or explosive materials, and similar waste material in a solid or semi-solid state that the city manager may consider a likely hazard to the public health or safety, except radioactive waste materials, as provided in rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources.     "Industrial waste" or "industrial solid waste" means the solid waste materials from factories, processing plants and manufacturing enterprises, and includes food processing wastes, meat and poultry processing waste, hatchery waste, construction and demolition waste, condemned food, ashes and cinders from power plants, agriculture products waste, land clearance waste, and similar waste.     "Litter" means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuge, garbage, trash, poles, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description.     "Mayor and council" means the legally designated governing body of the city, namely the mayor and council.     "Person" means any person, partnership, public or private corporation, association, institution, individual or other entity.     "Premises" means land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, watercraft, or parts thereof, upon or in which solid waste is stored.     "Primary contractor" means the contractor that pulls a permit with the City of Valdosta and is responsible for the entire construction project.     "Recyclable materials" means newspapers, glass bottles, metal cans, aluminum cans, plastic bottles and corrugated boxes.     "Rubbish" means a variety of combustible and noncombustible waste not subject to rapid decomposition derived from places of residence, commercial areas and institutions and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, metals, minerals, crockery, excelsior, bedding, discarded clothing, and similar materials.     "Scavenge" means uncontrolled rummaging through discarded solid waste materials.     "Solid waste" means putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except human body waste, and shall include garbage, rubbish, paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, tin cans, glass, crockery, dunnage, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, waste materials generated in industrial operations, residue incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, construction wastes, and any other wastes in a solid or semi-solid state, not otherwise defined in this section.     "Waste" means unwanted or discarded material, except human body waste.     "Yard waste" means leaves, pine straw, limbs, grass or cuttings from bushes. (Ord. No. 2013-30, 12-5-2013)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-32. - Administration and appeals. (a)	Responsibility for administration. The mayor and council, in order to protect the health and safety of the people in the city, authorizes and directs the city manager, by implementing and enforcing the provisions of these regulations, to control the storage, collection, and disposal of solid waste in the incorporated areas of the city. The city manager shall plan, organize, procure equipment and personnel, and manage a publicly owned and operated solid waste collection and disposal service and/or, establish criteria for evaluation of private collection and disposal services, make recommendations to the mayor and council regarding contracts for solid waste collection and/or, disposal between the mayor and council and private collectors and/or, disposal site owners and/or operators, and shall regulate the establishment, maintenance and operation of public or private solid waste collection, and/or, disposal systems, methods and sites. (b)	Functions of city manager. Collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager, who shall have authority to establish routes and days of collection, types and locations of solid waste containers, and such other necessary matters pertaining to collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided such measures are not contrary to the provisions of these regulations. (c)	Collection by city. All residential solid waste generated or accumulated in the incorporated areas of the city shall be collected, transported and disposed of by the city through its designated agents, employees, or contract representatives. no other person shall collect, transport or dispose of any residential solid waste generated or accumulated in the city. All commercial solid waste shall also be collected, transported and disposed of by the city or through private firms licensed and franchised by the city. (d)	Industrial solid waste. These rules and regulations shall not prohibit the producers of industrial solid waste or the owner of premises upon which industrial solid waste has accumulated from collecting, transporting and disposing of such waste, subject to laws and regulations pertinent thereto, if such service is not provided by the city. (Ord. No. 2013-30, 12-5-2013)
Sec. 82-33. - Precollection. (a)	Containers. (1)	All residential and some small commercial customers will utilize a 96-gallon roll-out container as well as an 18-gallon recycling bin. These containers will be provided to every residence and some small commercial customers on a one-time basis. If a container is removed from the residential or small commercial location the replacement container will be paid for by the occupant or owner of the residential or commercial location. (2)	Some small commercial customers who pay for twice weekly pickup may utilize up to three 96-gallon containers furnished by the customer. (3)	Disposable plastic bags and corrugated boxes are to be used to dispose of rubbish that will not fit in the roll-out container. The bags or boxes shall be placed beside the roll-out garbage container on the scheduled day of collection. These containers shall never be placed with yard trimmings. (b)	Preparation. (1)	Garbage, rubbish and recyclable materials shall be drained of excess liquids before being placed for collection. (2)	All rubbish shall be placed at the curbside, streetside or alleyway for collection.(3)	Roll-out containers shall be placed at the curbside, streetside or alleyway for collection.(4)	Recyclable containers shall be placed at the curbside, streetside or alleyway for collection. (5)	Yard waste shall be placed at the curbside, streetside or alleyway for collection. Limbs or cuttings when placed in bundles shall not exceed 35 pounds gross weight per bundle and shall not be over four feet in length and four inches in diameter. (6)	Trees, large bushes or shrubbery that are trimmed by anyone other than a resident where left for pickup or by commercial trimmers or tree surgeons, are not to be picked up by the city. All persons other than residents trimming or cutting trees, large bushes or shrubbery shall be responsible for disposing of the residue of trees, bushes or shrubbery that are trimmed. (c)	Construction site. (1)	a.	Litter prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of a construction site, or any contractor on a construction site, to cause, to permit, or allow the presence of litter or construction waste on such site outside of a proper receptacle or to cause, permit, or allow litter or construction waste to be spilled, discharged, or blown by wind or water. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or agent of the property and the primary contractor performing work on the site to keep the property free of litter. All litter and construction waste from construction activities or any related activities shall be picked up at the end of each workday and placed in containers, which will prevent litter and construction waste from being carried by the elements to adjoining premises. b.	Receptacles required. The owner, agent, or primary contractor in charge of a construction site shall furnish on such site receptacles sufficient to contain worker's litter and receptacles sufficient to contain all construction waste. All receptacles shall be conveniently available and maintained and secured or covered so as to prevent litter and construction waste from being spilled, discharged, or blown by wind or water. The primary contractor should determine the number and capacity of receptacles to be present at each construction site. All receptacles shall be emptied as necessary, but not less frequently than weekly. All receptacles required under this subsection shall remain conveniently available on the site from the time construction activity commences until the construction activity ceases. c.	Construction site stormwater runoff control. Per 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 122.34(b)(4)(ii)(C), incorporated into NPDES Permit No. GAG610000, the construction site operator(s) is required to control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse water quality impacts. d.	Exclusion. The requirement for receptacles in this section shall not apply to any construction site on which only repair or renovation of the building is taking place and this work is being performed by the owner of the property, who is also a resident on the property, where work is being performed. This provision in no way eliminates any responsibility of any party regarding subsection (a) under this provision regarding keeping the property free of litter. e.	Penalties. Failure to abide by this subsection (b)(8) shall subject the violating party to a fine not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00 per first offense. The second offense and each offense there after shall have a minimum fine of $350.00. The offender shall be billed no less than $75.00 per pickup if the material is picked up by the City of Valdosta. (2)	Appliances, furniture, and/or white goods (stoves, dishwashers, washers and dryers, etc.) shall not be placed on the curb until the resident has called for a special pickup. Failure to call and request a special pickup shall result in a $25.00 fee for disposal without prior notice. Property owners and/or property management companies that serve dispossessory notice on residents will be responsible for calling for a special pickup the day before the dispossession is to be served on the resident. Failure to comply will result in a fine of $50.00 and a charge for disposal of not less than $75.00 for each pickup when done by the city. (d)	Storage. (1)	Rubbish shall be stored five feet from the residence building until the day of garbage collection. Rubbish shall be placed on the curb with the roll-out container no earlier than 12:00 p.m. of the day before the day of collection. (2)	Roll-out containers shall be stored at least five feet from the rear or side of the residence building. Roll-out containers shall be placed on the streetside or alleyway no sooner than 12:00 p.m. of the day before the day of collection. Roll-out containers shall be removed from the streetside or alleyway and stored in the proper storage location by 12:00 p.m. of the day following the collection day. Roll-out containers that are positioned on the streetside or alleyway before or beyond this time period shall be subject to a $10.00 charge per incidence that will be added to the monthly sanitation bill. (3)	Recyclable containers shall be stored in the residence building and placed on the streetside or alleyway no earlier than 12:00 p.m. of the day before the day of collection. Recyclable containers shall be removed from the streetside or alleyway and stored in the proper storage location by 12:00 p.m. of the day following the day of collection. Recyclable containers that are positioned on the streetside or alleyway before or beyond this time period shall be subject to a $10.00 charge per incidence that will be added to the monthly sanitation bill. (4)	Yard waste may be placed at the curbside, streetside or alleyway at any time, but preferably on the day of collection. (5)	Building materials generated by the residence building owner shall be stored five feet from the residence building until the day of garbage collection. Rubbish shall be placed on the curbside, streetside or alleyway with the roll-out container no earlier than 12:00 p.m. of the day before the day of collection. (6)	Appliances, furniture or white goods shall be stored in the residence building until pickup date and time is arranged, and then placed at curbside, streetside or alleyway. (e)	Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the city manager, or any employee of a person holding a contract with the city for collection of solid waste, shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storage of solid waste or recyclable materials pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any such container from the location where same shall have been placed by the owner thereof, unless permission to do so has been granted by the city manager. (Ord. No. 2013-30, 12-5-2013)
Sec. 82-34. - Collection. (a)	Limitations. No person shall contract for the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste who does not possess a current license for such business operation in the city. Applications for licenses shall be written and shall be considered after evidence has been presented to show that the applicant has received a current permit, appropriate to the type of business concerned, as required under solid waste regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, pursuant to Georgia Code Annotated, tit. 12, Conservation and Natural Resources; ch. 8, Waste Management; art. 2, Solid Waste Management; pt. 1, General Provisions; O.C.G.A. § 12-8-24. Permits for solid waste or special solid waste handling, disposal, or thermal treatment technology facility; inspection of solid waste generators. Licenses shall then be issued in accordance with criteria established by the city manager after payment therefore has been made in full. (b)	Contract collectors. (1)	The mayor and council may contract with others to engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of solid waste, provided such persons have applied for and obtained an appropriate solid waste permit in accordance with regulations of the Georgia Code Annotated, tit. 12, Conservation and Natural Resources; ch. 8, Waste Management; art. 2, Solid Waste Management; pt. 1, General Provisions; O.C.G.A. § 12-8-24. Permits for solid waste or special solid waste handling, disposal, or thermal treatment technology facility; inspection of solid waste generators. Persons contracting for solid waste collections shall, before engaging in such business, be licensed by the city, shall conform to all regulations providing for safe and sanitary collection and transportation of waste to a point of disposal, and shall execute a bond to the city in the sum of not less than $25,000.00, with a responsible surety company duly authorized to do business in the state to be approved by the council which shall establish conditions for the full and faithful performance of all agreements and covenants in the contract. (2)	Vehicles to be used on streets and highways for solid waste collection, transportation or disposal shall be kept clean and shall be certified in regard to highway safety by the Motor Vehicle Division of the Georgia Department of Public Safety. Such vehicle bodies shall be in good condition and repair, covered and constructed in such manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled or blown from the vehicle. The outside of the body shall be painted and identified by the name, telephone number, and permit number of the person owning the collection business in letters and numbers not less than three inches high and easily legible. (c)	Dead animal collection. Small dead animals, not over 100 pounds in weight, if kept separate from garbage and rubbish, will be collected without charge upon notice to the city manager, provided that a charge will be made for all such animals collected from animal hospitals, kennels, pet shops, and the like. Although owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal, the city manager may, at his discretion, remove large dead animals upon request and charge an appropriate fee therefor. (d)	Recyclables. All solid waste collectors, both public and private, shall provide recycling services to all residential customers including those defined as multifamily (eight or more units) as follows: (1)	Such service shall be provided with pickup at least once a week and must be provided in a separate container from household garbage. (2)	Such service may be provided per unit with an 18-gallon or larger recyclable container, or a container such as a recycle bag or similar product, per unit; or by a large recycling container of such size to serve the entire complex or property, which shall have a lid to protect the recyclables from inclement weather. If one container for the entire complex is used it must be appropriately marked for recycling only and must be visibly located and accessible and must be located within the vicinity of any dumpster or whatever type of container is used for collection of household garbage in the complex. (3)	The recycled products disposal of in the container cannot be disposed of in a landfill and must be disposed of in an appropriate manner acceptable to the city and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for recycle goods. (Ord. No. 2013-30, 12-5-2013)
Sec. 82-35. - Management of disposal facilities.     Authorized sites. Sites approved for final disposal of solid waste shall be designated by appropriate signs posted near the roadside. Such sites shall be maintained in use until permanently closed in accordance with pertinent laws and regulations. At that time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting and through the press. All solid waste shall be delivered and deposited at authorized disposal sites in accord with the directions and orders of the city manager or his representative in charge of operation except privately operated sites may be used for sanitary disposal of industrial waste or other specified waste upon approval of the city manager and upon receipt of a disposal area permit issued pursuant to regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. (Ord. No. 2013-30, 12-5-2013)
Sec. 82-36. - Control of private disposal sites. (a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited on land under his ownership and control any solid waste without having first obtained a disposal area permit as required by regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and acceptance of the site by the city manager for such use and purpose. (b)	The city manager or authorized representative of the department of natural resources shall be permitted to enter private disposal sites at any time during normal business hours for free and unhindered inspections to determine compliance with these and all other pertinent laws and regulations. (Ord. No. 2013-30, 12-5-2013)
Sec. 82-37. - Air pollution controls.     No person shall set fire to, or burn, any papers or other solid waste deposited at the disposal site or on the grounds thereof. No garbage or other materials from which offense or noxious odors emanate during combustion shall be burned outside of any building. (Ord. No. 2013-30, 12-5-2013)
Sec. 82-38. - Financing. (a)	Fees for collection and disposal services. There is hereby fixed, established and imposed upon, and there shall be collected from, each owner, and each occupant of residential or commercial properties within the city a sanitation tax computed in accordance with the following schedule (provided that only one such fee shall be collected with respect to any such property or unit thereof each month): (1)	Garbage can collection service for residential and multifamily. For single-family residences a "per month" charge shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the deputy city manager of operations. (2)	Commercial. For each store, shop, restaurant, hotel, motel, warehouse, office, boarding house, rooming house or other place of business operating in the city, per month fees shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the deputy city manager of operations. (b)	Deposits. A deposit to secure payment of refuse collection service bills shall be paid to the city at the time service is granted, for those customers not serviced by the city's water system as follows: (1)	Residential customers shall deposit twice the monthly fee at the time of receipt of service. When a homeowner has a satisfactory record of payment for a period of two years, his deposit will be refunded in full upon demand. Deposits shall not be refunded to renters. (2)	Multiple-dwelling units shall deposit twice the monthly fee as computed in subsection (b)(1) above. (3)	Commercial accounts shall deposit twice the monthly fee.(c)	Commercial dumpster rates: (1)	Charges for collection. Charges for collection of dumpster containers shall be based on: (1) size of the container; and (2) frequency of collections per week. Fees shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the deputy city manager of operations. (2)	Method of computing charges. The number of pickups per week, multiplied by the charge per pickup multiplied by 41/3 equals monthly charge per container. The size of the dumpster in cubic yards dictates the "charge per pickup." (3)	Container size defined. The size of each container in cubic yards shall be determined by the director of public works by actual measurement of each container, and this determination shall be final. (Example: (1) containers with a capacity of 3.5 to 4.499 cubic yards shall be considered a four-cubic yard container; (2) containers with a capacity of 4.5 to 5.499 cubic yards shall be considered a five-cubic yard container, etc.). (4)	"Container in use" defined. "Container in use" for the purposes of this section shall mean a container of any size which has, or which is subject to have, any amount of solid waste deposited therein by a business or businesses during any calendar month. (5)	Minimum fee for container collection. The minimum fee for collection of dumpster shall be determined by the size of the container. The minimum fee charged shall be for one collection per week for each container in use by the customer. The minimum fee shall be imposed for each container in use, regardless of whether or not the solid waste generated each week is less than the capacity of the container. (6)	Shared containers. When more than one business shares in the use of a dumpster, the total monthly fee shall be divided by the total number of users and each user billed an equal share of the total fee. (7)	Determination of minimum pickups per week. Unless additional pickups are desired and requested by the users of a container or containers, the minimum number of pickups required by a business shall be determined by the director of public works, using the following procedures: a.	During one or more weekly periods selected by the director of public works, the cubic yards of solid waste generated by a business or businesses shall be measured and recorded. b.	Each container of the entire system will be considered separately as to volume and pickups required. c.	The weekly cubic yard total for each separate container in use shall then be divided by its individual cubic yard capacity to determine the minimum pickups for each container, with any fraction remaining constituting an additional pickup. d.	When more than one container is required by a business or businesses, the individual charge for each container shall be added to comprise the final charge. (8)	Container overflow. Should a container or containers in use by a business or businesses become overflowed twice in any given month because of excessive quantities being generated by the user, a charge for an additional pickup shall be imposed by the director of public works, on the user or users of such container. (9)	Limit on the size of dumpsters. Any container hereafter added into the collection system shall not exceed an eight-cubic yard capacity. (10)	Weight limit of dumpsters. Limits on the weight of a dumpster served by the city, when filled, shall not exceed 3,000 pounds gross weight. (11)	Responsibility for repair of dumpsters. The responsibility for general repairs of dumpsters served by the city is as set forth below: a.	The streets and sanitation department shall repair and maintain the following items on dumpsters which are presently in the collection system and on such additional containers that are added to the system that have been constructed in accordance with the specifications in current use (if damaged by city equipment): 1.	Container lifting sleeves.2.	Container lids or doors.3.	Casters.b.	All other repairs, preservation and repainting of the dumpster shall be at the expense of the owners or users of these containers. (12)	Purchasing and furnishing of commercial containers and provisions for monthly repayment. The director of public works shall be authorized upon request of commercial customers to purchase and provide to commercial customer commercial dumpsters. The cost of said containers shall be reimbursed the city on a monthly basis with payments for a total of 60 months and interest at the rate of eight percent per annum. (13)	Special handling charge. For slaughterhouses, chemical businesses, fish houses, or any other commercial or residential establishments which require special handling of solid waste generated by such establishments, the rate shall be computed by the director of public works on the actual cost of handling. The fee shall include collecting, transporting, disposal and all associated overhead costs in each individual case, provided that the sanitation fee imposed and collected with respect to any such place of business shall not be less than the minimum commercial fee, and in respect to any residence shall not be less than the minimum residential fee. (Ord. No. 2013-30, 12-5-2013)
Sec. 82-39. - Penalties.     Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article and is convicted therefore shall be fined in accordance with the aforementioned sections or as is allowable by the city Charter for each separate offense; each violation hereof shall be deemed a separate offense and each day's failure to comply herewith shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. No. 2013-30, 12-5-2013)
Secs. 82-40—82-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - YARD TRIMMINGS DISPOSAL REGULATIONS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2.
Sec. 82-81. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial sites.     Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus.     Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill.     Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations.     Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills.     Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludge or small-quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover on the waste.     Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. (Code 1976, § 4-4001; Ord. No. 96-42, 9-5-1996)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-82. - Prohibitions. (a)	It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. (b)	Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. (Code 1976, § 4-4002; Ord. No. 96-42, 9-5-1996)
Sec. 82-83. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings.     Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in the following manner: (1)	Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with other solid wastes.(2)	Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored separately for collection in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting or other handling. (3)	Yard trimmings may be sorted in stockpiles or chipped, composted, used as mulch, or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled. (Code 1976, § 4-4003; Ord. No. 96-42, 9-5-1996)
Chapter 86 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(6); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades of the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; cemeteries, ch. 26; environment, ch. 42; floods, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94; utilities, ch. 98; vehicles for hire, ch. 102; zoning ordinance, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B; airport zoning ordinance, app. C.State Law reference— State, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 86-1. - Assessments for street improvement.     Where any work of making any improvements upon the streets, avenues, lanes, or alleys is done by the city, the cost shall include the entire cost of all materials used and labor done in the performance of the work, and shall include all engineering, legal and other expenses incurred in connection with such work; and all such expenses shall be included in the cost of improvements to be assessed against the lots or parcels of land abutting upon such improvements. (Code 1976, § 4-1006; Ord. No. 76-24, § 1, 8-4-1976)State Law reference— Executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 
Sec. 86-2. - Use of city right-of-way.     It shall be unlawful for any person to build upon, use, obstruct or otherwise encroach upon the right-of-way of any public street within the city limits without the express written permission of the city engineer or city manager. Failure to remove any such obstruction after proper notice from the city engineer shall constitute a separate offense. Each day such offense occurs or continues after proper notice shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1976, § 4-1007; Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 5-6-1982)
Sec. 86-3. - Street carnivals, festivals.     All persons offering to hold carnivals or any festive occasions of any kind within the city are required to first obtain a permit from the mayor and council and to give bond in a sum full and sufficient to settle all bills contracted by them and to exhibit all attractions advertised by them. (Code 1976, § 7-2001)
Sec. 86-4. - Placing merchandise on sidewalk.     It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to display or permit to be displayed along or on the sidewalk or by or in front of his place of business in the city any goods, wares or merchandise or other articles. (Code 1976, § 7-2002)
Sec. 86-5. - Selling goods on sidewalks. (a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person doing business in the city and having a regular place of business in the city to make any sales of any goods, wares or merchandise on any of the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city. (b)	All vendors operating trucks or other types of equipment for the sale of sandwiches or other merchandise on the streets of the city shall, before and during any sale: (1)	Park at the right curb at least eight feet from any other vehicle and at least 100 feet from any intersecting street; (2)	Use no sound equipment while the vehicle is stopped, nor after 9:30 p.m. daily, nor between 9:30 a.m. and noon on Sundays; (3)	Service customers only on the curbside; and(4)	Remain a distance of at least one block away from any public school that is in session.(Code 1976, § 7-2003)
Sec. 86-6. - Interruption of utility service—Permission required.     It shall be unlawful for any public utility, concern, contractor, plumber, electrician, city employee, or other person to cut off or interrupt any electrical distribution service, gas distribution service, water distribution service or public sewer service, whether such service is operated or maintained by the city or by a public utility concern, without having first obtained permission from the city engineer and from the public utility concern or maintaining such service, if any. (Code 1976, § 7-2004)
Sec. 86-7. - Same—Regulations.     It shall be unlawful for any person having the permission required by section 86-6 to cut off or interrupt any of the several services referred to in that section without complying with the following regulations: (1)	Notice shall first be given to the city engineer and to the public utility concern affected, if any, of the area of the city to be affected and of the approximate time that such service will remain cut off or interrupted; and similar notice shall be given, in such manner and at such time as may be reasonably directed by the city engineer, to all residents and business concerns to be affected; (2)	If the service to be cut off or interrupted is a water distribution service, similar notice shall first be given to the fire chief; (3)	No such cutoff or interruption shall continue longer than is reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose authorized by the city engineer. (Code 1976, § 7-2005)
Sec. 86-8. - Protection of vehicular traffic. (a)	No person shall intentionally cause, either directly or indirectly, any object to be placed upon any street, highway, bridge, alley, driveway, road or other passageway with the city normally and customarily utilized in whole or in part for the movement of motor vehicular traffic that obstructs, retards, or tends to obstruct or retard the movement of vehicular traffic on or that has the potential to damage vehicles that travel on such place or to harm the occupants of such vehicles. (b)	No person while in a motor vehicle shall follow any other person in another motor vehicle upon any street, highway, alley or road within the city with the intent to cause such person to fear bodily harm or otherwise intimidate or coerce such person. (c)	No person shall intentionally obstruct the free, convenient and normal use of any public sidewalk, street, highway, bridge, alley, road or other passageway, or the entrance, exit, corridor or other passageway to or from any adjacent building or structure by impeding, hindering, blocking, retarding, delaying or detaining vehicular or pedestrian traffic on such place; however, this subsection shall not be construed to punish handbilling or soliciting for any lawful purpose by isolated individuals unless conducted in a manner that in fact impedes, blocks, delays or detains pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (d)	The restrictions in subsections (a)—(c) of this section shall not apply when owners of existing buildings provide access to their buildings for handicapped persons. This exception shall only apply provided that a ramp, not more than 36 inches in width and parallel to the right-of-way, may be installed provided the area from the back of the curb to the right-of-way is a distance of six feet or more. This exception in the installation of any ramp shall be subject to the approval of the office of the city engineer. (Code 1976, § 7-2006; Ord. No. 79-38, 8-8-1979)
Secs. 86-9—86-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAVING GENERALLY 
Sec. 86-41. - Paving of sidewalks, crosswalks, driveways, curbs and gutters.     All paving of sidewalks, crosswalks, driveways, curbs and gutters within the city that join or touch any street or sidewalk within the city shall be done in accordance with the written specifications for such paving on file in the office of the city engineer, and shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city engineer; and the grade for such paving shall be fixed by the city engineer unless otherwise expressly provided by resolution of the mayor and council. (Code 1976, § 4-1004(a))
Sec. 86-42. - Copy of specifications to property owner.     The city engineer shall furnish to the property owner or his duly authorized agent a copy of specifications when called for by such owner or agent and, upon the request of such owner or agent, shall immediately fix the grade for the paving, all of which shall be without cost or expense to the property owner. (Code 1976, § 4-1004(b))
Sec. 86-43. - Paving petition.     No petition presented to the mayor and council by abutting property owners pursuant to chapter 1 or article VII of the Charter requesting the paving of any street, avenue, lane or alley, or any part, within the limits of the city shall be considered or approved by the mayor and council unless the petition shall also include a request for installation of curbing and gutter work as a part of the improvements requested. (Code 1976, § 4-1005(a); Ord. No. 76-23, § 1, 8-4-1976)
Secs. 86-44—86-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CLOSURE, NAME CHANGE OF STREETS, ALLEYS 
Sec. 86-81. - Consideration by mayor and council.     The mayor and council shall consider the closing or changing of the name of any public street or alley within the corporate limits only upon receipt of petition signed by 60 percent of property owners and/or residents abutting the public street for which the name change or closing is requested. (Code 1976, § 4-1005(b); Ord. No. 90-23, 4-5-1990)
Sec. 86-82. - Procedure for consideration.     Upon receipt of petition requesting a name change or closing of any public street or alley, the mayor and council shall verify that the petition contains the requisite signatures of 60 percent of property owners and/or residents of the public street or alley. Thereafter, a notice of meeting in which the petition and request is to be considered shall be published in the local newspaper a minimum of three times commencing at least ten days prior to the meeting. This notice shall contain the date and place of meeting, the current name of the street or alley to be changed or closed, or if a name change is requested, the requested name change. (Code 1976, § 4-1005(c); Ord. No. 90-23, 4-5-1990)
Sec. 86-83. - Effective date of change.     Upon the change of any public street within the city, the effective date of the change shall not be effective for a period of at least 90 days after passage of the ordinance. (Code 1976, § 4-1005(d); Ord. No. 90-23, 4-5-1990)
Secs. 86-84—86-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION 
Sec. 86-121. - Required.     When any parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city abutting existing public streets is developed with new construction, or over half of an existing structure is remodeled or renovated, the owner or developer shall install a four-foot-wide sidewalk along the entire frontage of the parcel, the sidewalk to be installed within the city right-of-way in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. Compliance with this article shall not be required for single-family residential lots of record prior to May 4, 1984. (Code 1976, § 4-1008(a); Ord. No. 84-14, § 1, 5-4-1984)
Sec. 86-122. - Installation in new subdivisions.     In new subdivisions where the developer or owner is installing public streets, sidewalks shall be installed at the time of construction of residence dwellings or other structures. These sidewalks shall be installed within the city right-of-way in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 86-121. On residential streets, sidewalk installations shall be required only on the northern right-of-way of east-west residential streets and only on the eastern right-of-way of north-south streets. Installation shall be required on both the sides of collector or higher classified roads. (Code 1976, § 4-1008(b); Ord. No. 84-14, § 1, 5-4-1984)
Sec. 86-123. - Limitation on granting certificate of occupancy.     No certificate of occupancy shall be granted if the provisions of this article have not been complied with and construction of the sidewalks have not been completed. (Code 1976, § 4-1008(c); Ord. No. 84-14, § 1, 5-4-1984)
Secs. 86-124—86-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ASSEMBLIES IN PLACES OF PUBLIC TRAVEL 
Sec. 86-161. - Purpose.     The city has a duty to prevent violence, maintain order and protect the right of persons and property to move upon public streets, roads, sidewalks, alleys, and all other places subject to a public easement of travel; to provide an environment conducive to the effective administration of justice and other essential governmental functions and the transaction of public and private business; and to promote the right of all persons to be free from substantial invasions of their privacy in an essentially intolerable manner. This duty is limited by the fundamental right of every person to express his opinions, disseminate information and opinion, to peaceably assemble, and to petition government for redress of grievances as guaranteed by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. The purpose of this article is to promote the discharge of these duties while preserving the fundamental freedoms enumerated. (Code 1976, § 7-2011)
Sec. 86-162. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Block means that portion of any street or sidewalk that falls between its intersections with two other streets.     Fighting words means words which are not protected as speech by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, are not in any reasonable sense communication of information or opinion, and are generally epithets or personal verbal abuse directed towards another person in his presence that by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace; fighting words frequently include threatening, profane or obscene reviling, mass name-calling (that is, concerted or coordinated name-calling by two or more persons with intent to annoy, ridicule, insult or provoke a violent reaction) and will not ordinarily include derisive or annoying words except when these have the characteristic of plainly tending to incite the addressee to commit an immediate breach of the peace; in every case the circumstances of the utterance control whether particular words fall within this definition.     Handbilling means the activity of a person in a place open and accessible to the general public, distributing any circulars, handbills, advertising or other printed, written or symbolic matter on any subject and for any purpose.     Mass picketing means picketing by a sufficient number of pickets in a manner that effectively prevents other persons with a right to be in the vicinity of the picketing from exercising their right to utilize the area, or facilities in the area, for the purposes to which it has been dedicated either by physical domination of the area or by threats, intimidation or coercion actually arousing or having a tendency to arouse a fear of bodily harm with respect to any person who does not comply with the wishes of the pickets; however, the congregation of three or more pickets for a common cause at the same location, in the presence of other persons not pickets within a distance of 15 feet or less of one another, shall be presumed to be mass picketing unless the contrary is shown by clear evidence.     Parade means a coordinated movement of two or more pedestrians or vehicles upon the streets, parks or other public grounds within the city with an intent of attracting public attention that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the street, park or other public ground; however, the term shall not be construed to include picketing within a limited geographic area.     Picket means any person engaged in the act of picketing.     Picketing means either the act of patrolling a particular geographic area by one or more persons as an expression of a point of view with respect to any subject of actual or potential dispute for the purpose of publicizing that viewpoint and with the further purpose of inducing a specific response from persons actually found or likely to be found in the locality, or of handbilling or soliciting by four or more persons in furtherance of a common purpose within a single block or within 100 feet or less of one another, whichever is the shorter distance.     Procession means a public assembly that moves as a unit on the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public grounds or places within the city for the dominant purpose of moving the location of the assembly from its point of origin to a predetermined destination.     Public assembly means a gathering of more than eight persons for a common purpose in a place open to the general public as a result of prior planning or a spontaneous gathering for a common purpose in a place open to the general public that continues in existence for more than 30 minutes.     Public park means any land area within the city, owned by the city, predominantly open to the elements, open and freely accessible to the general public, and primarily dedicated to providing a public place to relax, meet, socialize, eat and drink, and/or engage in recreational activities or other pleasurable pursuits.     Soliciting means the activity of a person in a place open and accessible to the general public who by spoken language directed to persons in the vicinity attempts to disseminate facts or opinions regarding any subject with intent to induce a specific response from any listener.     Special pickup means appliances, furniture or white goods/rubbish that weigh more than 25 pounds gross weight and will not fit in the roll-out container.     Tire means a continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering designed for encircling the wheel of a vehicle and which is neither attached to the motor vehicle nor a part of the vehicle as original equipment. (Code 1976, § 7-2012)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-163. - Limitations on the right to distribute handbills and solicit. (a)	Any person may hand out or distribute, without charge to the recipient, any handbill, in any public place to any person willing to accept such handbill, provided that those engaged in such handbilling activities shall not engage in them in such manner so as to block any public doorway, driveway, sidewalk or street intersection or so as to unduly interfere with the flow of traffic, whether pedestrian or vehicular. Such activity shall be conducted in a manner consistent with the maintenance of public health and safety. (b)	The blocking of the path of any pedestrian or vehicle by any handbiller or solicitor with intent to compel such pedestrian or vehicle to halt its movement for the purpose of rendering such pedestrian or vehicle a captive audience for the solicitations of the picket or to compel the acceptance of any leaflet or handout in return for passage is prohibited. (c)	The making by a handbiller or solicitor of any threat of bodily harm or property damage to any person whether directed to such person or said with respect to some other person bearing a close relationship to such person or the use of any fighting words by a handbiller or solicitor is prohibited. (d)	Handbilling or soliciting in a manner that interferes with or is likely to interfere with another person's performance of the duties of his employment is prohibited. (e)	The possession by any handbiller or solicitor of any object or instrumentality with an apparent potential to cause physical injury to persons or damage to property is prohibited. Objects and instrumentalities encompassed by this prohibition include, but not to the exclusion of others not enumerated, walking or hiking sticks, canes, clubs, knives, firearms, brass knuckles, slingshots, zip guns, pellet guns, rocks, glass bottles, stones and bricks, or any other potential missile or club, teargas, mace, or any other chemical projectile, and any incendiary, stench, coloring or drying chemical, or vicious animal. (f)	No person shall handbill or solicit in violation of any of the prohibitions of this section. (Code 1976, § 7-2013; Ord. No. 96-34, 7-25-1996)
Sec. 86-164. - Limitations on the right to picket. (a)	Mass picketing is prohibited as an unlawful infringement upon the public right to travel freely on public streets, sidewalks, parks and grounds without fear of personal bodily harm or coercive or intimidating persuasion. (b)	Picketing in streets, alleys, roads, highways, driveways or other places predominantly dedicated to the use of vehicular traffic shall be conducted as to not block the free flow of vehicular traffic. Picketing in streets, alleys, roads, highways, driveways or other places predominantly dedicated to the use of vehicular traffic which blocks the free flow of traffic or creates a traffic hazard is prohibited. (c)	The blocking of the path of any pedestrian or vehicle by any picket with intent to compel such pedestrian or vehicle to halt its movement for the purpose of rendering such pedestrian or vehicle a captive audience for the solicitations of the picket or to compel the acceptance of any leaflet or handout in return for passage is prohibited. (d)	The making by a picket of any threat of bodily harm or property damage to any person whether directed to such person or said with respect to some other person bearing a close relationship to such person or the use of any fighting words by a picket is prohibited. (e)	The picketing of any private home, residence or domicile is prohibited as an unlawful infringement on the right of privacy and the right to be free from fear and intimidation. (f)	Picketing in a manner that interferes with or is likely to interfere with another person's performance of the duties of his employment is prohibited. (g)	The possession by any picket of any object or instrumentality with an apparent potential to cause physical injury to persons or damage to property is prohibited. Objects and instrumentalities encompassed by this prohibition include, but not to the exclusion of others not enumerated, clubs, knives, firearms, brass knuckles, slingshots, zip guns, pellet guns, rocks, glass bottles, stones and bricks, or any other potential missile or club, teargas, mace, or any other chemical projectile, any incendiary, stench, coloring or dying chemical, and any vicious animal. (h)	No person shall picket in violation of any of the prohibitions of this section.(Code 1976, § 7-2014; Ord. No. 95-2, 2-23-1995; Ord. No. 96-34, 7-25-1996)
Sec. 86-165. - Limitations on the right to assemble. (a)	The public parks of the city are declared to be public forums dedicated to, among other purposes, the dissemination of information and opinion protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, or other protected expressive conduct in furtherance of which purpose the parks may be used for public gatherings and assemblies. All other public and quasi-public areas of the city may also be used for such purposes. However, public assemblies shall be subject to the following limitations: (1)	Public assemblies shall be conducted in compliance with the other laws and ordinances of the state and the city. (2)	Public assemblies upon private property without the consent of the owner are prohibited.(3)	Public assemblies are not permitted in areas of public buildings dedicated to clerical and office work. (4)	Public assemblies that thwart the purpose to which the property upon which they occur is dedicated or that interfere with the normal use of such property by others with an equal right of access are prohibited. (5)	Public assemblies that are inconsistent with or interfere with the rights of another group to assemble pursuant to a valid permit issued by the city manager pursuant to section 86-166 are prohibited. (6)	Whenever the number of attendees at a public assembly exceeds the natural capacity of the facility so as to threaten the public safety or convenience the excess may be ordered to disperse by city law enforcement officials and, failing to do so, may be punished as provided by this article. Therefore, the city manager, after careful study of facilities within the city limits that are available for public assemblies, shall issue regulations setting forth the maximum capacity of each such facility so that the existence of an overflow crowd may be determined by a numerical count. (7)	Public assemblies that violate the antinoise ordinances of the city are prohibited.(8)	Public assemblies shall not interfere, hinder, or stop vehicular or pedestrian traffic, nor create a traffic or safety hazard. (9)	No person present at a public assembly shall conduct himself in a fashion that will establish a purpose or likelihood of causing or encouraging immediate violence. (10)	No person present at an assembly may be in possession of a weapon prohibited by O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-127 and 16-11-127.1. (11)	The use of fighting words by any person in any public assembly is prohibited.(b)	No person shall assemble in violation of any of the prohibitions of this section.(Code 1976, § 7-2015; Ord. No. 96-34, 7-25-1996)
Sec. 86-166. - Preferential treatment of licensed assemblies. (a)	Although the acquisition of a permit is not a condition to the right to assemble within public parks of the city, nevertheless where two or more groups seek to use simultaneously the same area of the same park or otherwise make overlapping or inconsistent demands for public facilities, the group having the first duly issued permit shall have the right to use such facilities pursuant to the terms of the permit. (b)	No group, person or organization shall be issued a permit in preference to a valid written request for the same facility at the same time by another group that has utilized the same facility fewer times within the preceding 90-day period. (c)	An application for an assembly permit to be deemed valid must be filed at the office of the city manager during normal business hours not less than 72 hours prior to the proposed commencement hour for the applicant assembly and must set forth the following information: (1)	The full legal name of the sponsoring person;(2)	A bona fide mailing address for each sponsoring person;(3)	The state of incorporation of any incorporated sponsoring person;(4)	With respect to any resident agent for service of process of any sponsoring person:a.	The full legal name of the agent; andb.	The address of the agent's place of business and his personal residence and the telephone number for each; (5)	If a sponsoring person has no registered agent for service of process:a.	A brief statement of its reason for failing to appoint one; andb.	The full name, business and residential address of a local resident adult who will stand surety for the sponsoring person for any damage caused by participants in the assembly; (6)	The date, hours, and site sought for the assembly;(7)	The number of persons expected to attend the assembly, if known, and the basis for the estimate if an estimate is made; if no estimate is made, the reason why a reasonable estimate cannot be made (example, the principal purpose for the assembly is to bring together previously unorganized persons presently unknown to the sponsoring person to join the sponsoring persons in a common purpose); and (8)	The signature of each sponsoring person or its legal representative.The city manager shall cause to be prepared a form to be used for applications for assembly permits which shall be approved by the mayor and council prior to utilization. (d)	The city manager shall cause to be verified all information contained in an assembly permit application that has been completed in full as provided by subsection (c) of this section and upon such verification shall issue a permit that shall state the: (1)	Date and hours of the assembly;(2)	Location and the maximum number of attendees for the assembly as provided in subsection (c) of this section; (3)	The name of the sponsoring persons and the names and addresses of their agents for service or process or their local sureties; (4)	The date of filing the permit application;(5)	The date the permit issued; and(6)	The personal signature of the city manager or his designee;however, the information in an incomplete application shall not be verified, and a permit shall issue on an unverified application. (e)	The city manager shall cause to be prepared forms for application for an assembly permit and for assembly permits, which shall be approved by the mayor and council prior to utilization. (f)	Any assembly held in accordance with a duly authorized permit shall not be entitled to preferential treatment unless the actual permit is in the possession of a member of the assembly who makes himself available to display the permit on demand to any person who requests to examine the permit. (Code 1976, § 7-2016)
Sec. 86-167. - Limitations on parades. (a)	Parades within the city are declared unlawful except when conducted pursuant to the authority of a lawfully issued parade permit. The parade route must be sealed off by traffic enforcement officers of the city before the period during which the parade permit authorized the parade, and no other traffic shall be permitted on the route for the duration of the parade. (b)	The city manager shall issue a parade permit if the following conditions are satisfied: A written application for a parade permit, signed by the sponsoring person or his legal representative, must be filed at least seven days in advance of the proposed parade date. In cases of emergency or hardship, the city manager, at his discretion, may waive the seven-day advance notice requirement. (c)	The application for a parade permit must contain the following information:a.	The full legal name of the sponsoring persons;b.	A bona fide mailing address for each sponsoring person; and if the sponsor is a corporation, the state of incorporation or state where the corporation is subject service of process; c.	The full name, business and residential address of the local resident adult who will stand surety to the sponsoring person for any damage caused by participants in the parade; and d.	The requested date, hours, place of assembly for the parade; the route, the length, and expected duration for such parade; and the place and time of disbandment of such parade. (d)	The proposed parade route must not intrude into the hospital zones of the city.(e)	The aggregate length of the proposed parade (including people, vehicles and equestrians) must be at least 100 yards. (f)	No fee shall be charged for a parade or assembly permit.(g)	Parade applications shall be processed in the order they are received by the city manager. The city manager shall deny a parade permit if another parade permit has already been issued for the same day. (h)	The city manager shall utilize the approved parade application form when processing any application for a parade permit. (i)	All parade permits shall be issued subject to the conditions that:(1)	No vehicle may travel abreast of another vehicle during the parade, and each vehicle measuring more than ten feet in width must parade in the center of the street. (2)	No vehicle or equestrian may come within six feet of either side of the street, the curb of any sidewalk, or the nearest protrusion of any parked automobile or other vehicle along the street. (j)	If the city manager or his designee fails to issue a parade permit within two business days after the filing of such application, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial or the right to appeal the imposition of any restriction imposed by the city manager or his designee to the mayor and council within five business days after the denial or notice. The mayor and council shall act upon the appeal at its next scheduled meeting. If the proposed starting time of the event is to occur before the next scheduled meeting of the mayor and council, the applicant may file an emergency appeal to the mayor, who shall act in place of and with all powers delegated to the mayor and council as the appellate body. (k)	In the conduct of appeals, whether to the mayor and council or an emergency appeal, the review shall be limited to a determination as to whether or not each restriction imposed by the city manager or his designee and appealed from by the applicant is, in fact, required in order to protect from imminent or grave danger to public health or safety. (l)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council (or an emergency appeal heard by the mayor) may seek prompt judicial review of such decision by petitioning the county superior court for a writ of mandamus, or by resorting to any other legal or equitable remedy provided by law. (Code 1976, § 7-2017; Ord. No. 96-34, 7-25-1996)
Sec. 86-168. - Limitations on processions. (a)	A permit shall not be required for any procession.(b)	A procession unaccompanied by a police escort must comply with each and every traffic law and regulation of the city irrespective of the impact such compliance has upon the continuity or regularity of that procession. A nonescorted procession must be in continuous motion except for traffic lights and signals and must not obstruct the entrances or exits of any establishment of any kind or interfere with free passage upon any road, sidewalk, alley, driveway or other passageway. Should a pedestrian procession unlawfully cease its motion on a public street or sidewalk or other passageway, it ceases to be a procession subject to regulation under this section and becomes a public assembly subject to regulation under section 86-165. (c)	A procession accompanied by a police escort may continue without break through stop signs, traffic lights, yield signs and the like so long as each vehicle maintains a close but safe distance with the immediately preceding vehicle and keeps its headlights on to indicate its participation in the procession. (d)	A police escort will be provided to any procession for a lawful purpose upon application identical to requirements of the parade permit application form but filed at least 24 hours prior to the designated commencement of the parade upon the further condition that the city has a police officer available at the designated time for this service. (e)	A pedestrian procession may not consist of more than two files nor more than six ranks; except that after six ranks of two files followed by a distance of 20 feet, another six ranks of two files may follow ad seriatim until the entire procession is accommodated. Unorderly pedestrian processions are prohibited as an interference with the rights of others to use the public sidewalks and streets. A pedestrian procession must comply with every traffic regulation and signal. Pedestrian procession participants may carry placards or signs not exceeding two feet in width and two feet in length nor carried in a fashion that tends to obstruct the fire movement of other members of the public using same sidewalk for movement or otherwise create a safety hazard. (f)	Any member of a procession who violates a traffic regulation or ignores any traffic signals or creates an obstruction not permitted by this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. (g)	Any procession that engages in loud and boisterous conduct or expression thereby loses its character as a procession within the meaning of this article and becomes a parade within the meaning of this article and subject to the rules and regulations applicable to a parade. (h)	Any parade or procession involving the following conduct is unlawful and must disperse upon order of law enforcement officials: (1)	The use of any fighting words by any participants; or(2)	The possession of any deadly weapons as defined in section 86-163 by any participant. (Code 1976, § 7-2018)
Sec. 86-169. - Interference with public agencies. (a)	No person, singly or in concert with others, shall engage in picketing in such a manner as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere with free ingress or egress to and from any public premises, state property, county or municipal courthouse, city hall, public office building, jail or any other public building or facility owned by the United States, the state, the county, or the city, or with the transaction of public business or the administration of justice conducted in or on such place, or so as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere with the free use of public streets, sidewalks or other public ways adjacent or continuous to such place. (b)	No person, with intent to interfere with, obstruct or impede the administration of justice, or with intent to influence any judge, juror, witness or officer of a court in the discharge of his duty, shall picket or parade in or near a building housing a court of the United States, the state, the county, or any other duly constituted governmental agency. (Code 1976, § 7-2019)
Sec. 86-170. - Scope of article; construction. (a)	The express enumeration of powers and rights in this article shall not be deemed a waiver of similar or related powers or rights inherent to municipal governments or delegated to municipal governments by the state. (b)	No person shall hamper, obstruct or interfere with any parade, picket line or public assembly being conducted under the authority of a permit duly issued by the city manager. (c)	This article shall be construed liberally in a manner that will effectuate its purposes so as to avoid the creation of any conflict with any valid state or federal law and so as to avoid regulation of any conduct or activity, the regulation of which has been preempted by a valid state or federal law. (Code 1976, § 7-2020)
Secs. 86-171—86-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BUILDING NUMBERING[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18.
Sec. 86-201. - Method. (a)	On all streets running north and south, the numbers shall start at 100 at Hill Avenue and increase north and south at the rate of 100 numbers to each block or space between streets and beginning with each consecutive 100 at each street intersection, such as northward from Hill Avenue, Central Avenue (200), Valley Street (300), and so on to the city limits; southward, Savannah Avenue (200), Crane Avenue (300) and so on to the city limits. (b)	On all streets running east and west, the numbers shall start with 100 and increase at the rate of 100 to each block or space between each street and beginning each consecutive 100 at each street intersection such as westward from Patterson Street, Toombs Street (200), Stephens Street (300), and so on to the city limits. (Code 1976, § 7-2031)
Sec. 86-202. - How numbers placed.     The odd numbers shall be placed on the east and south sides of all streets and the even numbers on the north and west sides. (Code 1976, § 7-2032)
Sec. 86-203. - Renumbering.     If the street number assigned to or used or displayed upon any house or other property is or becomes erroneous due to resubdivision of lots, opening of new streets, or any other case, the director of inspections shall assign a new number to such house or property in accordance with the provisions in this article and shall notify the owner and occupant of the house or property of the error in the number used and the new number assigned. (Code 1976, § 7-2033)
Sec. 86-204. - All houses to be numbered. (a)	All persons owning or occupying houses and buildings erected within the city limits must place on the house or building the proper identifying street number of the house or building so that the number may be read from the street. Identifying numbers may be placed upon the house or building, on a mailbox, on the curb, or as a marker in the yard, or in the front of the house or building. If the building or house is over 50 feet from the road, the numbers shall be at the road and on the house or building. (b)	It shall be the duty of the director of inspections to assign a proper street number to each house or building within the city in accordance with the provisions of this article; and it shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any property owner, after being notified of the number assigned to his property by the director of inspections pursuant to this article, to have posted or displayed upon his property a number different from the number so assigned for the property. (Code 1976, § 7-2034; Ord. No. 76-29, 10-6-1976)
Chapter 90 - TAXATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-491 et seq.; license taxes for sale of alcoholic beverages, § 6-71 et seq.; business regulations, ch. 22.State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; ad valorem taxation of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.; joint county and municipal sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-80 et seq.; limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 90-1. - Use of county tax digest.     Ad valorem taxes due the city shall be computed by use of valuations upon the tax digest of the county as finally approved by the revenue commissioner of the state for the applicable year. (Code 1976, § 2-5011)
Sec. 90-2. - Sale of land purchased by city at tax sales or paving assessment sales. (a)	Where land is purchased by the city at tax sales of the city and paving assessment sales of the city, such land shall be sold at public outcry before the courthouse door in the county to the highest bidder for cash, or on such other terms as may be fixed by the mayor and council, after advertising the time, place and terms of sale once a week for four weeks next prior to the date of the sale in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements for the county are published, such advertisements to contain the recital that the land is being advertised as the property of the city and such sale to take place during the legal hours for sheriff's sales as fixed by the laws of the state; however, where it is clearly shown to the mayor and council that such property, either returned or unreturned, has been sold and purchased by the city under authority of the mayor and council to protect its taxes as well as paving assessments and the cost of collecting taxes and assessments and that the city has not parted with the title to the property, the city by authority of the unanimous vote of the mayor and council shall be authorized to quitclaim such property to its owner at the time of the purchase by the city, or to such owner's administrators, executors, heirs and assigns, upon payment of all taxes which may be due and all costs due by reason of the tax sale or sale under the paving assessment. (b)	The term "land" as used in this section shall be construed to mean all the buildings and other improvements situated on and forming a part of the land. (Code 1976, § 2-5018)
Sec. 90-3. - Effect of section 90-2 on city's power to alienate its own property.     Section 90-2 having been enacted in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359, nothing contained in that section shall be construed to limit the right, power and authority of the city to sell, lease or otherwise alienate any of its property other than that purchased at tax sales, or paving assessment sales, in such manner as authorized by its Charter or as authorized by the statutes of the state. (Code 1976, § 2-5019)State Law reference— Municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 
Secs. 90-4—90-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX 
Sec. 90-41. - Occupation tax required for business dealings in the city; purpose and scope of tax. (a)	Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation, which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk, his designated representative, or to any police officer of the city upon request. (b)	The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. (Code 1976, § 7-1001; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1001, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-42. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax.     Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived.     Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation to the following: (1)	Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred;(2)	Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness;(3)	Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services;(4)	Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and(5)	Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income.    Gross receipts shall not include the following: (1)	Sales, use or excise tax;(2)	Sales returns, allowances and discounts;(3)	Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister-controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2); (4)	Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and(5)	Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts.     Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project.     Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue-raising purposes.     Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, or nonprofit or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 80 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes.     Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation.     Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include practitioners who are employees of a business if the business pays an occupation tax based upon gross receipts.     Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. (Code 1976, § 7-1002; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1002, 12-21-1995)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-43. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. (a)	A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal or reopening of those accounts. (b)	A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. (c)	The annual regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations, businesses and professions shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1976, § 7-1003; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1003, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-44. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. (a)	Tax levied. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. (b)	Occupation tax schedule. (1)	The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession or occupation shall be as prescribed in this subsection and will be developed and updated by the city clerk. (2)	For the purpose of this article, every person engaged in trade, business or profession requiring licenses is classified in accordance to his main line of business as defined in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget; and profitability classes are assigned in accordance with Statistics of Income, Business Income Tax Returns, U.S. Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service. In the case where a person is engaged in more than one line of business in the same location, taxes will be levied on gross receipts of all business done, using the classification of the dominant business activity of the licensee. For businesses not specifically listed in the schedule of fees and charges, the business operator will provide the city clerk with sufficient information on the nature of the business activity for the city clerk to assign a Standard Industrial Classification code and determine the corresponding business class. (3)	The six separate tax rate classifications of class 1 through class 6, are provided so as to provide for the determination of the occupational tax to be levied as a fixed sum and measured by taxable gross revenue, the purpose of which is to recognize the ability of businesses to pay as determined by nationwide averages. All separate businesses engaged in more than one business activity shall be classified on the basis of their dominant business activity at each location where business is done, except that person whose dominant business activity is legally exempted or otherwise limited by city ordinances or by state law from the tax shall be classified according to his principal subsidiary business, if any, which is subject to the levy and within each classification as to fixed units of taxation, that is, total taxable gross revenue against which there are applied fixed rates. (c)	Restrictions. (1)	No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. (2)	No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business's gross receipts. (3)	No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. (4)	An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the taxing jurisdiction and who sell property inside the taxing jurisdiction. (5)	An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. (6)	Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the taxing jurisdiction or in the state. (7)	Out-of-state businesses with no location in the state shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in O.C.G.A. § 14-13-7 which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state. (Code 1976, § 7-1004; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1004, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-45. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in state.     Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: (1)	Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or (2)	Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. (Code 1976, § 7-1005; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1005, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-46. - Each line of business; more than one location of business; identification of dominant line on business registration. (a)	Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. (b)	The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business the business conducts. (c)	Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. (Code 1976, § 7-1006; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1006, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-47. - Licenses or occupational tax receipts not transferable; change of address notification required. (a)	Business licenses or occupational tax receipts shall not be transferable, and transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the termination of such business and the establishment of a new business. Therefore, a new occupational license tax shall be required for the new owner of the business. (b)	Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the clerk of such move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the clerk no later than the day of moving. A new license or receipt for occupational tax will be issued at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city. (Code 1976, § 7-1007; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1007, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-48. - Professionals as classified in state law. (a)	Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: (1)	The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in section 90-44. (2)	A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such fee to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; however, a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. (b)	This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. (Code 1976, § 7-1008; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1008, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-49. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government.     Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. (Code 1976, § 7-1009; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1009, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-50. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. (a)	Each occupational tax shall be for a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. A registration and occupational tax shall be payable to the city, at the office of the business license clerk, on January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by February 1 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business; and a ten percent penalty plus interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the due date shall be paid. This tax registration shall be issued by the business license clerk; and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in city any of the kinds of professions, trades, or callings subject to this article without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the city judge, be punished as provided in section 1-11; however, this section shall not be applicable with respect to professions as defined in section 90-48, or with respect to any other business licensed and regulated by the state. (b)	In addition to the remedies specified in subsection (a) of this section, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. (Code 1976, § 7-1010; Ord. No. 97-13, § 7-1010, 4-10-1997; Ord. No. 97-41, § 7-1010, 7-24-1997; Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 90-51. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. (a)	For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: (1)	Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and (2)	Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. (b)	Where the business has locations outside the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. (Code 1976, § 7-1011; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1011, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-52. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose; veteran's free registration.     No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from the registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from the business is devoted to such purpose. Persons who can qualify for a state veteran's free registration must secure such license from the state and present it to the clerk, who will honor the license and issue a city registration. (Code 1976, § 7-1012; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1012, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-53. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed; evidence of qualification required if applicable. (a)	Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. (b)	Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. (c)	Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. (Code 1976, § 7-1013; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1013, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-54. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain.     All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for the business as described in this article; and in default, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing business; and any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of businesses, trades, professions or occupations without first having so obtained the registration shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. (Code 1976, § 7-1014; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1014, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-55. - City clerk; rules, regulations, enforcement.     The clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the constitution of the state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the occupational tax under this article. The finance department and its duly designated officers and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. (Code 1976, § 7-1016; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1016, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-56. - Businesses not covered.     The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: (1)	Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission.(2)	Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3.(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. (4)	Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105.(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq.(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15.(7)	Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls). (8)	Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356.(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55.(Code 1976, § 7-1017; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1017, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-57. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law.     An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. (Code 1976, § 7-1018; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1018, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-58. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. (a)	All occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the current calendar year. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, each business subject to the occupation tax levied in this article shall, on or before the dates set forth in this section, file with the city clerk the return provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making an estimated payment on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth in this section. (b)	The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer of the business subject to occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before January 1 of the current calendar year, file with the city clerk, on a form furnished by that officer, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current year. To verify and document the gross receipts of such return, the applicant must attach the appropriate federal tax return form listing gross receipts for the most recently completed fiscal year. Currently these forms are either 1040 schedule C, E, or F; form 1120 or 1120S; form 1065; form 1041; or form 990. (c)	Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in the return. The return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. This figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. (Code 1976, § 7-1019; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1019, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-59. - Filing of return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. (a)	On or before January 1 of each year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for the occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the city clerk on a form furnished by that officer, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year. (b)	If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of the tax provided for in this article is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by the business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 90-58, the difference in such amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on January 1 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before that date. (c)	If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of tax provided for in this article exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by the business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 90-58, the difference in such amount shall be refundable by city to the taxpayer; or, if the business continues to be conducted in the city during the current year, such difference in amount shall be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by the business for the current year. (Code 1976, § 7-1020; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1020, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-60. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses.     In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year; and such tax shall be paid based upon the estimate. (Code 1976, § 7-1021; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1021, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-61. - Returns confidential.     Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax levied by this article, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent, or clerk of the city, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of the return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the city using the returns for the purpose of the occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication by city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States, and other local governments. (Code 1976, § 7-1022; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1022, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-62. - Inspections of books and records.     In any case, the finance department of the city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The finance director shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city; and upon demand of the finance director, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure to submit such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the finance director at that officer's discretion. If after examination of the books or records it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of ten percent of the tax due plus interest at the rate of ten percent per annum will be assessed for the period delinquent. (Code 1976, § 7-1023; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1023, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-63. - Tax registration and business license suspension or revocations. (a)	Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above-provided, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the finance director in accordance with provisions found in section 90-62. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. (b)	A licensee's business license can be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: (1)	Violation of a law of the State of Georgia by the licensee, his agent, employee or other acting in his behalf, which violation affects the public health welfare or safety and which violation occurred as a part of the main business activity licensed and not merely incidental thereto. (2)	Violation of an ordinance of the City of Valdosta by the licensee, his agent, employee, or other acting in his behalf, which violation affects the public health, welfare, or safety and which violation occurred as a part of the main business activity licensed and not merely incidental thereto. (3)	Should any license be revoked pursuant to this section, the city may decline to issue to the licensee any similar license at any time within 12 months after such revocation. (4)	Repeated failures of the licensee or the employees, agents and servants of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly control and prevent upon the premises and adjoining parcels of such business any of the following activities or conduct: a.	Fighting, assaults, discharge, and brandishing of weapons;b.	Underage possession or consumption of alcohol;c.	Disorderly conduct;d.	Utilization of and sale of controlled substances;e.	Gambling;f.	Indecent conduct;g.	Excessive noise;h.	Gang activity;i.	Damage to adjacent properties;j.	Littering on adjacent properties;k.	Other criminal activity.(c)	Upon a preliminary determination by the city manager that a ground or grounds may exist for the suspension or revocation of a business license pursuant to the provisions of this article, then the city manager shall cause a written notice to be issued to the licensee informing him of the grounds and advising him of his right to a hearing to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revocated. If the applicant desires a hearing, he shall submit a written request for same which must be received by the office of city manager, 216 E. Central Avenue, Valdosta, Georgia within ten days of the notice. If so requested, the hearing shall be conducted no less than five and no more than 30 days of the licensee's request for same. The hearing shall be presided over by the city manager, adopting all rules he deems necessary; however, at said hearing, the licensee shall be given the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine adverse witnesses, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceedings transcribed or recorded at the applicant's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time. Continuances may be granted for good cause shown, but in no event longer than 30 days from the original hearing date. (Code 1976, § 7-1024; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1024, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. 2013-7, 4-25-2013)
Sec. 90-64. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation.     Any persons, their managers, agents or employees, who do business in the city after the registration for the business has been revoked who are required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make such returns within the time and in the manner provided in this article, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns, and any persons, their managers, agents or employees, who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees or representatives of the city request such inspection, during business hours of the firm, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11. In the case of those practitioners where the mayor and council cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the mayor and council in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. (Code 1976, § 7-1025; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1025, 12-21-1995)
Sec. 90-65. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax.     In addition to the other remedies provided for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the city clerk, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for the tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date when such tax becomes delinquent; and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person liable for the tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of the occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment of the tax becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the marshal or other appropriate officer of the city upon the property of the defendant located in such jurisdiction; and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other related proceedings shall be had as is provided by ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state; and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. (Code 1976, § 7-1026; Ord. No. 95-49, § 7-1026, 12-21-1995)
Secs. 90-66—90-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL/MOTEL EXCISE TAX 
Sec. 90-101. - Definitions.     City means the City of Valdosta, Georgia and variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the city is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51(b)(1)—(6) et seq.     City manager shall mean the duly appointed city manager of the city or his designee.     Due date means not later than the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed.     Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. It shall not include meeting rooms or exhibition halls.     Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club containing guest rooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, nursing or convalescent home, orphanage, prison, detention, or other building in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint.     Monthly period means a calendar month of any year.     Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or apartment.     Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right of use or possession of any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise.     Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, or a lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel.     Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, except the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided in this article.     Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.     Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article.     Tax means the tax imposed by this article. (Ord. No. 2007-43, § 7-1241, 9-6-2007; Ord. No. 2013-29, § 1, 12-5-2013)
Sec. 90-102. - Intent.     It is the intent of the City of Valdosta to impose a tax, pursuant to authority granted by the general assembly of this state, pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51(b)(1)—(6) et seq. (Ord. No. 2007-43, § 7-1242, 9-6-2007; Ord. No. 2013-29, § 1, 12-5-2013)
Sec. 90-103. - Imposition; rate.     There is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a tax of seven percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the City of Valdosta. The tax shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease, or other arrangement made prior to such date. (Ord. No. 2007-43, § 7-1243, 9-6-2007; Ord. No. 2013-29, § 1, 12-5-2013)
Sec. 90-104. - Collection of tax by operator; receipt to occupant; rules for reporting and remittance of taxes collected. (a)	Every operator maintaining a place of business in the city, as provided in the next preceding section, and renting guest rooms in the city, not exempt under section 90-105 below, shall collect a tax of seven percent on the amount of rent from the occupant. (b)	Such operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant to whom the tax is charged, showing the amount of rent and the amount of all taxes by category. (c)	All taxes due shall be collected at the same time as rent is collected.(d)	An operator shall be liable for any amount of tax that he fails to collect appropriately and must remit to the city any amount of tax collected in excess of that which should have been collected. (e)	The proceeds of such taxes shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51(b)(5), (6). (Ord. No. 2007-43, § 7-1244, 9-6-2007; Ord. No. 2013-29, § 1, 12-5-2013)
Sec. 90-105. - Exemptions.     No tax shall be imposed under this article upon: (1)	Any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; (2)	The use of meeting room and other such facilities or any rooms, lodging, or accommodations provided without charge; (3)	Any rooms, lodging, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by Georgia state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business; or (4)	Charges made for the continuous use of any rooms, lodging, or accommodations after the first 30 days of continuous occupancy. (Ord. No. 2007-43, § 7-1245, 9-6-2007; Ord. No. 2013-29, § 1, 12-5-2013)
Sec. 90-106. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority.     Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall register within 45 days from the date this article becomes effective with the city manager, or his designee on a form provided therefore. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business, and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the secretary may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city manager, or his designee shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. (Ord. No. 2007-43, § 7-1246, 9-6-2007)
Sec. 90-107. - Determination, returns, and payments. (a)	All amounts of the taxes shall be due and payable monthly on or before the 20th day of every month succeeding each respective monthly period. (b)	On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, each operator of each hotel shall file a return with the city manager, or his designee, showing the gross rent, rent from exempted individuals, taxable rent, amount of taxes due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city manager. (c)	An operator who fails to make a return or to pay the amount of the tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent thereof or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent thereof or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent of the outstanding tax debt or $25.00, whichever is greater. (d)	The city manager, or his designee may, for good cause shown, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the operator. An operator granted an extension shall remit a tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without grant of the extension. If the operator requesting an extension was not in operation during the corresponding period in the previous year, a remittance of a tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the previous month shall be given. (Ord. No. 2007-43, § 7-1247, 9-6-2007)
Sec. 90-108. - Deficiency determinations. (a)	Recomputation of tax; authority; basis of recomputation. If the city manager, or his designee is not satisfied with the accuracy of the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. (b)	Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the due date of taxes. (c)	Notice of determination; service. The city manager, or his designee shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city manager, or his designee. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. (d)	Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. (e)	Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. (Ord. No. 2007-43, § 7-1248, 9-6-2007)
Sec. 90-109. - Determination if no return made. (a)	If any operator fails to make a return, the city manager, or his designee shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in, or may come into, the possession of the city manager, or his designee. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 90-108. (b)	The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum, from the due date of taxes, until the date of payment. (Ord. No. 2007-43, § 7-1249, 9-6-2007)
Sec. 90-110. - Administration of article. (a)	Authority of city manager. The city manager, or his designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. (b)	Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers and in such form as the city manager, or his designee may require. (c)	Examination of records; audits. The city manager, or his designee authorized in writing by the city manager may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. (d)	Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the city manager, or his designee may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city manager, or his designee when required by same and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, and such other information as the secretary may require. (Ord. No. 2007-43, § 7-1250, 9-6-2007)
Sec. 90-111. - Violations.     Any operator who fails, neglects, or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 90-104 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed 12 months, or both fine and confinement. Any operator who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 90-107, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed 12 months, or both. Any operator who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $750.00, nor more than $1,000.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed 12 months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. No. 2007-43, § 7-1251, 9-6-2007)
Sec. 90-112. - Collection of tax. (a)	Action for tax. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this article becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city manager, or his designee may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. (b)	Operator selling or quitting business. If any operator that is liable for any amount under this article sells his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. (c)	Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this section sells or otherwise transfers his business, then the purchaser, or the seller's successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount from the purchase price of the business to cover any deficient amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city manager, or his designee showing that all taxes due under this article have been paid or a certificate from the business license clerk stating that no amount is due. (d)	Liability for failure of purchaser to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. (e)	Overpayments. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this section, it may be offset by the city manager, or his designee. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city manager, or his designee, he shall have three years from date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators, executors, successors, or assigns. (Ord. No. 2007-43, § 7-1252, 9-6-2007)
Chapter 94 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Court, ch. 34; noise control for defect in vehicle or load, § 42-40; noise control for transportation of metal rails, pillars or columns, § 42-46; noise control for sound trucks, § 42-49; abandoned motor vehicles, § 42-171 et seq.; scrap tire management, § 42-301 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 66; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; operation of vehicles in parks, § 74-7; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 86; vehicles for hire, ch. 102.State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 94-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. (Code 1976, § 8-1001)State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 94-2. - Parental responsibility.     It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, such minor to violate any provision of this Code or state law regarding the operation of vehicles. 
Sec. 94-3. - Temporary traffic regulations.     In cases where traffic upon the roads of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the chief of police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts; and any person who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be liable as for other violations of this Code. (Code 1976, § 8-1011)State Law reference— Adoption of temporary regulations, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 
Sec. 94-4. - Pedestrians in the roadway. (a)	No person shall stand in the roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride.(b)	No person shall stand on a highway or roadway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, contributions, charitable or otherwise, or for the purpose of handing out political literature or handbills to the occupant of any vehicle. (Ord. No. 2001-21, § 1, 5-24-2001)
Secs. 94-5—94-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
Sec. 94-41. - Traffic, speed zones; signs and traffic control devices. (a)	Upon approval of the mayor and council, the city engineer is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: (1)	Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. (2)	Other safety zones for pedestrians.(3)	Traffic lanes.(4)	Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones.(5)	Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices.(6)	Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the city. (b)	All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. (c)	The city engineer shall keep and maintain an accurate official map setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic control devices. The map and any amendments or changes to the map shall be adopted by the mayor and council, and the map shall be known as the official traffic control map of the city. An official copy of the map shall be kept in the office of the city engineer; shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the city engineer shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device. (d)	No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. (e)	Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this section shall be a violation of this Code. 
Sec. 94-42. - Covering of loads.     No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
Sec. 94-43. - Riding of bicycles and play vehicles on sidewalks.     It shall be unlawful to operate any bicycle or similar type vehicle on any sidewalk in the downtown area of the city bounded as follows: Rogers Street on the north; Branch Street on the south; Toombs Street on the west; and Lee Street on the east; or as designated by the chief of police. (Code 1976, § 8-1014; Ord. No. 83-7, 4-7-1983)
Sec. 94-44. - Vehicle approaching intersection in which traffic signal is inoperative.     The driver of any vehicle approaching an intersection in which the traffic signal has become inoperative or is malfunctioning for any reason shall stop the vehicle and proceed through the intersection with caution; and if two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different highways at approximately the same time in which a traffic signal has become inoperative or is malfunctioning, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. (Code 1976, § 8-1015; Ord. No. 81-62, 12-10-1981)
Sec. 94-45. - Restrictions upon use of streets by certain vehicles. (a)	The city traffic engineer and the police chief are designated to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of trucks with a gross weight in excess of 6,000 pounds other than for local delivery and shall erect the appropriate signs giving notice of such restriction. (b)	When signs are so erected giving notice, no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. (Code 1976, § 8-1016; Ord. No. 83-22, 7-7-1983)
Secs. 94-46—94-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED REGULATIONS 
Sec. 94-81. - General speed limit.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or portion of a street in the city at a rate of speed greater than 30 miles per hour unless another speed limits posted or otherwise designated for such street or portion of a street. 
Sec. 94-82. - Maximum speed limits on specific streets.     The mayor and council may alter the maximum speed limits established by section 94-81 on any street or portion thereof within the city in accord with the provisions of state law. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion of a street, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. 
Sec. 94-83. - Speed limits.     The speed limits in the city are established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law and are on file in the offices of the city engineer, the clerk of council and the chief of police. 
Secs. 94-84—94-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note—Ord. No. 2009-33, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 2009, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 94-121—94-123 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1976, § 8-1012; Ord. No. 82-57, adopted Nov. 11, 1982; and Ord. No. 2001-15, adopted Apr. 5, 2001.Cross reference— Off-street parking and service requirement, app. A, § 7.State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1).
Sec. 94-121. - Authority of city engineer.     The city or traffic engineer shall have the authority to regulate the stopping, standing and/or parking of vehicles by signing or yellow painting on any of the public streets and/or alleys within the corporate limits. These regulations shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations or policies, and a listing of such streets and/or alleys with their respective restrictions shall be maintained on file with the traffic engineer. (Ord. No. 2009-33, § 1, 8-6-2009)
Sec. 94-122. - Prohibited areas of parking. (a)	Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, it shall be prohibited for any person or entity owning or having control of a motor vehicle, watercraft, nonmotorized camper or any trailer designed to be pulled by a motor vehicle to: (1)	Stop, stand or park said motor vehicle, watercraft, nonmotorized camper or any trailer:a.	On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;b.	On a sidewalk;c.	Within an intersection;d.	On a crosswalk;e.	Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings; f.	Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; g.	Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;h.	On any railroad tracks;i.	At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; orj.	In any deceleration or acceleration lanes.(2)	Stand or park a motor vehicle, watercraft, nonmotorized camper or any trailer, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger: a.	In front of a public or private driveway;b.	Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;c.	Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, except within the area designated as the central downtown development authority district; d.	Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; e.	Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance (when properly signposted); or f.	At any place where official signs prohibit standing.(3)	Park a vehicle wider than 80 inches and weighing more than nine tons, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, on any residential street (including the right-of-way). (b)	No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. (Ord. No. 2009-33, § 1, 8-6-2009; Ord. No. 2009-43, 10-8-2009)
Sec. 94-123. - Parking in residential areas. (a)	No person shall stand or park any motor vehicle, watercraft, nonmotorized camper or any trailer in the front yard, as that term is defined by subsection 106-1(c) of the Valdosta Land Development Regulations, of a residential lot located in the Valdosta Residential Parking Overlay District unless it is upon an improved surface. For purposes of this subsection, an improved surface shall include asphalt, concrete, gravel, pavers, or approved organic materials provided that any loose materials shall be contained in a defined area with a suitable raised border provided by landscape timbers, pavers, crossties, etc. Provided, however, no more than five motor vehicles, watercrafts, nonmotorized campers or any trailers, or combination thereof, can be located in the front yard of any residential lot. Furthermore, nothing in this article shall be construed to permit or allow the construction of an allowable improved surface that exceeds that allowed by the City of Valdosta Land Development Regulations. (b)	A property owner of any residential lot within the residential parking overlay district shall not allow or permit a motor vehicle, watercraft, nonmotorized camper or any trailer to stop, stand or park in violation of subsection (a) above in excess of three times in a 12-month calendar period. The property owner shall be forwarded a notice of such violation by United States Mail with proper postage thereon within seven days of each date of a violation of subsection (a). (c)	It shall not be a violation of subsection (a) if the motor vehicle, watercraft, nonmotorized camper or any trailer, or any combination thereof, is parked in an existing nonimproved driveway and does not exceed a total of five spaces. For purposes of this section, a nonimproved driveway shall be defined as a pathway not exceeding ten feet in width from an existing driveway apron directly into a carport, garage or other established parking area. (d)	No person shall park a motor vehicle wider than 80 inches and weighing more than nine tons, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, on any residential street (including the right-of-way). (Ord. No. 2009-33, § 1, 8-6-2009; Ord. No. 2009-43, 10-8-2009)
Sec. 94-124. - Violation of article; duties of officer.     It shall be the duty of peace officers, city marshals, policemen and parking enforcement officers of the city acting in accordance with this article to report the following information on any citation issued for violation of this article: (1)	The location as best described where said vehicle is parked in violation of any parking regulation. (2)	The state license number of said vehicle.(3)	The date and time during which said vehicle was parked in violation of any provisions of the ordinance from which this article derives. (4)	The violation type.(5)	Any fact or knowledge of which is necessary to thoroughly understand the circumstances attending such violation. (Ord. No. 2009-33, § 1, 8-6-2009)
Sec. 94-125. - Notice to be attached to vehicle.     The citation shall be conspicuously attached to such motor vehicle, watercraft, nonmotorized camper or any trailer notifying the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of this article and the procedure for paying or contesting same. (Ord. No. 2009-33, § 1, 8-6-2009; Ord. No. 2009-43, 10-8-2009)
Sec. 94-126. - Fees for parking violations.     The fees for violation of the parking regulations of the city shall be $75.00 for the first violation within one calendar year; $150.00 for the second violation within one calendar year; and $300.00 for the third violation within one calendar year. (Ord. No. 2009-33, § 1, 8-6-2009)
Sec. 94-127. - Failure to pay fees for parking violations.     When any person upon whose motor vehicle, watercraft, nonmotorized camper or any trailer a parking violation notice is placed fails to pay the parking violation fee as specified by this article within seven days after the notice has been attached, the citation shall be forwarded to Valdosta Municipal Court for disposition of same. (Ord. No. 2009-33, § 1, 8-6-2009; Ord. No. 2009-43, 10-8-2009)
Sec. 94-128. - Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles.     In the event any vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city at a fire hydrant or in prohibited area in such a manner as to obstruct, impede or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or to become a hazard to police and parking authorities at their discretion are hereby authorized in addition to citing the violator to municipal court to cause the vehicle to be removed and towed to a garage in the city selected by the police or parking authorities and to remain there until the owner or operator shall have appeared in municipal court and paid the fees prescribed for the violation and any fine imposed by the court. (Ord. No. 2009-33, § 1, 8-6-2009)
Chapter 98 - UTILITIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; business regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 42; floods, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 54; historical preservation, ch. 58; diversion of services from utility apparatus, § 70-9; solid waste, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 86.State Law reference— Authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 98-1. - Water emergency. (a)	City manager authorized to declare emergency. In the event of prolonged drought, failure of equipment, or for any other reason that could substantially affect the supply of water to the city and the city water users, the city manager is authorized for the health and safety of the city to declare an emergency. If an emergency is declared, the city manager shall notify all users through news releases to the media and through notices mailed to all users as soon as practical after the emergency is declared. (b)	Restricted use in the event of an emergency. When an emergency is declared by the city manager requiring the conservation of water, the following restrictions shall be effective: (1)	No outside watering of any kind shall be allowed, including street flushing, public fountains, park irrigation, lawn, garden and shrubbery watering. (2)	No commercial, industrial and/or public use, such as motor vehicle washing, noncritical manufacturing processes, filling of swimming pools and other related uses, shall be allowed. (3)	No commercial and home laundry shall be allowed except during the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. only. (c)	Violations; penalties. Any person found in violation of this section shall on the first violation be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and issued a warning ticket. Upon the second violation, water service shall be terminated to the residence or business address of the violator and a reconnection fee of $50.00 shall be assessed. For all such subsequent violations, a reconnection fee of $200.00 for each violation shall be assessed. (Ord. No. 87-46, §§ 1—3, 7-9-1987)
Secs. 98-2—98-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Water conservation restrictions, § 18-81 et seq.State Law reference— Authority to provide for the development storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; waterwell standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 98-31. - How service obtained; charges.     Persons desiring water service to any property where the facilities of the city water distribution system are available shall apply for such service in the city and make such payment as shall be prescribed by the mayor and council. (Code 1976, § 5-1001; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 88-51, 10-6-1988)
Sec. 98-32. - Permit for water use meters.     Upon payment of the amount as required by section 98-31, the city will issue a permit for installing the water tap and meter; and the city shall provide such water taps and meters within a reasonable period of time, at a prescribed location, provided the property owner to be served is on a street on which the city has a sufficient water main. If after the initial installation the meter and/or meter box is to be relocated, raised, lowered, repaired or altered in any way (other than from normal wear and tear), the property owner or customer shall be responsible and pay the city the total cost of placing the meter or meter box back into service. Any cost incurred by the city shall be billed through the inspection department or the accounting department if the plumbing installation on the premises has been completed. A property owner, customer or contractor shall not be able to obtain any other permit for water use meters should any statement for cost of repairs, alteration or other work on any meter be outstanding in the name of the customer, property owner or contractor. (Code 1976, § 5-1002; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 80-22, 5-21-1980)
Sec. 98-33. - One meter to each place; exception.     Each residence or place of business must be provided by property owners with its individual meter, but any person who owns more than one residence or place of business connected by one set of pipes may provide each group of residences or places of business adjoining each other and occupied by different tenants with one meter; provided, the owner shall pay the minimum water rates per month for each residence or place of business occupied by different tenants and such rates in addition as meter may indicate at the rate specified. (Code 1976, § 5-1003; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-34. - Owners must not tamper with meters.     It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on or off any curb block placed in any service pipe by the water and sewer department or to tamper with any meter or meter boxes set by the water and sewer department. All meters installed shall remain the sole property of the city; and the payment for water taps or for other services or metering purposes does not in any way give the property owner or occupant of the property any rights or incidents in the ownership of the meter, the connections or the meter box. (Code 1976, § 5-1004; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 80-22, 5-21-1980)
Sec. 98-35. - Unlawful to tamper with mains.     It shall be unlawful for any person to open or close or in any way tamper with any hydrant or valve placed on any main of the water and sewer department or any main on which the water and sewer department carries pressure, whether such hydrant or valve is on private property or on the streets of the city. (Code 1976, § 5-1005; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-36. - Extending pipes.     It shall be unlawful for any person to extend any existing service pipes or any other means of conveying water, to any other residence or place of business than that of those to which it is connected without the consent of the city. (Code 1976, § 5-1006; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-37. - Owners to keep agreement with city.     The application for a permit shall constitute an agreement on the property owner's part to abide by any and all rules for the use and operation of the meter as set out in this division. Furthermore, the application for a permit shall grant to the city the right to enter upon private property for the purpose of reading and/or repairing any meter and use and incident to the delivery of water services to the property. (Code 1976, § 5-1007; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 80-22, 5-21-1980)
Sec. 98-38. - Cutting water off.     When it becomes necessary to cut the water off from any premises for nonpayment of water service charges, or for any other reason, a charge as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall be made and collected; and if cut off for nonpayment of service charges, the service charges shall be collected in full before water again is turned on to the premises. (Code 1976, § 5-1008; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-9-1978)
Sec. 98-39. - Charge for establishing new account; transfers.     A charge as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk will be charged to each customer when a new account is established for the consumption of water or the treatment of wastewater. Payment will be required prior to the account's being established. A charge as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk will be added to each residential or commercial customer who transfers an existing account from one service address to another service address. This charge will be added to the next monthly bill at the new service address. (Ord. No. 93-38, § 5-1009, 9-9-1993)
Secs. 98-40—98-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER REGULATIONS AND CONNECTION CHARGES 
Sec. 98-61. - Meters.     All water furnished by the city to consumers or owners, including water for fire protection, shall be furnished and dispensed by the use of standard water meters to be applied and installed under the supervision of the city and to be paid for by the consumer or the person who shall request the installation of the meter; and the meter shall be paid for at the time of installation pursuant to section 98-68; and the amount to be charged to the consumer having water furnished by the city shall be determined by the reading of each meter by a designated agent or employee of the city. (Code 1976, § 5-1021; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 88-51, 10-6-1988)
Sec. 98-62. - Payment to clerk.     All water meters in the city registering the consumption of water furnished by the city shall be read once each month, and the consumption of water furnished by the city shall be read once each month, and the consumer or property owner of the water shall pay monthly upon notice being furnished by the city as to the amount of water consumed during the preceding month, all payments to be made to the clerk. (Code 1976, § 5-1022; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-63. - Cutting water off when residence is vacated.     When any person moves from a residence within the city, the water at such residence shall immediately be cut off. (Code 1976, § 5-1023; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-64. - Cutting off water for nonpayment of bill.     If the water is cut off for nonpayment of the water and sewer bill as provided in section 98-100, the meter shall be read for water consumed up to the date of cutting off the water. The amount of the water and sewer bill up to the time the water is cut off shall be deducted from the deposit if a deposit has been made in accordance with this article. Any overage shall be paid over to the depositor. (Code 1976, § 5-1024; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-65. - Means of collection.     If for any reason any water and/or sewer bill remains unpaid after it becomes due and is not promptly paid upon demand, the city shall pursue collections through a collection agency. (Code 1976, § 5-1025; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-66. - Deposit of funds.     All money received by the city under the provisions of this article shall be deposited separately from the other funds of the city and shall be designated as the water and sewer deposit fund, and all refunds that are made under the provisions of this chapter shall be drawn by vouchers out of this fund and no other. The money of this fund shall be used for no other purpose except to make refunds to tenants or property owners; except the money may be used in the payment of water bills owing by the depositor; and in the latter case, the city shall withdraw such amount from this fund as to pay the overdue water bill of any tenant or property owner who is liable for such water bill. (Code 1976, § 5-1026; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-67. - Remedies cumulative.     The remedies provided in this division for the collection of water bills in the city shall be cumulative of the remedies provided by law, and not in exclusion thereof. (Code 1976, § 5-1027; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-68. - Water and sewer connection charges. (a)	All water meters shall be purchased from the city and shall be installed by the city and shall remain the property of the city. The subdivision regulations require that the subdivider/developer of a proposed subdivision shall provide every lot with water and sanitary sewage services of adequate size. Also where water and sewer mains are in the street but no services are to the proposed lots, the subdivider shall have the services installed. Also where public water and sanitary facilities are available through extensions, the subdivider shall provide services for every lot. The city shall install water meters on these services at the rates set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (b)	On existing lots of record, where water and sewer mains exist in the street but no services are on the lot, the city shall install a single small water or sewer service on each lot at the rates set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for city-installed services. (Code 1976, § 5-1028)
Secs. 98-69—98-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATIONAL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
Sec. 98-91. - Separate water or sewer service.     Water and/or sewer service shall not be rendered separately unless the mayor and council finds that the denial of one service because of the inaccessibility of the other would create a health hazard or undue hardship, and by a majority vote in a regularly scheduled meeting allows the rendering of separate service. If such an exception is granted, all of the other provisions of this article shall still be in effect. (Code 1976, § 5-1041; Ord. No. 88-51, 10-6-1988)
Sec. 98-92. - Service area. (a)	It is the intent of the mayor and council to provide water service on a self-sustaining basis to any and/or all users within the corporate limits of the city. It is not the intent to add new water users outside of the corporate limits of the city. Service will be supplied to anyone requesting it, provided the service will be feasible financially, and insofar as possible self-sustaining. In cases where economic feasibility is a factor, the city shall have the final decision as to whether or not service will be provided. In determining feasibility, the city will consider the cost of construction as well as the cost of maintenance both before and after the extended system is fully utilized. (b)	To compensate for the lower density in the outlying areas and the resulting greater unit costs of serving users in such areas, all water rates to users outside the corporate limits prior to October 6, 1988, shall be double those charged inside the city, including connection charges, regular water rates, cost recovery fees, and impact charges that may be assessed. (c)	In order to accomplish the intent of this section, the city shall develop master plans for water mains and sewer outfalls, which shall be used as the guide for extensions to allow orderly growth of the system and development of the land within the city as well as in the areas surrounding the city as annexation occurs. (Code 1976, § 5-1042)
Sec. 98-93. - Financing extensions generally.     It is the general philosophy of the city that water and sewer extensions will be made only when they are paid for totally or partially by the user, or where the extension proves financially attractive. Specifically, extensions will be made to various classes of users and facilities, as outlined in this section. All extensions shall be sized in accordance with the city's master water and sewer plans and/or as recommended by the city engineer and the water and sewer director. If the city's master plan or city officials require a water main or sewer outfall larger than is required to meet the needs of the proposed user, the proposed user may request participation by the city for payment of the difference in cost of the main needed by the user and the main required by the city to serve the area. The user's engineer shall calculate the needs of the user based on proposed land use. Water and sewer demand factors for the various land use categories shall be according to accepted engineering standards and peaking factors shall be according to Ten State Standards. Water demand shall include domestic use and total fire flows with a remaining residual of 20 psi. The user must provide at least an eight-inch main before the city will consider participation in oversizing costs. The city's participation in oversizing of water mains and sewer outfalls shall be limited to 2,000 feet in length. Participation shall be limited to available budgeted funds. The mayor and council shall have the final decision as to whether service will be granted and reserves the right to approval of any participation agreement. (Code 1976, § 5-1043(a))
Sec. 98-94. - Service to existing individual residential and businesses.     Existing single residents and businesses in the city served by wells and septic tanks may request service from the city. The city shall have the service installed provided the user shall pay in advance the full cost of the main and the service to the property line. The city may consider participation in oversized mains as described in section 98-93. (Code 1976, § 5-1043(b))
Sec. 98-95. - Service to groups of existing residences or businesses.     A group of existing residences or businesses in an area near major water transmission or wastewater interceptor lines may petition the city for service. As provided in the Charter, the mayor and council may cause the system to be installed and assess the total cost of all lines and services to the property benefited, whether the owner chooses to connect to the system or not. (Code 1976, § 5-1043(c))
Sec. 98-96. - Service to undeveloped areas.     In order to promote growth and development in an area of the city, the mayor and council may cause the major water transmission lines, sewer outfalls, lift stations and treatment facilities to be installed and assess the total cost for materials and construction of the system to all properties benefited. The assessment shall be paid to the city prior to connection to the system and shall be in addition to the cost of any lines required to connect the individual users. (Code 1976, § 5-1043(d))
Sec. 98-97. - Subdivisions.     All water and sewer lines within subdivisions shall be provided by the subdivision's developer as provided in the subdivision regulations, appendix B to this Code. All lines to connect to existing water transmission mains and sewer outfalls shall be provided by the subdivision's developer, except that the city may participate in required oversizing as provided in section 98-93. The definition of subdivision shall be the same as that in the city's subdivision regulations and shall include all classes of users, including residential, commercial and industrial classifications. (Code 1976, § 5-1043(e))
Sec. 98-98. - Individual undeveloped lots.     Any person desiring service to an existing single undeveloped lot of record shall provide the required main extensions and individual service to connect to the main except that the city may participate in required oversizing as provided in section 98-93. (Code 1976, § 5-1043(f))
Sec. 98-99. - Deposits. (a)	A deposit as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk to secure payment of water and sewer bills shall be paid to the city at the time service is granted. (b)	If the user of the city water and/or sewer system shall have made the deposit provided for in this section, the user will be entitled to a refund of the deposit, less the amount of water and/or sewer bills owing to the city, when such user shall move from the dwelling house. (c)	The director of finance may waive the deposit requirements of residential, commercial and industrial property owners after an investigation is made and it is determined that the user is the property owner and has a prior record of prompt payment (no discontinuance of service for late payment) for a period of not less than two years on any other account established with the city water and sewer department. (Code 1976, § 5-1044; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 80-38, 9-10-1980; Ord. No. 80-56, 12-10-1980) 
Sec. 98-100. - Discontinuance of service.     If for any reason the water and sewer bill is not paid within 15 days of the deadline date specified on the bill, a second notice will be sent advising that service will be terminated if the bill is not paid within ten days. If the bill is still not paid within the ten-day period, the water service will be terminated without further notice. After service has been disconnected, the user will be required to pay a reconnection fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk, in addition to the current bill. No additional deposit will be required following a first discontinuation for nonpayment for any user. (Code 1976, § 5-1045; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-101. - Auxiliary residential water and/or sewer system. (a)	It shall be the policy of the city not to furnish water or sewer service where the user has in operation a well and/or private sewage disposal facility, except where such well or sewage facility exists on March 7, 1979. Where a user has a city water meter but is using domestic water from a private source, the user shall be notified of the requirement to cease the use of domestic water from the private source and use only city water, or the city water meter will be disconnected, and service will no longer be available for standby use. In case of disconnection of water service pursuant to this section, sewer service will also be terminated. (b)	Each commercial or industrial sewer customer who uses a source of supply other than city water shall be required to install a meter on this private source of water, the meter to be accessible to city meter readers; and the sewer rate shall be based upon the meter readings made by the city. (c)	No user shall have connections both to private well systems and to the city water system. This is not intended to prohibit the use of private wells for sprinkler systems, lawn watering, etc., provided the well is not connected in any manner to the same system as the city water system. (Code 1976, § 5-1046; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-102. - Ownership of system.     The city shall retain ownership of the water system up to and including the curb stop and water meter. The water meter shall be placed at the right-of-way, and no meter shall be located on private property except as authorized under section 98-106. The city's ownership of the sewer system shall extend to the user's property line (right-of-way). The city will repair and maintain only that portion of the system which it owns. Repairs or defects beyond the limits outlined in this section shall be at the sole expense of the user. (Code 1976, § 5-1047; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 80-26, 5-21-1980; Ord. No. 80-27, 6-4-1980) 
Sec. 98-103. - Water leaks.     No adjustments will be made in water bills because of defective pipe or fixtures owned by the user which results in wastage. (Code 1976, § 5-1048; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-104. - Rebates and paybacks.     There will be no rebates or paybacks to developers or owners for extending sewer and water service lines to property lines exclusive of those instances where the city has existing contracts to the contrary. (Code 1976, § 5-1048; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-105. - Material and construction specifications.     The specifications for materials and construction of all water mains, water services, sewer mains and sewer services shall be the "standard specifications for construction" as adopted and approved by the city. This shall include lines on public property as well as private unmetered fire lines and lines on private property in accordance with section 98-106 up to the water meter. The specifications for plumbing materials on private property beginning at the outlet of the water meter shall be according to the plumbing code as adopted and approved by the city. (Code 1976, § 5-1050)
Sec. 98-106. - Water meters on private property in group developments.     The owner or user may be allowed to place the water meter on private property and beyond the city right-of-way in large multifamily developments or complexes and shopping centers where it is infeasible to place a meter at the right-of-way provided the location and the plans have been approved and accepted by the city engineer. When approval is given, all meters shall be purchased through the city and the ownership of the meter and box is as stated in section 98-68. Repairs to the system between the right-of-way or the water valve which designates the end of the city system and the curb stop of the meter shall be at the owner's or user's expense. The specifications for materials and construction for all lines between the right-of-way or valve which designates the end of the city system and the curb stop of the meter shall be according to the "standard specifications for construction" of the city. The fee for all meters shall be as specified in section 98-68. (Code 1976, § 5-1051)
Secs. 98-107—98-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 
Sec. 98-121. - Title of division.     This division shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Valdosta Cross Connection Control and Backflow Prevention Ordinance." (Ord. No. 2009-54, § 3, 12-10-2009)
Sec. 98-122. - Cross connection control—General policy. (a)	Purpose. The purpose of this division is: (1)	To protect the public potable water supply of the City of Valdosta from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system or the customer's private water system such contaminants or pollutants that could backflow into the public water system; and (2)	To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the customer's in-plant potable water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures, and industrial piping systems; and (3)	To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control that will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. (b)	Responsibility. The water and sewer director shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. (Ord. No. 2009-54, § 4, 12-10-2009)
Sec. 98-123. - Definitions. (a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Backflow means the undesirable reversal of flow of water or other substances through a cross connection and into the piping of a public water system or customer's potable water system. This includes backflow from backsiphonage or backpressure.     Cross connection means any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste, or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as the result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeable devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow could occur are considered to be cross connections.     Manual means the manual adopted pursuant to section 98-124. (b)	Other terms defined in the manual shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the manual. (Ord. No. 2009-54, § 5, 12-10-2009)
Sec. 98-124. - Adoption of manual of cross connection control. (a)	There is hereby adopted by reference the 2003 edition of the "Cross Connection Control Manual" as prepared by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. (b)	The manual contains provisions concerning, without limitation, the following:(1)	Introductory comments, a general description of backflow and backflow prevention, allocation of responsibility for the program and definitions. (2)	Administrative components including: Procedures to review new service connections; procedures to review existing service connections; procedures for keeping cross connection records; procedures for educating the public about cross connection control; and procedures for dealing with backflow complaints and backflow incidents. (3)	Backflow prevention assembly applications including provisions concerning: City water connections to other water systems; pumping stations and water loading stations; fire protection customers; residential customers; and commercial/industrial customers. (4)	Standards for backflow preventers.(5)	Installation of required backflow preventers including provisions concerning: Location requirements; bypassing the assembly; backflow preventer positioning; retrofitting old assemblies positioning; possible pressure problems; and freezing conditions. (6)	Testing, maintenance and certification of required backflow preventers including provisions concerning: General requirements; testers' responsibilities and certification requirements; customer responsibilities; notification of noncompliance; show cause hearings for significant noncompliance; emergency discontinuation of service; and judicial review. (7)	Annual cross connection control program status report for public water systems.(8)	Appendices including construction standards.(c)	One copy of such manual shall be maintained in the office of the water and sewer director and one copy in the office of the building official. (d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of the manual adopted in subsection (a) of this section. (Ord. No. 2009-54, § 6, 12-10-2009)
Secs. 98-125—98-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6).
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 98-141. - Purpose and policy.     This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). (Code 1976, § 5-2001; Ord. No. 83-29, 9-8-1983)
Sec. 98-142. - Objectives.     The objectives of this article are to: (1)	Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; (2)	Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be compatible with the system; (3)	Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and (4)	Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system.(Code 1976, § 5-2001)
Sec. 98-143. - Administration.     This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city POTW. Except as otherwise provided, the director of utilities of the city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. (Code 1976, § 5-2001)
Sec. 98-144. - Scope.     This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users; authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities; requires user reporting; assumes that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this article. (Code 1976, § 5-2001)
Sec. 98-145. - Definitions.     Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:     Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.     Ammonia nitrogen. That fraction of nitrogen in the ammonia form as analytically determined by standard methods.     Approval authority. The director in a NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the administrator of the EPA in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program.     Authorized representative of industrial user. An authorized representative of an industrial user may be: (1) a principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation; (2) a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership of proprietorship, respectively; (3) a duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.     Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). Shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, (approved by EPA) five days at 20 degrees Centigrade expressed in milligram per liter.     Building drain. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner fact of the building wall.     Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW to the public sewer or other place of disposal.     Categorical standards. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or pretreatment standards.     CCF. Hundred cubic feet.     City. The City of Valdosta or the City Council of Valdosta.     City engineer. City Engineer of the City of Valdosta, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.     COD (denoting chemical oxygen demand). Shall mean the quantity of dissolved oxygen required for the chemical oxidation of decomposable matter under aerobic conditions. COD shall be determined by EPA approved methods.     Collection sewer. A sewer line less than 12 inches in diameter that receives wastewater from a small geographic area and discharges into an interceptor sewer serving more than one collection sewer area.     Combined sewer. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.     Composite. The make up of a number of individual samples, so taken as to represent the nature of wastewater or industrial wastes.     Constituents. The combination of particles, chemicals, or conditions which exist in the industrial wastes.     Contractual FOG services. A contractual arrangement with an approved registered commercial waste transporter which provides a containment device for all FOG related material constituents generated by a food industry customer including scheduled removal of all FOG materials so as none of these FOG constituents enters the sanitary sewer system or publicly owned treatment works.     Control authority. The term "control authority" shall refer to the "approval authority", defined hereinabove; or the director of utilities.     Control manhole. An appropriately located manhole from which a given user's effluent can be effectively sampled by the city's standard methods.     Cooling water. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.     Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Georgia.     Director of utilities. The Director of Utilities for the City of Valdosta, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.     Effluent. The discharge of flow of a treatment facility.     Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator of other duly authorized officials of said agency.     Flammable. Defined by existing fire regulations covering the city.     FOG. Means fats, oils and grease.     Food industry customer. Any restaurant, bakery, deli, meat market, fish/seafood market commercial kitchen or commercial establishment that prepares or cooks food, either for takeout service or to be consumed on-site.     Garbage. Solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the building, storage and sale of produce.     Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.     Grease interceptor. A device designed and installed to separate and retain for removal food wastes and grease from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity.     Grease trap or interceptor. A fixture through which all of the discharge of a connection flows and which provides a minimum detention period of ten minutes between influent and effluent baffles with 20 percent of the total volume as allowance for a sludge pocket.     Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks.     Indirect discharge. The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under sections 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system).     Industrial user. A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to section 402, of the Act. (33 U.S.C. 1342).     Industrial wastes. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.     Influent. The wastewaters arriving at the wastewater treatment plant for treatment and those structures associated with its initial treatment.     Interceptor sewer or trunk line. A sewer line 12 inches or more in diameter into which one or more collection sewers are tributary.     Interference. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operation which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.     Metered water. The amount of water consumed by the sewer customer, as measured by the city water meter.     mg/l. Milligrams per liter, or the ratio by weight, interchanged with ppm.     National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or pretreatment standard. Any regulations containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial user.     National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).     National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard. Any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5.     Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.     New source. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of propose regulations prescribinq a section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the federal register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after proposal, a new source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard.     Normal. Those values as standards in the measurement of this division; these limits are defined in context.     Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.     pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.     Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.     Pollution. The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.     POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater.     ppm. Parts per million, shall mean ratio by weight.     Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR section 403.6(d).     Pretreatment device. Any device, equipment or system designed to accomplish pretreatment.     Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user.     Properly shredded garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half-inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.     Public sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.     Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW.     Receiving waters. Those waters into which wastes are discharged.     Recurrent maintenance. The removal of the entire contents of the grease interceptor system by pumping the contents of the grease interceptor system no less than once every month. The pumping of contents will be in accordance with State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control 3913-6-.24 Regulation of Commercial Waste Originators, Pumpers, Transporters, Processors and Disposal Facilities.     Registered commercial waste transporter. A business/owner registered by the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) and whose tank trucks are permitted by a local governing authority.     Sampling. The collection of a sample of two effluent discharges by a given connection to the system.     Sand trap. Means a structure or device designed primarily for the accumulation and removal of grit or sand.     Sanitary sewer. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.     Septic tank waste. That waste which results from the emptying of domestic septic tanks.     Sewage. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present.     Sewage treatment plant or wastewater treatment plant. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.     Sewage works. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.     Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.     Sewer connection charge. The charge assessed against the sewer customers within or without the city that are connected to, or have access to, the city sewage system.     Shall is mandatory. May is permissive.     Significant industrial user. Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who: (1) has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day; or (2) has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the city's wastewater treatment system, or (3) has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the Act of (state) statutes and rules; or (4) is found by the city, (state control agency) or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system.     Slug. Shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flow during normal operation.     Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.     Standard methods. Shall mean those procedures or methods established by the latest edition of the "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.     State. State of Georgia.     Storm drain or storm sewer. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.     Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.     Superintendent. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative.     Suspended solids or total suspended solids. Shall mean the solids that either float on the surface, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by EPA approved methods.     Total solids. Total weight ppm of all solids; dissolved, undissolved, organic or inorganic.     Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA section 307(a) or other Acts.     User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into city's POTW.     Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.     Wastewater contribution permit. As set forth in division 8 of this article.     Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.     Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. (Code 1976, § 5-2002, Ord. No. 2010-17, § 1, 5-20-2010)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-146. - Abbreviations.     The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: BODBiochemical oxygen demandCFRCode of Federal RegulationsCODChemical oxygen demandEPAEnvironmental Protection AgencylLitermgMilligramsmg/lMilligrams per literNPDESNational Pollutant Discharge Elimination SystemPOTWPublicly owned treatment worksSICStandard Industrial ClassificationSWDASolid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. USCUnited States CodeTSSTotal suspended solids (Code 1976, § 5-2003)
Sec. 98-147. - Damaging, destroying equipment.     No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Code 1976, § 5-2161; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 83-29, 9-8-1983)
Sec. 98-148. - Entrance to properties; certain information confidential.     The director of utilities and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The director of utilities or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways of facilities for waste treatment. (Code 1976, § 5-2171; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 83-29, 9-8-1983)
Sec. 98-149. - Observance of safety rules.     While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 98-148, the director of utilities or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. (Code 1976, § 5-2172; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-150. - Entrance to certain private properties through which city holds easements.     The director of utilities, and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of but not limited to inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Code 1976, § 5-2173; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-151. - Notice of violation.     Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the violation and providing a five-day time limit for its satisfactory correction. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation. (Code 1976, § 5-2191; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 83-29, 9-8-1983)
Sec. 98-152. - Liability for expenses.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by city by reason of such violation. (Code 1976, § 5-2193; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-153. - Request for review and explanation.     If any user shall have a grievance concerning the amount of determination of an industrial surcharge or another decision made by the director of utilities pursuant to this article, he may submit a written request for review and explanation by the director of utilities. The director of utilities shall respond to such request within ten days from its receipt, giving a full explanation of his determination. (Code 1976, § 5-2211; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 83-29, 9-8-1983)
Sec. 98-154. - Filing of appeal; hearing; ruling. (a)	If any user is not satisfied with the response of the director of utilities, as specified in section 98-153, an appeal may be filed with the city manager. Such appeal shall be filed within ten days of receipt of the director of utilities' response. Upon the filing of an appeal, the city manager shall, within five days of receipt, schedule a hearing before him, and shall give written notice of the date, time and place of hearing to all parties. (b)	The city manager shall, within five days after the hearing, affirm, modify or overrule the determination of the director of utilities. (c)	The ruling of the city manager shall be subject to review by the superior court upon proper writ of certiorari. (Code 1976, § 5-2212; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Secs. 98-155—98-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 
Sec. 98-181. - Unlawful deposits of objectionable waste on public or private property.     It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (Code 1976, § 5-2011; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 83-29, 9-8-1983)
Sec. 98-182. - Unlawful discharge of sewage to any natural outlet.     It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. (Code 1976, § 5-2012; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-183. - Privies, privy vaults, similar facilities, unlawful.     Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Code 1976, § 5-2013; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-184. - Connection to public sewer required.     The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city is required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided a public sewer is within 200 feet (61 meters) of the property lines. (Code 1976, § 5-2014; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-185. - Connection to city water service required.     The owner shall connect to the city water system as a prerequisite to receiving sewer service. (Code 1976, § 5-2015; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Secs. 98-186—98-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
Sec. 98-211. - When public sanitary sewer available.     Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 98-184, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division, provided the lot consists of a minimum of at least one-half acre with a minimum dimension of 100 feet. (Code 1976, § 5-2031; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 83-29, 9-8-1983)
Sec. 98-212. - Permit required.     Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the county health officer. (Code 1976, § 5-2032; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-213. - Inspection.     A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the county health officer. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event the applicant for the permit shall notify the county health officer when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by county health officer. (Code 1976, § 5-2033; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-214. - Compliance with health department regulations.     The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of human resources. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. (Code 1976, § 5-2034; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-215. - Connection of public sewer when available.     At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 98-184, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article; and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. (Code 1976, § 5-2035; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-216. - Owner to maintain facilities in sanitary manner.     The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. (Code 1976, § 5-2036; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-217. - Division not to interfere with requirements of health officer.     No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. (Code 1976, § 5-2037; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Secs. 98-218—98-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 
Sec. 98-241. - Unauthorized connections.     No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance without first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer. (Code 1976, § 5-2051; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 83-29, 9-8-1983)
Sec. 98-242. - Construction plans and fees required prior to connection.     Any person desiring to make connection to any public sewer for any residential dwelling or subdivision or any commercial structure shall submit complete construction plans, meeting all construction standards of the city and the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources, to the city building official or to the city engineer and shall pay all applicable fees prior to making the connection. (Code 1976, § 5-2052; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-243. - Cost and expenses to be borne by owner.     All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (Code 1976, § 5-2053; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-244. - Separate sewer for each building.     A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and whole considered as one building sewer, provided both buildings are under the same ownership. However, if separate water meters service each building, the separate sewer service will be charged to each building. (Code 1976, § 5-2054; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-245. - Use of old building sewers.     Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city engineer, to meet with all requirements of this article. (Code 1976, § 5-2055; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-246. - Conformity with technical requirements.     The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code and OSHA and other applicable rules and regulations of the city and state. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification of such provisions, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. Special cleanout connections or locate indicators as requested by the city engineer may be made at the structure and/or at the property line. (Code 1976, § 5-2056; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-247. - Elevation.     Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. (Code 1976, § 5-2057; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-248. - Certain connections prohibited.     No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. (Code 1976, § 5-2058; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-249. - Compliance with applicable rules.     The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specification of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city engineer before installation. (Code 1976, § 5-2059; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-250. - Inspection and connection.     The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the city plumbing inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city plumbing inspector or his representative. Should the connection be made without the supervision of the city plumbing inspector or his representative, the connection shall be exposed by the owner at his expense so that the connection can be inspected and/or treated. (Code 1976, § 5-2060; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-251. - Excavations.     All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and light so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer. (Code 1976, § 5-2061; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Secs. 98-252—98-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - STANDARDS FOR USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 
Sec. 98-271. - Prohibited discharges to sanitary sewers generally.     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. (Code 1976, § 5-2061; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 83-29, 9-8-1983)
Sec. 98-272. - Discharge of unpolluted drainage.     Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the director of utilities, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet after an NPDES permit has been obtained from the state environmental protection division. (Code 1976, § 5-2072)
Sec. 98-273. - Discharge of sanitary wastewater into storm sewer prohibited.     Without exception, sanitary wastewater shall not be discharged into the storm sewer. (Code 1976, § 5-2073; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-274. - Prohibited wastes enumerated.     No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced, directly or indirectly into the POTW, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to any other national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: (1)	Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including but not limited to wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; nor any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time, shall two successive readings on any explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hybrides and sulfides and any other substances which the city, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system; nor any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. (2)	Solid or viscose substances in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides, or fleshing entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from the refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. (3)	Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or in excess of 10.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment. (4)	Any wastewater which results in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems or containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, whether singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to, section 307(a) of the Act. (5)	Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW. (6)	Wastewater having a temperature greater than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) at the introduction into the POTW or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference. (7)	Trucked or hauled pollutants including septic tank waste, except at discharge points and at such times designated by the director of utilities. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the director of utilities or his designated representative and the city may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. Such waste shall not violate provisions of this article or other requirements established by the city. The director of utilities shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits and may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director of utilities may also prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall also identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous waste. (8)	Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving stream water quality standards. (Code 1976, § 5-2074)
Sec. 98-275. - Limited discharges. (a)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the director of utilities that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving system, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director of utilities will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: (1)	Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. (2)	Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharge to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. (3)	Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. (4)	Any wastewater containing radioactive wastes of isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director of utilities in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. (5)	Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.(6)	Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius) and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). (7)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 pH metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director of utilities. (8)	Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. (9)	Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the director of utilities as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. (10)	Any waters containing quantities of radium, naturally occurring, or artificially produced radioisotopes in excess of presently existing or subsequently accepted limits for drinking water as established by the National Committee on Radiation Protection and Measuring. (11)	Materials which exert or cause:a.	Any waters containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual provision, attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the wastewater treatment plant. b.	Any waste which has unusual volume, concentration of solids, or composition that may create obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation and treatment of influent of the wastewater works. (b)	When the director of utilities determines that a user is contributing to the POTW of the substances enumerated in subsection (a) of this section in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the directors shall: (1)	Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; and(2)	Develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the POTW.(Code 1976, § 5-2075; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 89-42, 11-9-1989; Ord. No. 93-41, 10-21-1993) 
Sec. 98-276. - Calculation of local limits. (a)	The director of utilities shall calculate limits for such substances which shall be technically based using applicable POTW process limits and state and/or federal water quality standards and sludge regulations. The limits fixed in this section may be used as a guide and plant control but may be altered by the director of utilities in the event of a cumulative overload on a particular drainage basin or the POTW in order to protect against pass through or interference. Fixed Upper Limits for Constituents (ppm by weight) Antimony5.00Arsenic0.110Beryllium0.00013Cadmium0.0016Chromium0.500Copper0.050Lead0.003Total Toxic Organics2.13 Mercury0.00004Nickel0.123Selenium0.012Silver0.0004Thallium0.055Zinc0.320Cyanide0.020BOD5500TSS350N50  The limits set forth in this subsection apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The director of utilities may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of the concentration-based limitations of this subsection. (b)	Prior to the adoption of the 1996 revisions of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the city has issued permits to several existing users whose historical discharge of BOD, total suspended solids and/or ammonia exceed the concentration limits of this section. The director of utilities may renew these existing permits provided that the existing mass load of pollutants from any of these individual industries shall not increase above the historic average and that the discharge shall not cause a cumulative overload on a particular basin. 
Sec. 98-277. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards.     The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. (1)	Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass of the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director of utilities may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). (2)	When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director of utilities shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). (3)	A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. (4)	A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. (Code 1976, § 5-2076)
Sec. 98-278. - State requirements.     State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. (Code 1976, § 5-2078)
Sec. 98-279. - City's right of revision.     The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 98-275. (Code 1976, § 5-2078)
Sec. 98-280. - Excessive discharge.     No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with discharge limitations unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director of utilities may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Code 1976, § 5-2080)
Sec. 98-281. - Accidental discharges.     Each user shall provide protection from the accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own costs and expense. At least once every two years, the director of utilities shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: (1)	Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;(2)	Description of stored chemicals;(3)	Procedures for immediately notifying the city of any accidental or slug discharge; and (4)	Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and control of plant runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. Review and approval of such plans and procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. (Code 1976, § 5-2081)
Sec. 98-282. - Written notice.     Within five days following an accidental discharge the user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. (Code 1976, § 5-2082)
Sec. 98-283. - Notice to employees.     A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. (Code 1976, § 5-2083)
Sec. 98-284. - Flow equalization. (a)	The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes in volumes, or with constituents, such that existing dilution conditions in the sewers or at the treatment plant would be affected to the detriment of the city, shall be subject to review and approval of the director of utilities. When necessary in the opinion of the director of utilities, pretreatment or equalizing units may be required to bring constituents or volume of flow within the limits previously prescribed or to an otherwise acceptable level, and to hold or equalize flows such that no peak flow conditions may hamper the operation of any unit of the sewer system. The equalization or holding unit shall have a capacity suitable to serve the intended purpose and be equipped with acceptable outlet control facilities to provide flexibility in operation and accommodate changing conditions in the waste flow. (b)	Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained at the user's expense. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. (Code 1976, § 5-2084)
Sec. 98-285. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. (a)	Generally. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of fats, grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of the type and capacity approved the department of human resources public health chapter 290-5-14-.06, and the City of Valdosta Land Development Regulations chapter 332, section 332-31 or as deemed appropriate by the director and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, to prevent the passage of accumulated fats, grease and oil, sludge or sand into the publicly owned treatment works. A regular inspection, cleaning and repair schedule may be imposed when such schedule is reasonably deemed necessary by the director to prevent the passage of grease and oil, sludge or sand into the publicly owned treatment works. Such interception units shall be considered pretreatment devices as defined in section 98-145. Inspections, cleaning and repairs shall be by the owner, at the owner's expense. (b)	Installation requirements and design criteria. (1)	All new and remodeled food industry customers and institutions with commercial kitchens shall have a properly designed and maintained grease interceptor or series of grease interceptors meeting the design criteria contained in the City of Valdosta Land Development Regulations chapter 332, section 332-31. All outside grease interceptors shall be designed and installed to allow complete access for maintenance and inspection of inner chambers as well as observation and sampling of the wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer. (2)	All existing food industry customers and institutions with commercial kitchens within the City of Valdosta service area are required to conduct their operations so that fats, oils and grease are separated and captured on the user's premises and then properly disposed. All transportation and disposal of fats, oil and grease shall be conducted by a registered commercial waste transporter in accordance with State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control 391-3-6-.24 Regulation of Commercial Waste Originators, Pumpers, Transporters, Processors and Disposal Facilities. (c)	Recurrent maintenance program. (1)	General intent. The purpose of the recurrent maintenance program is to minimize the introduction of fats, oil and grease into the City of Valdosta publicly owned treatment works through the proper operation and maintenance of grease interceptors. This section establishes the responsibilities of the user, reporting criteria, right of inspection, and legal remedies for noncompliance. (2)	Recurrent maintenance required. All food service customers and institutions with commercial kitchens with outside grease interceptors shall perform recurrent maintenance. Recurrent maintenance shall be the removal of the entire contents of the grease interceptor system by pumping the contents of the grease interceptor system no less than once every month. The pumping of contents will be in accordance with State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control 391-3-6.24 Regulation of Commercial Waste Originators, Pumpers, Transporters, Processors and Disposal Facilities. a.	The user shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the grease trap waste and for maintenance of records of disposal as specified in this section. b.	All waste removed from each grease trap must be disposed of at an appropriate facility designed to receive such waste. c.	In no manner shall any grease trap pumpage be discharged to any portion, public or private, of the wastewater collection system. d.	Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floatable materials, wastewater, sludges and solids. Top skimming of outdoor grease traps, decanting or back flushing of the grease trap or its wastes for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled is prohibited. Further, the discharge of liquid, semi-solids, or solids into a grease trap from vehicles after servicing is prohibited. Vehicles capable of separating water from grease shall not discharge separated water into the grease trap or into the wastewater collection system. (3)	Right to conduct monitoring. The city reserves the right to conduct monitoring activities for the purpose of documenting compliance with the requirements of this article. Monitoring activities may include: a.	Review of waste hauler manifests;b.	Inspection of grease interceptors;c.	Sampling and analysis of grease interceptor discharge.(4)	Right of inspection. a.	The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any food industry customer to ascertain whether the purpose of this article, and any order issued under this article, is being met, and whether the food industry customer is complying with all requirements thereof. Food service customers shall allow the director or his representatives ready access to all parts of the premises associated with FOG collection and sanitary sewer connections for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. b.	Where a food industry customer (including, but not limited to hospitals, prison facilities, schools) has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the food industry customer shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, state and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. (5)	Documentation of maintenance. Copies of waste hauler manifests documenting the cleaning of grease interceptors shall be maintained by the food industry customer at the business site or by the registered commercial waste transporter if included as part of the customer's service contract for a period of three years. Upon request by the city the food industry customer or the registered commercial waste transporter will provide copies of manifests to the city by fax or electronic copy. Failure to produce copies of waste hauler manifests containing all required information within ten days shall be deemed a violation of this article. Waste hauler manifests shall contain the following information at a minimum: a.	Generator information including business name, address, volume pumped, date and time of pumping, and generator signature. b.	Certified waste hauler information including company name, address, telephone number, State of Georgia registration number, driver name and signature. (d)	Enforcement—Option 1: (1)	Whenever the utilities director or his designee determines that a violation of this section exists, said director may issue to the food service customer a notice of violation and an order to clean and inspect the grease interceptor immediately. The director may also place the food service customer on a probationary status and require monthly reporting of grease interceptor cleaning and inspection. (2)	If the violation has not been corrected within a reasonable time as determined by the utilities director, the city may issue a citation requiring the violator to appear in the Municipal Court of the City of Valdosta. (3)	The violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250.00 for a first violation; not to exceed $500.00 for the second violation within 12 months; a third offense within 12 months shall be a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. (4)	For any subsequent violations, fines shall be issued on a daily basis and are not to exceed $500.00 per day or sewer service may be severed. Each day a violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1976, § 5-2086; Ord. No. 2010-17, § 2, 5-20-2010)
Sec. 98-286. - Control manhole and monitoring facilities. (a)	When required by the director of utilities, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director of utilities. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. The monitoring facilities should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. (b)	There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be kept clean and maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the city. (Code 1976, § 5-2088)
Sec. 98-287. - Sample collection and analytical requirements. (a)	All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. (b)	Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab sampling techniques. For all other analyses, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional, composite collection techniques. If flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director of utilities may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. (Code 1976, § 5-2089)
Sec. 98-288. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.     If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director of utilities within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director of utilities within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the director of utilities or his representative monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the director or representative samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user received the results of this sampling. 
Sec. 98-289. - Notification of discharge of hazardous waste.     The discharge of any substance which if otherwise disposed of would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, into the POTW of the city is prohibited. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the PPTW of the incident and to provide all verbal and written notifications required by this article for accidental discharges. The user shall also be responsible for making all other notifications as required by EPD, EPA and other authorities. 
Sec. 98-290. - Special agreements.     No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and an industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength of character may be accepted by the city for treatment; provided in division 7 of this article. 
Secs. 98-291—98-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY DETERMINATIONS 
Sec. 98-311. - Quality changes.     The director of utilities shall have made, from time to time, tests to determine the quality of waste being discharged into the city sewer from users or connectors, including the premises of industrial waste disposal permit holders under the provisions hereof. If, at any time, such waste becomes or the industrial process changes to a quality that requires pretreatment according to the city standards, the director of utilities shall have the authority to require that proper permits be obtained and proper pretreatment facilities be installed by the permit holder. Should any user or connector, or a permit holder fail to or refuse to install such utilities or initiate their installation to the satisfaction and approval of the director of utilities, within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the director of utilities, the director of utilities shall have the authority to revoke such permit and to terminate sewer service to such premises until such time as the owner thereof has complied with the requirement of this article and shall have the authority to assess administrative fines as provided in division 12 of this article. (Code 1976, § 5-2101; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979; Ord. No. 83-29, 9-8-1983; Ord. No. 89-43, 11-9-1989) 
Sec. 98-312. - Standard of quality. (a)	Wastes will be accepted which have been placed in satisfactory conditions or quality after pretreatment by the producer in a plant or by a process which has been approved by the director of utilities and which is continuously maintained and operated by the producer at no cost to the city and which is continuously subject to inspection by the director of utilities or his designated representative. The construction plans for such pretreatment plants shall after their approval be placed on file in permanent reproducible form with the director of utilities without costs to the city. (b)	All industrial users shall meet federal pretreatment requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403. (Code 1976, § 5-2102; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-313. - Quality determination. (a)	Determination of the average concentration or strength of the waste delivered shall be the obligation of the city except as provided by industrial, contribution permits and tests made on representative average samples collected by the city shall be made at intervals as the city may desire so long as at least annual samples are taken. (b)	Samples may be taken and tests made at the city's option without notice to the owner and test results made and approved by the city shall be final in fixing the application rate. However, the owner may request in writing that parallel sampling and tests at all times be made by the owner and the city, in which case consideration may be given to using the average of comparable values obtained by the owner and the city. (Code 1976, § 5-2103; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-314. - Quantity determination. (a)	Unless otherwise provided, the quantity of waste delivered to city sewers will be used as the same as the water delivered to the producer by the city water system; if well water is to be used it must be known to the city and metered at the user's standards. The user shall pay the city the costs incurred in periodic maintenance, meter reading, and billing. Such metering devices will be available to the city at all reasonable times. (b)	Should the producer evaporate or dispose of water delivered by the city water system, it shall be the obligation of the producer to install such meters or other devices to determine the portion or quantity delivered to the sewer system. (c)	The director of utilities will consider establishing a constant ratio, factor or percentage to be applied to the metered water quantity delivered by the city in order to determine the waste delivered by the industry. Determination of this factor shall be the responsibility of the waste producer as also shall be the demonstration to obtain the director of utilities' approval of the factor. The value of this factor will be periodically reviewed for accuracy. (d)	All industries, commercial organizations, or other procedures of liquid waste of any form, including domestic waste as at apartments, hotels, motels, hospitals, universities, schools, or homes served by the city sewer system, and for which the water supply is from private wells or other suppliers of water, must pay a sewer connection charge to the city. (e)	It shall be the obligation of the owner in all instances to submit a statement immediately where no payment procedure is established to the director of utilities and if any changes take place after billing rate of charges have been initially established using forms supplied by the director of utilities. (Code 1976, § 5-2106; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Secs. 98-315—98-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - INDUSTRIAL SEWER SURCHARGES 
Sec. 98-341. - Standard pollutants.     Industrial users discharging process wastes with standard pollutants named in this section with concentrations greater than the described normal strength must obtain a wastewater contribution permit from the director of utilities. The contribution permit shall impose concentration limits and/or impose mass limitation on the daily discharge for users discharging wastes with concentrations of standard pollutants greater than these normal strengths. The director shall consider factors such as the effects on the POTW and receiving stream, the concentration and total load reaching the headworks of the treatment facility and the historical load from the user. The director shall also impose penalties for violation of concentration limits or mass limitation in additions to surcharge rates established by this article. PollutantNormal Strength(mg/l)BOD5 250COD400TSS220N* 25Oil and Grease100 The user discharging such waste shall be charged and assessed a surcharge as provided in this article, if the waste has a concentration greater than the above normal concentration. (Code 1976, § 5-2121; Ord. No. 83-29, 9-8-1983; Ord. No. 93-42, 10-21-1993)
Sec. 98-342. - Quality determination for surcharges.     As provided in division 5 of this article, the director of utilities shall from time to time make tests to determine the character and concentration of the industrial wastes from the users. The director of utilities shall determine the average concentration of the industrial discharge from a user at least annually for calculation of the surcharge rate. If at any time the director of utilities determines that the quality of the discharge has changed, the surcharge rate may be adjusted accordingly, provided, further, that the director of utilities shall also have the authority to require pretreatment or to take other action as provided elsewhere in this article. (Code 1976, § 5-2122; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-343. - Quantity determination for surcharges.     A volume of flow used on computing industrial surcharges shall be determined as provided in division 5 of this article; provided, however, a reasonable approximation of flows cannot be obtained otherwise, the volume of flows shall be determined by actual measurement, utilizing a flow meter provided by the person discharging the industrial waste and approved by the director of utilities. Such meter shall be capable of recording total flows and shall also be capable of recording minimum, maximum and average flows for a period of not less than seven days. (Code 1976, § 5-2124; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-344. - Billing procedure.     Industrial waste surcharges provided for in this article shall be prepared and rendered with the regular water and sewer bill. The surcharge for the discharge of excessive concentrations of pollutants shall be calculated as follows: Volume (in ccf) x 0.00624 (in pounds per ccf) x (concentration minus normal strength) x surcharge rate (in dollars per pound) (Code 1976, § 5-2125; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Sec. 98-345. - Surcharge rates.     The surcharge rates for standard pollutants shall be according to the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk, except that the director may impose incremental escalation of these rates and/or other enforcement actions for violation of mass limitations established in the users permit for discharge. (Code 1976, § 5-2126; Ord. No. 79-8, 3-7-1979)
Secs. 98-346—98-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS 
Sec. 98-371. - Permit required.     All significant users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit before connection to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. New users shall apply for a permit at least 90 days prior to connection to or contributing to the POTW. 
Sec. 98-372. - Permit application.     Significant users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file an application in the form prescribed by the city, and accompanied by a fee of $100.00. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: (1)	Name, address, and location, (if different than the address).(2)	SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972 as amended. (3)	Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in sections 98-275 and 98-276 as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. (4)	Time and duration of the contribution.(5)	Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any. (6)	Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation. (7)	Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged. (8)	Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal pretreatment standards. (9)	Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production.(10)	Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day).(11)	Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system. (12)	Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to the terms and conditions provided in this article. 
Sec. 98-373. - Permit modification.     The director of utilities may modify a wastewater discharge permit for cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: (1)	To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; (2)	A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; (3)	Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; (4)	Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;(5)	Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; (6)	Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; (7)	To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit;(8)	To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator; or (9)	To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
Sec. 98-374. - Permit conditions.     Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following information: (1)	A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; (2)	A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 98-377 and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; (3)	The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the POTW; (4)	Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics and limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; (5)	Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; (6)	Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;(7)	Specifications for self-monitoring programs which shall include identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling locations, frequency of sampling, and sample type based on federal, state and local law and reporting requirements; (8)	Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW; (9)	Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;(10)	Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records and relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto; (11)	Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; (12)	Requirements for the development of spill control plans or other special conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges and requirements for notification of slug discharges; (13)	A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law; (14)	Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; (15)	A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and (16)	Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
Sec. 98-375. - Wastewater discharge permit revocation.     The director of utilities may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: (1)	Failure to notify of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;(2)	Failure to provide prior notification of changed conditions pursuant to requirements of this article; (3)	Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; (4)	Falsifying self-monitoring reports;(5)	Tampering with monitoring equipment;(6)	Refusing to allow timely access to the facility premises and records;(7)	Failure to meet effluent limitations;(8)	Failure to pay fines;(9)	Failure to pay sewage charges;(10)	Failure to meet compliance schedules;(11)	Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;(12)	Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or (13)	Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. Wastewater discharge permits shall be void upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
Sec. 98-376. - Permit duration.     Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than one year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit re-issuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in division 2 of this article are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
Sec. 98-377. - Permit transfer.     Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
Sec. 98-378. - Baseline monitoring report.     Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director of utilities a baseline monitoring report which contains the information listed in subsections (1)—(8) of this section. A new source shall report the method of treatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. Users described in this section shall submit the following information: (1)	The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.(2)	A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.(3)	A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated process. (4)	Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). (5)	The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in this article. (6)	A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. (7)	If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: a.	The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). b.	No increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine months.c.	Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the director of utilities including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment, the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director of utilities. (8)	All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
Sec. 98-379. - Reports on compliance with standards deadline.     Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director of utilities a report containing the information described in section 98-378(4)—(6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with requirements of this article. 
Sec. 98-380. - Periodic compliance report. (a)	Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW shall submit to the director of utilities during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment permit, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. At the discretion of the director of utilities and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the director of utilities may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. (b)	The director of utilities may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (a) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the director of utilities of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. 
Sec. 98-381. - Pretreatment. (a)	Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with all local limits and this article and shall achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the national pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. (b)	All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request. 
Sec. 98-382. - Confidential information.     Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the director of utilities' inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director of utilities, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be make available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
Sec. 98-383. - Application signatories and certification.     All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
Sec. 98-384. - Reports of changed conditions.     Each user must notify the director of utilities of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. (1)	The director of utilities may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application. (2)	The director of utilities may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing discharge permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. (3)	For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater or the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants or any change to qualify as a significant industrial user. 
Sec. 98-385. - Recordkeeping.     Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent to such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used, and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director of utilities. 
Secs. 98-386—98-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ENFORCEMENT 
Sec. 98-391. - Notification of violation.     When the director of utilities or his designated representative finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director or his representative may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 15 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action including emergency actions or any other enforcement actions, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
Sec. 98-392. - Consent orders.     The director of utilities may enter into consent orders, assurance of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
Sec. 98-393. - Show cause hearing.     The city may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appeal before the director of utilities and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
Sec. 98-394. - Hearing procedure.     The director of utilities may conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any employee of the department to: (1)	Issue in the name of the director of utilities notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings. (2)	Take the evidenced.(3)	Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the director of utilities for action thereon. 
Sec. 98-395. - Hearing testimony.     At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
Sec. 98-396. - Order to be issued.     After the director of utilities has reviewed the evidence, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service may be disconnected unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
Sec. 98-397. - Administrative compliance orders.     When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director of utilities may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
Sec. 98-398. - Cease and desist orders.     When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article for any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director of utilities may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing it to cease and desist such violations and directing the user to: (1)	Immediately comply with all requirements; and(2)	Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
Sec. 98-399. - Administrative fines. (a)	When the director of utilities finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article for any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director of utilities may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $100.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. (b)	Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall after 30 calendar days be assessed an additional penalty of one percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. (c)	Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the director of utilities to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the director of utilities may convene a hearing on the matter. If the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The director of utilities may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. (d)	Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
Sec. 98-400. - Emergency suspensions.     The director of utilities or his designated representative may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director or his representative may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. (1)	Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or the endangerment to any individuals. The city may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director or his representative that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in this article are initiated against the user. (2)	A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any further occurrence, to the director of utilities prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under the provisions of the article. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
Sec. 98-401. - Termination of service.     The city may terminate water and waste disposal service and disconnect the user from the system when: (1)	A government agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment. (2)	The user:a.	Discharges industrial wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the city. b.	Discharges wastewater which has a deleterious effect upon the city's sewer system.c.	Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause imbalance in the wastewater treatment system. d.	Fails to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge, or fails to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge. e.	Refuses reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling. f.	Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due.g.	Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers.h.	Is in violation of federal pretreatment requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403.Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar against the user. 
Sec. 98-402. - Disconnection.     If service is disconnected pursuant to this article, the city shall: (1)	Disconnect the customer.(2)	Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information. (3)	Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from its industrial wastes. 
Sec. 98-403. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance.     The director of utilities shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the city, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant compliance" shall mean: (1)	Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceeded the maximum daily limit or average daily limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; (2)	Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); (3)	Any other discharge violation that the director of utilities believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; (4)	Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director of utilities' exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such discharge; (5)	Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; (6)	Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; (7)	Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or(8)	Any other violation which the director of utilities determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Secs. 98-404—98-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE 
Sec. 98-431. - Damaging, destroying, etc., equipment.     No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
Secs. 98-432—98-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS 
Sec. 98-451. - Entrance to properties; confidentiality of certain information. (a)	The director of utilities and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. (b)	When a user has security measures in force, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the employee will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. (c)	Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected or sampled shall be promptly removed, by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The cost of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
Sec. 98-452. - Observance of safety rules.     While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 98-451, the director of utilities or duly authorized representatives of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. 
Sec. 98-453. - Entrance to certain private properties trough which the city holds easements.     The director of utilities, and other duly authorized representatives of the city bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
Secs. 98-454—98-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - PENALTIES 
Sec. 98-481. - Civil remedies.     Any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty of not less than $1,000.00. Each act of violation and each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damages occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. The city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of actual damages incurred. In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, violation history of the user, and any penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action. 
Sec. 98-482. - Criminal prosecution. (a)	A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. (b)	A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 or subject to imprisonment for not more than six months or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. (c)	A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge, or order issued under this article; for who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
Sec. 98-483. - Injunctive relief.     When the director of utilities or authorized representative finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director or representative may petition the county court through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking other action against a user. 
Sec. 98-484. - Other legal sanctions.     In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
Sec. 98-485. - Liability for expenses.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city of such violation. 
Secs. 98-486—98-510. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - APPEAL PROCEDURES 
Sec. 98-511. - Request for review and explanation.     If any user shall have a grievance concerning the amount of determination of an industrial surcharge or another decision made by the director of utilities pursuant to this article, he may submit a written request for review and explanation by the director of utilities. The director of utilities shall respond to such request within ten days from receipt thereof giving a full explanation of his determination. 
Sec. 98-512. - Filing of appeal; hearing; ruling. (a)	If any user is not satisfied with the response of the director of utilities, an appeal may be filed with the city manager. Such appeal shall be filed within ten days of receipt of the director of utilities' response. Upon the filing of an appeal, the city manager shall, within five days of receipt, schedule a hearing before him, and shall give written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to all parties. (b)	The city manager shall within five days after the hearing, affirm, modify or overrule the determination of the director of utilities. (c)	The ruling of the city manager shall be subject to review by the superior court upon proper writ of certiorari. 
Secs. 98-513—98-550. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES 
Sec. 98-551. - Upset. (a)	For the purposes of this section, the term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative measures, or careless or improper operation. (b)	An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (c) of this section are met. (c)	A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: (1)	An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset;(2)	The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and (3)	The user has submitted the following information to the director of utilities within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. (If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days.) a.	A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;b.	The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and c.	Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. (d)	In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. (e)	Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. (f)	Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
Sec. 98-552. - Prohibited discharge standards.     The user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 98-275. If it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: (1)	A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and that user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or (2)	No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge with the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and, in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
Sec. 98-553. - Bypass. (a)	For the purposes of this section:(1)	The term "bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastewaters from any portion of a user's treatment facility. (2)	The term "severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss by delays in production. (b)	A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. The bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. (1)	If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director of utilities, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. (2)	A user shall submit oral notice to the director of utilities of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director of utilities may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. (c)	Bypass is prohibited, and the director of utilities may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: (1)	Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; (2)	There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and (3)	The user submitted notices as required under this subsection (c).The director of utilities may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director of utilities determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsections (c)(1)—(c)(3) of this section. 
Secs. 98-554—98-580. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER CHARGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 98-581. - Miscellaneous rates and charges.     The city hereby adopts the following rates, charges and regulations as a condition to provide ancillary services to the city's water and wastewater customers as follows: Miscellaneous Rates, Charges and Fees DescriptionProposed FeesConnection Fees & Charges Water Meter Installation Fee [*]5/8 × ¾" Meter Plumber Installed$350.00 City Installed$550.001" Meter Plumber Installed$400.00 City Installed$600.001 ½" Meter Plumber Installed$650.00 City Installed$850.002" Meter Plumber Installed$775.00 City Installed$975.00Above 2" (Contractors Install)Actual Cost plus $75.00Sewer Connection Fee$200.00 per connectionOther Miscellaneous Fees & Charges Initial Deposit$50.00Additional Deposit (After Disconnection for Non-Payment)$50.00Water Reconnection Fee (After Disconnection for Non-Payment) Residential Service$30.00 Commercial Service$50.00Wastewater Reconnection Fee$375.00Re-Read Fee$10.00Standby Calls$10.00New Service$25.00Transfer Service$25.00Broken Payment Arrangements$10.00Excessive Trip Charge$10.00Non-compliance for BFP ordinance$35.00Tampering Fee$50.00Curb Stop Fee$50.00Backflow Prevention Fee$50.00Grease Trap Inspection Fee$100.00Lowndes CountyCharge Outside City RatesHydrant Meter FeeHydrant Meter Charge$750.00Hydrant Monthly Charges Base Charge$20.00 Usage Charge (Commercial Consumption Rate)Commercial RateLaboratory Service Biochemical Oxygen Demand$40.00 Chemical Oxygen Demand$40.00 Total Suspended Solids$40.00 Ammonia Nitrogen$20.00 Fecal Coliform$25.00 Bac-t$30.00[*] Amounts exclude the cost of the service line to the Service Main. (Ord. No. 2012-16, § 3, 7-5-2012)Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-16, § 3, adopted July 5, 2012, repealed and replaced § 98-581 formerly entitled "Monthly service charge", which derived from: Ord. No. 96-52, § 5-3001, adopted Nov. 7, 1996; Ord. No. 88-51, adopted Oct. 6, 1988; and Ord. No. 2004-23, § 5-3001, adopted June 10, 2004. 
Sec. 98-582. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-16, § 1, adopted July 5, 2012, repealed § 98-582 entitled "Outside city rate", which derived from: Code 1976, § 5-3012; and Ord. No. 2004-23, § 5-3012, adopted June 10, 2004. 
Sec. 98-583. - Charge for account establishment and transfers.     A charge as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk will be charged to each customer when a new account is established for the consumption of water or the treatment of wastewater. A charge as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk will be added to each residential or commercial customer who transfers an existing account from one service address to another service address. This charge will be added to the next monthly bill at the new service address. This charge may be paid in advance or added to the service. (Ord. No. 96-52, § 5-3013, 11-7-1996; Ord. No. 2004-23, § 5-3013, 6-10-2004)
Secs. 98-584—98-610. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER 
Sec. 98-611. - Water, rates and charges.     The city hereby adopts the following rates, charges and regulations as a condition to the provision of water service by the city to customers as follows: (1)	Definitions: a.	"Residential service" means an individual dwelling unit designed for more or less permanent household occupancy which would include individual cooking and bathing facilities. Examples are a single-family home, efficiency apartment unit, cooperative apartment unit, duplex unit, condominium, and multifamily residential building unit. b.	"Commercial service" means a use of land or a building for nonresidential purposes, but shall include a residential use which has identifiable "general service" characteristics, as the term is used herein, both of which use the same water meter. c.	"Irrigation service" means an individually-metered water service used exclusively for lawn sprinkling, irrigation of pervious surfaces, and other related service. Irrigation service can be utilized by both residential and commercial service customers. d.	"Outside city surcharge" means an additional charge for service for water customers outside the corporate limits of the city. The outside city surcharge is 100 percent (i.e., charges equal twice the inside water rates). (2)	Residential water service rates: Applicability: Potable water service in residential dwelling units with individual water meters. Rate per monthly billing period: The monthly rates for service include a monthly service charge and a water consumption rate. The monthly bill for service rendered to an individually-metered residential service shall equal the sum of the monthly service charge, which serves as the minimum bill, and the water consumption rate based on all metered water consumption delivered to the premises. Monthly service charge: The base service charge for all metered or active accounts shall reflect the applicable rates shown in the table below. The monthly service charge does not include an allowance for water consumption. Residential Monthly Service Charges for Water Service Effective Date on or afterDescription 7/1/2012 7/1/2013 7/1/2014 7/1/2015 7/1/2016 Residential - Inside City [*]Meter Sizes:5/8" to ¾" Meter$4.20$4.90$5.60$6.30$7.001" Meter6.438.6711.3114.2417.501.5" Meter9.4914.4120.3327.1535.002" Meter14.6622.6432.1443.2856.00[*] Outside City water customers pay an Outside City Surcharge or twice the Inside City rates.  Consumption Rate: The rate for each one ccf (100 cubic feet) or fraction thereof of water that passes through the customer's service meter shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: Residential Consumption Rates for Water Service LowerLimitUpperLimitEffective Date on or afterDescription (CCF)(CCF)7/1/2012 7/1/2013 7/1/2014 7/1/2015 7/1/2016 Residential - Inside City [*]All Meter Sizes: Metered Water Use0- 5$1.40$1.40$1.40$1.40$1.40 Metered Water UseAbove- 5$1.75$1.75$1.75$1.75$1.75[*] Outside City water customers pay an Outside City Surcharge or twice the Inside City rates.  (3)	Commercial water service rates: Applicability: Potable water service for all nonresidential purposes, but shall include a residential use which has identifiable "general service" characteristics, as the term is used herein, both of which use the same water meter. Rate per monthly billing period: The monthly rates for service include a monthly service charge and a water consumption rate. The monthly bill for service rendered to an individually-metered residential service shall equal the sum of the monthly service charge, which serves as the minimum bill, and the water consumption rate based on all metered water consumption delivered to the premises. Monthly service charge: The base service charge for all metered or active accounts shall reflect the applicable rates shown in the table below. The monthly service charge does not include an allowance for water consumption. Commercial Monthly Service Charges for Water Service Effective Date on or afterDescription 7/1/2012 7/1/2013 7/1/2014 7/1/2015 7/1/2016 Commercial - Inside City [*]Meter Sizes:5/8" to ¾" Meter$4.20$4.90$5.60$6.30$7.001" Meter6.438.6711.3114.2417.501.5" Meter9.4914.4120.3327.1535.002" Meter14.6622.6432.1443.2856.003" Meter39.9453.3168.6685.87105.004" Meter55.5779.23107.07138.98175.006" Meter93.37142.93202.27271.28350.008" Meter and Above137.76218.54315.84429.66560.00[*] Outside City water customers pay an Outside City Surcharge or twice the Inside City rates.  Consumption rate: The rate for each one ccf (100 cubic feet) or fraction thereof of water that passes through the customer's service meter shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: Commercial Consumption Rates for Water Service Effective Date on or afterDescription 7/1/2012 7/1/2013 7/1/2014 7/1/2015 7/1/2016 Commercial - Inside City [*]All Meter Sizes: All Metered Water Use$1.42$1.44$1.46$1.48$1.50[*] Outside City water customers pay an Outside City Surcharge or twice the Inside City rates.  (4)	Out of city rates: For potable water and irrigation consumers situated outside the corporate limits of the city and receiving such service(s) from the city, such consumers shall pay for comparable services or usage as listed under subsections (2) and (3) of this section, the identical and applicable rate therein stated, plus 100 percent (i.e., charges equal twice the inside city water rates). (Ord. No. 2012-16, § 1, 7-5-2012)Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-16, § 1, adopted July 5, 2012, repealed and replaced § 98-611 entitled "User charges generally", which derived from: Ord. No. 2004-23, § 5-3010, adopted June 10, 2004. 
Sec. 98-612. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-16, § 1, adopted July 5, 2012, repealed § 98-612 entitled "Schedule of user charges", which derived from: Ord. No. 2004-23, § 5-3011, adopted June 10, 2004. 
Secs. 98-613—98-630. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WASTEWATER 
Sec. 98-631. - Wastewater rates and charges.     The city hereby adopts the following rates, charges and regulations as a condition to the provision of wastewater service by the city to customers as follows: (1)	Definitions: a.	"Residential service" means an individual dwelling unit designed for more or less permanent household occupancy which would include individual cooking and bathing facilities. Examples are a single-family home, efficiency apartment unit, cooperative apartment unit, duplex unit, condominium, and multifamily residential building unit. b.	"Commercial service" means a use of land or a building for nonresidential purposes, but shall include a residential use which has identifiable "general service" characteristics, as the term is used herein, both of which use the same water meter. c.	"Outside city surcharge" is not applicable to wastewater service as adopted by the city. (2)	Residential wastewater service rates: Applicability: Wastewater service in residential dwelling units with individual water meters. Rate per monthly billing period: The monthly rates for service include a monthly service charge and a consumption rate based on metered water use. The monthly bill for service rendered to an individually-metered residential service shall equal the sum of the monthly service charge, which serves as the minimum bill, and the consumption rate based on all metered water consumption delivered to the premises. There is no maximum charge or cap applied to residential wastewater services. Monthly service charge: The base service charge for all metered or active accounts shall reflect the applicable rates shown in the table below. The monthly service charge does not include an allowance for metered water use. Residential Monthly Service Charges for Wastewater Service Effective Date on or afterDescription 7/1/2012 7/1/2013 7/1/2014 7/1/2015 7/1/2016 Residential - Inside & Outside City [*]Meter Sizes:5/8" to ¾" Meter$4.20$4.90$5.60$6.30$7.001" Meter6.438.6711.3114.2417.501.5" Meter9.4914.4120.3327.1535.002" Meter14.6622.6432.1443.2856.00[*] No Outside City Surcharge applies. Consumption rate: The rate for each one ccf (100 cubic feet) or fraction thereof of water that passes through the customer's service meter shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: Residential Consumption Rates for Wastewater Service LowerLimitUpperLimitEffective Date on or afterDescription (CCF)(CCF)7/1/2012 7/1/2013 7/1/2014 7/1/2015 7/1/2016 Residential - Inside & Outside City [*]All Meter Sizes: Metered Water Use0- 5$2.80$2.80$2.80$2.80$2.80 Metered Water UseAbove- 5$0.56$1.12$1.68$2.24$2.80[*] No Outside City Surcharge applies. (3)	Commercial wastewater service rates: Applicability: Wastewater service for all nonresidential purposes, but shall include a residential use which has identifiable "general service" characteristics, as the term is used herein, both of which use the same water meter. Rate per monthly billing period: The monthly rates for service include a monthly service charge and a consumption rate based on metered water use. The monthly bill for service rendered to an individually-metered residential service shall equal the sum of the monthly service charge, which serves as the minimum bill, and the consumption rate based on all metered water consumption delivered to the premises. Monthly service charge: The base service charge for all metered or active accounts shall reflect the applicable rates shown in the table below. The monthly service charge does not include an allowance for metered water use. Commercial Monthly Service Charges for Wastewater Service Effective Date on or afterDescription 7/1/2012 7/1/2013 7/1/2014 7/1/2015 7/1/2016 Commercial - Inside & Outside City [*]Meter Sizes:5/8" to ¾" Meter$4.20$4.90$5.60$6.30$7.001" Meter6.438.6711.3114.2417.501.5" Meter9.4914.4120.3327.1535.002" Meter14.6622.6432.1443.2856.003" Meter39.9453.3168.6685.87105.004" Meter55.5779.23107.07138.98175.006" Meter93.37142.93202.27271.28350.008" Meter and Above137.76218.54315.84429.66560.00[*] No Outside City Surcharge applies. Consumption rate: The rate for each one ccf (100 cubic feet) or fraction thereof of water that passes through the customer's service meter shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: Commercial Consumption Rates for Wastewater Service Effective Date on or afterDescription 7/1/2012 7/1/2013 7/1/2014 7/1/2015 7/1/2016 Commercial - Inside & Outside City [*]All Meter Sizes: All Metered Water Use$2.80$2.80$2.80$2.80$2.80[*] No Outside City Surcharge applies. (4)	Out of city rates: For wastewater service no outside city surcharge applies. (Ord. No. 2012-16, § 2, 7-5-2012)Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-16, § 2, adopted July 5, 2012, repealed and replaced § 98-631 entitled "User charges generally", which derived from: Code 1976, § 5-3021; Ord. No. 88-51, adopted Oct. 6, 1988; Ord. No. 2004-23, § 5-3021, adopted June 10, 2004. 
Sec. 98-632. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-16, § 2, adopted July 5, 2012, repealed § 98-632 entitled "Schedule of user charges", which derived from: Ord. No. 2004-23, § 5-3022, adopted June 10, 2004. 
Sec. 98-633. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-16, § 2, adopted July 5, 2012, repealed § 98-633 entitled "Biennial review of operation and maintenance charges", which derived from: Code 1976, § 5-3024. 
Sec. 98-634. - Notification.     The city shall provide that each user be notified, at least annually, during the first billing cycle of the fiscal year, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. (Code 1976, § 5-3025)
Secs. 98-635—98-650. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION COST RECOVERY 
Sec. 98-651. - Purpose of construction cost recovery.     The purpose of the construction cost recovery is for the city to recover part of the construction cost for the installation of water transmission mains and trunk sewer lines. This will be done by means of a surcharge fee based on either the area of development or the potential water and/or sewer demand from the development, whichever is greater. Such fee shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1976, § 5-3041; Ord. No. 85-22, 5-9-1985; Ord. No. 88-51, 10-6-1988; Ord. No. 97-39, § 1, 7-10-1997) 
Sec. 98-652. - Method of payment or fee collection.     The fee required by this division will be paid upon receipt of an application for a building permit for all development other than single-family residential. The cost recovery fee for single-family residential subdivisions shall be paid at the time a subdivision phase is accepted for recording for sale of the lots. There shall also be an amortization charge placed on the schedule for permits that are applied for after each January 1, following the date of completion of construction. This amortization fee shall be applied to the base surcharge rates effective January 1 and on each succeeding year until development is complete or the construction cost recovery is rescinded. Should there be a use or development that is not specifically listed in the water or sewer use schedule, the city engineer or the director of utilities shall have the authority to compute an equivalent sewer use based on the equivalent residential rate established. It should also be noted that the construction cost recovery fee is over and above any other fee established by the city. (Code 1976, § 5-3042; Ord. No. 85-22, 5-9-1985; Ord. No. 97-39, § 1, 7-10-1997)
Sec. 98-653. - Amendments.     Amendments or increases in fees may be made as extensions to the water transmission or trunk sewer system are constructed and connected into the system. (Code 1976, § 5-3043; Ord. No. 85-22, 5-9-1985; Ord. No. 97-39, § 1, 7-10-1997)
Secs. 98-654—98-670. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER UTILITY 
Sec. 98-671. - Purpose.     The city is authorized by the state constitution, including, without limitation, article IX, section II, paragraphs I(a) and III(a)(6) thereof, and state law, to provide stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout the incorporated areas of the city, which services, systems and facilities contribute to the protection and preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, and protection of the natural resources of the city. The Federal Clean Water Act, as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 USC 1251 et seq.), other amendments and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the act, place increased emphasis on the role of local governments in developing, implementing, conducting and making available to its citizens and property owners stormwater management services which address water quality and volume impacts of stormwater runoff. The city council has determined that development in the city to date, and the outlook for continued development at an increasing rate in the future, has created and will continue to create a need for stormwater management services, systems and facilities within the city. The city has engaged a consultant to perform professional engineering and financial analysis of the city's stormwater management needs and the alternatives available to the city for dealing with stormwater management, and has received, reviewed and considered the results of the consultant's analyses which identify stormwater management needs, propose strategic program goals and priorities, estimate the cost of stormwater management services, systems and facilities, examine reasonable charges by the city for providing such services and facilities and project the rate base available within the city to support such costs. The city council finds and concludes from the professional engineering and financial analyses that it would be desirable to provide for additional stormwater management services, systems and facilities within certain more developed portions of the city. The city council finds and concludes from the professional engineering and financial analyses that a fair and equitable rate structure for those receiving the benefits of stormwater management services, systems and facilities, the proceeds of which will be dedicated to the city stormwater utility for carrying out its purposes, will be essential if the city is to provide the level of stormwater management services, systems and facilities that would be desirable to meet the existing and future stormwater management needs of the city. (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5001, 3-9-2006)
Sec. 98-672. - Findings.     The city council makes the following findings of fact: (1)	The professional engineering and financial analyses conducted on behalf of and submitted to the city assesses and defines the stormwater management issues, needs, goals, program priorities and operational opportunities of the city. (2)	Given the issues, needs, goals, priorities and operational opportunities identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses submitted to the city, it is appropriate to authorize the establishment of an accounting unit which shall be dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater management services, systems and facilities in the city in concert with water resource management programs. (3)	The stormwater needs in the city include, but are not limited to, protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. Provisions of stormwater management services, systems and facilities and regulation of the use therefore renders and/or results in both service and benefit to individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city, and to all properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city concurrently in a variety of ways as identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses. (4)	The service and benefit rendered or resulting from the provision of stormwater management services, systems and facilities may differ over time depending on many factors and considerations, including, but not limited to, location, demands and impacts imposed upon the stormwater management services, systems and facilities, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among the owners of properties in proportion to the longterm demands the properties owned impose on the city's stormwater management services, systems and facilities which render or result in services and benefits to such properties and the owners thereof. (5)	The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed, installed, and acquired through various mechanisms over many years. The future usefulness and value of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and of future additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use and enhance the stormwater management systems and facilities in the city in concert with the management and regulation of other water resources in the city. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management services, systems, and facilities. (6)	A stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout the city, and the most equitable means to regulate the use of a higher level of stormwater management services, systems and facilities in the city through stormwater service charges, user fees and other mechanisms as described in the professional engineering and financial analyses prepared for the city. (7)	A schedule of stormwater utility service charges based in part on the area of impervious surface located on each property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout the city. Such service charges may be complemented by other types of charges which address specific needs, including, but not limited to, special service fees, special assessments, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes and other forms of revenue, as deemed appropriate by the city council. (8)	The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site or off-site systems, facilities, activities or assets which reduce or otherwise mitigate the impact of a particular property on the city stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities should be taken into account to reduce the service charge on that property either in the form of a direct reduction or credit, and that such reduction or credit should be conditional upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the city engineer. Reductions or credits for privately owned and maintained stormwater management systems, facilities, activities or assets shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the stormwater contribution from the property benefited by such systems. (9)	The area of impervious surfaces on each property is the most important factor influencing the cost of the stormwater management services, systems and facilities provided by the city or to be provided by the city in the future, and that the area of impervious surfaces on each property is therefore the most appropriate parameter for calculating a periodic stormwater service charge. (10)	It is imperative that the proceeds from all service charges for stormwater management services, systems and facilities, together with any other revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, systems and facilities, be dedicated solely to those purposes, and directs that such proceeds of service charges and revenues shall therefore be deposited into the enterprise accounting fund of the city stormwater utility and shall remain in that fund and be dispersed only for stormwater management capital, operating and nonoperating costs, lease payments and debt service of bonds or other indebtedness for stormwater management purposes. (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5002, 3-9-2006)
Sec. 98-673. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning     Act means and refers to the Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Agency pursuant thereto.     Bonds means revenue bonds, notes, loans or any other debt obligations issued or incurred to finance the costs of construction.     Contributor or user means any person owning, operating, or otherwise responsible for property within the city which directly or indirectly discharges stormwater or surface water or subsurface water to any portion of the stormwater management system, including direct or indirect discharges to the city's stormwater drainage system, or which is directly or indirectly protected by the city's flood protection system or stormwater drainage system. The term "contributor" or "user" means any person responsible for the direct or indirect discharge of stormwater or surface water or subsurface water to the city's stormwater drainage system.     Costs of construction means costs reasonably incurred in connection with providing capital improvements to the system or any portion thereof, including, but not limited to, the costs of the following: (1)	Acquisition of all property, real or personal, and all interests in connection therewith including all rights-of-way and easements therefore; (2)	Physical construction, installation and testing, including the costs of labor, services, materials, supplies and utility services used in connection therewith; (3)	Architectural, engineering, legal, and other professional services;(4)	Insurance premiums during construction, to the extent not paid for by a contractor for construction and installation; (5)	Any taxes or other charges which become due during construction;(6)	Expenses incurred by the city or on its behalf with its approval in seeking to enforce any remedy against any contractor or subcontractor in respect of any default under a contract relating to construction; (7)	Principal and interest on any bonds; and(8)	Miscellaneous expenses incidental thereto.    Credit means a reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to the owner of a particular property for the existence and use of privately owned, maintained and operated on-site or off-site stormwater systems or facilities, or continuing provision of services or activities that reduce or mitigate the city stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities for that particular property.     Debt service means the amount of money necessary annually to pay the interest on outstanding debt and pay the principal of maturing debt.     Developed property means real property upon which a structure or impervious surface has been placed or constructed, thus increasing the amount of rainwater or surface water runoff.     Director means the director of utilities as director of the stormwater management utility.     Dwelling unit means a singular unit or apartment providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.     Equivalent residential unit or ERU means the average impervious area of all residential dwelling units located within the city as periodically determined and established as provided in this article.     ERU rate means the dollar value periodically determined and assigned to each ERU as a charge for stormwater management services, and expressed as $X.XX per ERU per month.     Exempt property means public rights-of-way including public streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public drainage facilities.     Extension and replacement means costs of extensions, additions and capital improvements to or the renewal and replacement of capital assets of or purchasing and installing new equipment for the system or land acquisition for the system and any related costs thereto or paying extraordinary maintenance and repair, including the costs of construction or any other expenses which are not costs of operation and maintenance or debt service.     Fiscal year means a 12-month period commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30 of the succeeding year.     Flood protection system means the system of levees, floodwalls, floodgates, storm sewer gatewells, and stormwater pumping stations lying adjacent to rivers, creeks, and streams within the city, including associated control and operating equipment and facilities, whether adjacent to such rivers, creeks, or streams or remotely located, which are intended to provide flood protection to properties adjacent to such rivers, creeks, and streams.     Impervious area means the number of square feet of hard-surfaced areas which either prevent or retard the entry of water into soil mantle, as it entered under natural conditions as undeveloped property, and/or cause water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions as undeveloped property, including but not limited to roofs, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks, concrete/asphalt pavement, gravel surfaces and athletic courts.     Multifamily residential property means a residential structure designed with two or more dwelling units to accommodate two or more families or groups of individuals living separately and not sharing the same living space.     Nonoperating revenues refers to revenues derived from activities other than the basic operations of the stormwater management system, but excluding interest income on bond proceeds and on contributed capital.     Nonresidential property means any property developed for commercial, industrial, governmental, or institutional use, including churches, hospitals, and other eleemosynary institutions and including multiuse properties incorporating residential uses, but excluding undeveloped property and property used exclusively for agricultural purposes.     Operating budget means the annual operating budget for the stormwater management utility adopted by the city council for the succeeding fiscal year.     Operations and maintenance expense means the current expenses, paid or accrued, of operation, maintenance and current repair of the system, as calculated in accordance with sound accounting practice, and includes, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, insurance premiums, administrative expenses, including recordkeeping, the cost of materials and supplies used for current operations, and charges for the accumulation of appropriate reserves for current expenses not annually incurred, but which are such as may reasonably be expected to be incurred in accordance with sound accounting practice.     Single-family residential property means a detached residential structure designed as a single dwelling unit to accommodate one family or group of individuals living together and sharing the same living space, but excluding multi-class (i.e., commercial, residential, industrial, institutional, etc.) properties which include single-family residential uses.     Single-family unit or SFU means the average impervious area of a single-family detached residential dwelling unit located within the city as periodically determined and established as provided in this article.     SFU rate means the dollar value periodically determined and assigned to each SFU as a charge for stormwater services, and expressed as a dollar value per SFU per month.     Revenues means all rates, fees, assessments, rentals or other charges or other income received by the utility, in connection with the management and operation of the system, including amounts received from the investment or deposit of moneys in any fund or account and any amounts contributed by the city, all as calculated in accordance with sound accounting practice.     Stormwater drainage system means the system of publicly or privately owned or operated rivers, creeks, ditches, drainage channels, pipes, basins, street gutters, and lakes within the city through which or into which stormwater runoff, surface water, or subsurface water is conveyed or deposited.     Stormwater management charge means the charge authorized by state law and this article which is established to pay operations and maintenance, extension, replacement and debt service of the stormwater drainage system.     Stormwater management utility or utility means the enterprise fund utility created by this article to operate, maintain, and improve the system and for such other purposes as stated in this article.     Stormwater management utility system or system means the existing stormwater management facilities, stormwater drainage system, and flood protection system of the city and all improvements thereto which by this article are constituted as the property and responsibility of the utility, to be operated as an enterprise fund to, among other things, conserve water; control discharges and flows necessitated by rainfall events; and incorporate methods to collect, convey, store, absorb, inhibit, treat, use or reuse water to prevent or reduce flooding, overdrainage, environmental degradation and water pollution or otherwise affect the quality and quantity of discharge from such system.     Total annual revenue requirements refers to the total amount of revenue required in one year to meet all expenditures incurred during that year for the financing of construction and for the operations and maintenance, including administration and renewal and replacement funding, of the stormwater drainage system, including facilities for the collection, transportation, and treatment of stormwater, and of the flood control protection system, including river levees and stormwater pumping stations.     Undeveloped property means real property that has no impervious area. (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5004, 3-9-2006)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-674. - Stormwater utility and enterprise fund established. (a)	There is established a stormwater utility to be known as the city stormwater utility, which shall be responsible for stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout the city, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of the city's stormwater management services, systems and facilities. (b)	There is established a stormwater utility enterprise fund in the city budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the stormwater utility, including, but not limited to, rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses, as may be established by the city council from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the stormwater utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater utility enterprise fund, and all expenses and capital investments of the stormwater utility shall be paid from the stormwater utility enterprise fund; provided, however, that other revenues, receipts and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management services, systems and facilities as deemed appropriate by the city council. (c)	The city council shall place within the city stormwater utility department the responsibility for operation, maintenance and regulation of the existing stormwater management services, systems and facilities previously performed, owned and operated or maintained by the city, and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties, other than road rights-of-way, upon which such stormwater management systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. This responsibility shall be placed with the city stormwater utility department as the city council has determined that the city stormwater utility department has been sufficiently organized, staffed, and funded to adequately carry out such responsibilities. The city council shall determine which division of the city's governing body organization to place the stormwater utility in, and the city council may move the stormwater utility to other divisions from time to time as it sees fit. (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5003, 3-9-2006)
Sec. 98-675. - Scope of responsibility for systems and facilities. (a)	The city owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve, and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: (1)	Within public road rights-of-way and easements;(2)	On private property but within easements granted to the city, or are otherwise permitted to be located on such private property by written agreements for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management facilities; or (3)	On public land which is owned by the city or another governmental entity, and to which the city has agreements providing for the operation, maintenance, improvement, and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities. (b)	Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private or public property not owned by the city, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the city for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management and systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the laws of the state and the United States. (c)	It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its councilmen, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. (d)	If any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the city pursuant to this article or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city, or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the city, its councilmen, officers, employees or agents. (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5005, 3-9-2006)
Sec. 98-676. - On-site systems and facilities; enforcement methods and inspections. (a)	Every owner of real property located in the unincorporated areas of the city, and every person which serves as a contractor for the purpose of developing real property located in the city shall, as to the real property owned or being developed, provide, manage, maintain and operate on-site stormwater management systems and facilities sufficient to collect, convey, detain, control and discharge stormwater in a manner which is in compliance with all of the city ordinances, rules and regulations, the laws, rules and regulations of the state and the United States, and which, in any event, will not discharge stormwater in a manner which will flood, damage or otherwise harm property which is located downstream from the real property owned or being developed. A failure by an owner and/or developer to meet the obligations and requirements imposed by this article shall constitute a private nuisance and the parties damaged thereby or the city may bring an action to abate such nuisance. Any parties so damaged may include in such action a claim for the damages which such party has sustained. (b)	If any court of competent jurisdiction shall find that the failure of the owner and/or developer to meet the obligations and requirements imposed by this article constitutes a public nuisance, and the owner and/or developer fails to abate such nuisance within any time limit which the court might impose, the city may enter upon the property at issue and cause such work to be performed as is reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance, with the cost of such work to be charged to the owner and the developer, if any, on a joint and several basis. (c)	If the city incurs costs to abate a public nuisance as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the city shall file suit to recover such costs and establish its judgment lien rights in relation thereto, which lien rights shall be perfected, after judgment, by the city filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the city superior court. (d)	The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers, representatives, agents and employees to enter upon private and public property owned other than by the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner of such property, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests on such property in order to assure compliance with any order or judgment entered pursuant to this section. (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5006, 3-9-2006)
Sec. 98-677. - Service charges, user fees, etc. (a)	It shall be the policy of the city that service charges and user fees for stormwater management services, systems and facilities to be provided by the stormwater utility in the city shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management services, systems and facilities by individual properties and/or the level of service rendered by or resulting from the provision of stormwater management services, systems and facilities. Stormwater service charge rates shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable, and the resultant service charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities. (b)	The cost of stormwater management services, systems, and facilities may include operating expenses, capital investments, and reserve accounts. (c)	To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service charges and/or other methods of funding stormwater management shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities or to private stormwater management systems and facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems and facilities. (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5007, 3-9-2006)
Sec. 98-678. - Establishment of SFU, SFU rate and stormwater fee; establishment of policy regarding expenditure of enterprise revenues. (a)	For purposes of this article, an SFU shall be equivalent to 3,704 square feet of impervious property. (b)	Except as provided in this article, every contributor owning or occupying a single-family residential property, multifamily residential property, or a nonresidential property, other than exempt property, shall pay to the city, at the same time payment is made for other city services, a stormwater fee to be determined and billed as provided in this article. In the event the owner and the occupant of a particular property are not the same, the liability for payment of the stormwater fee attributable to that property shall be joint and several as to the owner and occupant. The stormwater fee shall be a monthly service fee and shall be determined by this article and the SFU rate which is established in this article and from time to time adjusted as provided in this article. (c)	The stormwater fees provided in sections 98-679—98-681 shall be applied and computed for each contributor during the customary billing periods. (d)	The SFU rate to be applied to residential and nonresidential properties for fiscal year 2006 shall be $2.50/SFU/month. (e)	Any changes to the stormwater fee shall be accomplished by adoption of an ordinance amending this section. (f)	No revenues generated by the stormwater enterprise user fee shall be used for any purpose other than stormwater expenses. (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5008, 3-9-2006)
Sec. 98-679. - Stormwater fee for single detached residential property. (a)	The stormwater fee for a single-family detached residential property shall be the following percentage of the SFU rate: Impervious Area of the Property (square feet)Percentage of SFU Rate1,850 or less50%1,851 to 6,099100%6,100 or more170% (b)	As to a new single-family detached residence, the stormwater fee attributable to that residence shall commence upon the earlier of the following: (1)	The issuance of a permanent water-meter.(2)	If no water-meter is issued for that development or if development has halted, on the date that the director or the director's designee determines, in reasonable judgment, that the development is substantially complete or has been halted for at least three months. (c)	Any owner or occupant of a residential property aggrieved by the director's calculation of the stormwater fee as provided in this section may appeal such determination to the director as provided in section 98-673(8). (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5009, 3-9-2006)
Sec. 98-680. - Stormwater fee for multifamily residential property.     The stormwater fee for a nonsingle family detached residential property shall be the following percentage of the SFU rate multiplied by the number of dwelling units on the property: Nonsingle Residential Family Property ClassificationPercentage of SFU RateMultifamily, greater than 4 dwelling units/buildings40%Multifamily (less than 5 units/building) and mobile homes50% (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5010, 3-9-2006)
Sec. 98-681. - Stormwater fee for nonresidential property. (a)	The rates are established as the initial stormwater service charge rates subject to the exemptions and credits provided in section 98-682. (b)	All other developed nonresidential property shall have the SFUs calculated by dividing the total impervious area by the square feet contained in the SFU. (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5011, 3-9-2006)
Sec. 98-682. - Exemptions and credits applicable to service charges. (a)	Except as provided in this section, no public or private property located in the city shall be exempt from stormwater service charges or receive a credit or offset against such stormwater service charges. No exemption, credit, offset or other reduction in stormwater service charges shall be granted based on the tax status, economic status, race, religion, age or sex of the owner of the property being served, or based on any other condition unrelated to the provision of stormwater management services, systems and facilities. A stormwater service charge credit technical manual shall be prepared by the city engineer and approved by the city council specifying the design and performance standards of on-site and off-site privately owned and maintained stormwater systems, facilities, assets, services and activities that qualify for application of a credit, and how such credits shall be calculated. (b)	Railroad tracks and the rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. (c)	Public and private roadways, not including driveways, shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. (d)	Other developed land and groups of detached single-family dwelling units or improvements on other developed land which are developed as part of a common development plan which includes within the development, but not on the lots on which the detached single-family dwelling units or the improvements on other developed land are located, privately owned, maintained or operated stormwater control systems, facilities, assets, services or activities that reduce the city stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities, may receive a credit based on attaining and continuing compliance with the technical requirements and performance standards contained in the stormwater service charge credit technical manual. The stormwater service charge credit for privately owned and maintained on-site or off-site stormwater control systems, facilities or assets that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces on the subject property may be up to 50 percent of the stormwater service charge applicable to the property, and shall be proportional to the extent that such stormwater control systems, facilities or assets provided, operated and maintained by private persons may reduce or mitigate the city stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities. The credit for services and activities that reduce or mitigate the city stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities shall be proportional to the reduced costs realized by the city stormwater utility, but shall not be related to the cost of such services and activities to the person providing such services and activities, and shall not exceed 50 percent of the stormwater service charge applicable to the subject property. (e)	In order to obtain a credit, the property owner must make application to the city engineer on forms provided by the city engineer for such purpose. When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the city engineer, he shall issue a decision granting the credit in whole or in part, or denying the credit within 30 days thereafter. Credits applied for by the property owner in the year 2006, and granted in whole or in part, shall apply to all stormwater service charges accruing in the year 2006. Beginning January 1, 2007 credits applied for by the property owner, and granted in whole or in part, shall apply from the first day of the calendar month immediately following the date on which a complete application for the credit has been filed with the city. (f)	A property owner shall not have to reapply annually for the credit granted, but the city engineer may review the credit, and the basis therefore, no more frequently than annually, and may terminate the credit if he finds grounds therefore. If such credit is terminated, the property owner may appeal such determination pursuant to section 98-684, or may, if possible, correct the deficiencies which caused the termination and reapply for the credit. A property owner with a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, however, must submit the report prescribed in the NPDES permit to the city engineer to continue to receive the credit from the city associated with the NPDES permit. (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5012, 3-9-2006)
Sec. 98-683. - Service charge billing, delinquencies, and collections.     Stormwater service charges shall begin to accrue June 1, 2006, and shall be billed in arrears. A bill for stormwater service charges may be sent through the United States Postal Service or by alternative means, notifying the owner of the property being billed of the amount of the stormwater service charge, less credits, the date the payment is due and the date when payment is past due. The stormwater service charge may be billed and collected separately or along with water and sanitary sewer charges as deemed most effective and efficient by the city council. Frequency of the billing of stormwater service charges shall be monthly unless otherwise specified by the city council. Failure to receive a bill shall not be justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land subject to stormwater service charges shall be obligated to pay stormwater service charges and any interest on delinquent stormwater service charge payments. If a property owner is underbilled, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of developed land, the city stormwater utility may backbill for a period of up to one year, but shall not be entitled to any interest for any delinquency during the backbilled period. The city council shall, by resolution adopted from time to time, establish the policies and procedures to be followed by the city stormwater utility in handling and collecting unpaid past due accounts for the stormwater service charge. Such policies and procedures may cover, among other things, late payment fees, fees for returned checks and any other matters the city council, in its discretion, determines would be appropriate for the handling of unpaid past due accounts. (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5013, 3-9-2006)
Sec. 98-684. - Appeals.     Any property owner who contends that the provisions of this article have been applied in error to the property of such owner, may appeal the stormwater service charges billed to him, in the following matter and sequence: (1)	An appeal must be filed in writing with the city engineer. The appeal shall include a copy of a plat or survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer licensed in the state, containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area and any other features or conditions that influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. (2)	Using information provided by the appellant, the city engineer, or his designee shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property, and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days of the date the filing of the appeal is deemed complete. During this period, the city engineer may require the appellant to submit documentation or written statements in support of the appeal and/or may hold a hearing concerning the appeal. In response to an appeal, the city engineer may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to the property in conformance with the general purposes and intent of this article if he determines that the facts support such adjustment. The decision of the city engineer shall be issued in writing setting out the factual findings and conclusions reached by him. A copy of the decision of the city engineer shall be served on the property owner personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the property owner. (3)	A decision of the city engineer that is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the city manager within 30 days of the date that the adverse decision is issued by the city engineer. Notice of the appeal shall be delivered in writing to the city manager by the appellant. The city manager may require the submission of additional written evidence and/or hold a hearing on the matter. The city manager shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 30 days of the date of delivery to him of the notice of appeal. All decisions by the city manager shall be in writing and shall be served on the property owner personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the property owner. All decisions of the city manager shall be final. (4)	The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved property owner seeking judicial relief. Any decisions of the city manager may be reviewed upon application for writ of certiorari before the city superior court, filed within 30 days of the date of the service of the decision of the city manager. (5)	Despite a property owner's contention that the provisions of this article have been applied in error, filing an appeal under this section shall not relieve the property owner from paying all accrued or accruing stormwater services fees and charges. Said payment is a condition precedent for the appeal and failure to pay said charges during the appeal process could result in termination of all utility services provided by the City of Valdosta to the property or property owner. Upon finding that the provisions of this article have been applied in error, the city shall reimburse said property owner for the amounts determined to be charged in error or shall provide credits against future utility fees incurred by the property or property owner. (Ord. No. 2006-18, § 5-5014, 3-9-2006; Ord. No. 2010-18, 5-20-2010)
Secs. 98-685—98-710. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 98-711. - Short title.     This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 1, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-712. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 1, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-713. - Definitions.     For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:     City means the City of Valdosta.     Covered account means: (i) an account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account or savings account; and (ii) any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation or litigation risks.     Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore.     Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal or continuation of credit; or any assigns of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies.     Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor.     Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority.     Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative or association.     Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information, and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security Number, mother's birth name and date of birth.     Red flag means a pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft.     Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 1, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-714. - Findings. (a)	The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. (b)	Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water and sewer services, building permits and zoning permits, sanitation, stormwater, court fines and fees, participation fees, user fees and miscellaneous billings. (c)	The processes of opening or closing a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts, has been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. (d)	The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. (e)	The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): (1)	Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; (2)	Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 1, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-715. - Process of establishing a covered account. (a)	As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer, a valid driver's license or other government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer, or for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such applicant shall also provide any information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. (b)	Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 1, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-716. - Access to covered account information. (a)	Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. (b)	Such password(s) shall be changed by the city software system for the city on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. (c)	Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the information and technology manager and deputy city manager for administration and the password changed immediately. (d)	Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city clerk and the city attorney. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 1, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-717. - Credit card payments. (a)	In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. (b)	All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. (c)	Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 1, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-718. - Sources and types of red flags.     All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: (1)	Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: a.	A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report;b.	A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report;c.	A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency;d.	Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 1.	A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries;2.	An unusual number of recently established credit relationships;3.	A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 4.	An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. (2)	Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: a.	Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged;b.	Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; c.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; d.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or e.	An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. (3)	Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: a.	Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 1.	The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or2.	The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. b.	Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. c.	Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. d.	Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. e.	The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers.f.	The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. g.	The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. h.	Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. i.	The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. (4)	Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: a.	Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. b.	A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 1.	The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. c.	An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 1.	Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments;2.	A material change in purchasing or spending patterns.d.	An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). e.	Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. f.	The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements when the customer has made such election. g.	The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with customer's account. h.	The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. (5)	Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 1, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-719. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. (a)	In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the deputy city manager for administration. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the finance service director, who may in his or her discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. If the finance service director in his or her discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the finance service director: (1)	Contact the customer;(2)	Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: a.	Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes or other security devices that permit access to an account; or b.	Close the account.(3)	Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; (4)	Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; (5)	Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or (6)	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft.(b)	In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the deputy city manager for administration or the finance service director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the deputy city manager for administration or the finance service director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the deputy city manager for administration or the finance service director in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the deputy city manager for administration: (1)	Request additional identifying information from the applicant;(2)	Deny the application for the new account;(3)	Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or(4)	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft.(Ord. No. 2008-43, § 1, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-720. - Updating the program.     The deputy city manager for administration or the city external auditor where requested shall annually review and, as deemed necessary, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the deputy city manager for administration shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: (1)	The city's experiences with identity theft;(2)	Updates in methods of identity theft;(3)	Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft;(4)	Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and(5)	Updates in service provider arrangements.(Ord. No. 2008-43, § 1, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-721. - Program administration.     The deputy city manager for administration is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. (1)	The deputy city manager for administration will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: a.	The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; b.	Service provider arrangements;c.	Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; andd.	Recommendations for material changes to the program.(2)	The deputy city manager for administration or the finance service director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The deputy city manager for administration or the finance service director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 1, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-722. - Outside service providers.     In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the deputy city manager for administration shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 1, 10-23-2008)
Secs. 98-723—98-740. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 
Sec. 98-741. - Short title.     This division shall be known as the treatment of address discrepancies. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 2, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-742. - Purpose.     Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this division is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 2, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-743. - Definitions.     For purposes of this division, the following definitions apply:     City means the City of Valdosta.     Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 2, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-744. - Policy.     In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: (1)	Compare the information in the consumer report with:a.	Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); b.	Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or c.	Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee. (2)	Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer.(Ord. No. 2008-43, § 2, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-745. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. (a)	In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: (1)	The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; (2)	The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and(3)	The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business, provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. (b)	Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. (Ord. No. 2008-43, § 2, 10-23-2008)
Sec. 98-746. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses.     The city employee in charge of confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: (1)	Verifying the address with the consumer;(2)	Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address;(3)	Verifying the address through third-party sources; or(4)	Using other reasonable processes.(Ord. No. 2008-43, § 2, 10-23-2008)
Secs. 98-747—98-770. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COMBINED PUBLIC UTILITIES SYSTEM 
Sec. 98-771. - Combined public utilities system; departments created.     The City of Valdosta owns a water distribution system, sewer collection system, stormwater management system and solid waste disposal and garbage pick-up services to users within and beyond the territorial limits of the city. Collectively, these systems shall be operated and maintained as a combined public utilities system. The city manager, or his designee, shall direct and control the operation of said combined system, but may operate such system through separate utility divisions, i.e., water, sewer, stormwater or in such combination as he deems most efficient. (Ord. No. 2010-23, 6-10-2010)
Sec. 98-772. - Utilities system accounts; establishment of rates. (a)	The city manager, or his designee, shall keep separate financial books and accounts for the various departments comprising the combined utilities system. It shall be the duty of the manager to place into effect, with approval of the Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta, schedules of rates, fees and charges for the services, facilities and commodities furnished by the combined system and, as often as it may appear necessary, to revise and adjust such schedules to the extent necessary to produce funds sufficient to: (1)	Pay the operating expenses of the combined system;(2)	Pay the principal and interest when due on any revenue bonds and debt obligations of the combined system, including funding of any debt service reserves or credit reserves required thereby; and (3)	Fund any minimum renewal and extension fund requirements as established by bond ordinance or other proper resolution of the Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta at least equal to 120 percent of the amount required for the then current fiscal year or accounting period; provided, however, for each of the systems operated, a schedule of rates, tolls, fees and charges for the services, facilities and commodities furnished by each individual system shall be imposed so as to operate each individual system on a sound businesslike basis. For purposes of this section, a system will be deemed to have operated on a sound businesslike basis if net revenues of each individual system at least equal 100 percent of that portion of estimated operating expense, plus debt service, allocable to that system during the current budget period. Such rates, fees, tolls and charges will be classified in a reasonable manner to cover users of the services and facilities furnished by the combined system so that, as nearly as practicable, such rates, fees, tolls and charges will be uniform in application to all users falling within any reasonable class. No free service will at any time be furnished, including to any political subdivision or other public body. No customer will be connected to the combined system or any individual utility thereof without first having executed a service agreement in the form prescribed by the city manager, and paid the applicable connection fees and charges. Where applicable, a proper meter shall first be installed before services or commodities are delivered. To the extent authorized by law, it shall be the duty of the city manager to require the owners of all improved properties accessible to services of the combined system to connect thereto. (b)	Nothing shall prevent the use of the existing rates now in place for the individual departments from continued applicability under the combined system as long as the revenues aggregately generated are sufficient to satisfy subsections (a)(1)—(3). (Ord. No. 2010-23, 6-10-2010)
Sec. 98-773. - Audit of combined system.     As soon as practicable after the closing of each fiscal year, an audit will be made of all books and accounts pertaining to the combined system and each individual utility department by an independent certified public accountant or firm of suitable experience and responsibility. Copies of such audit shall be made available to the Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta and to interested persons as a public record of the city. (Ord. No. 2010-23, 6-10-2010)
Sec. 98-774. - Right to shut off utilities for repair; emergencies.     The city manager and his department managers shall have the right to shut off utilities for necessary repairs and work upon the system; provided, however, shut-offs shall be planned to the extent possible and reasonable notice given to users by the best available means; in any emergency situation, notice of a shut-off is not required. The city will exercise its best efforts to restore normal levels of service as soon as feasible, considering the nature of the situation and all circumstances. The city shall not be responsible for damages or rebate of fees, rates, tolls and charges for temporary outages or shut-offs, or for compensatory damages allegedly arising from loss of utility services. (Ord. No. 2010-23, 6-10-2010)
Sec. 98-775. - Termination of services due to nonpayment or other cause. (a)	In the absence of a written contract with the city creating a property interest or legitimate expectation of continued service, utility users may be terminated due to violation of published rules, regulations and procedures governing service delivery and billing practices of the combined system as promulgated by the city manager. If amounts owed for water, sewer, stormwater management, solid waste disposal and garbage pickup service are not timely paid, all such services shall be disconnected or discontinued. Payment of amounts owed for each utility is a condition of service as to the remaining utilities. Where customers are subject to termination of services due to nonpayment, it shall be the policy of the city to afford the customer a reasonable opportunity for a meeting with a responsible employee of the combined system's customer service division to resolve any dispute prior to the scheduled date of termination. Where notice cannot be given the customer, as shown on the combined system's billing records, or known users at the location where service is provided, after reasonable diligence by the city staff, the city shall retain the right to terminate service upon concluding the amount billed was justly due. Failure by a customer to receive a bill for the current period shall not constitute a defense for nonpayment when services are shown to have been accepted at the service address. (b)	In the event that service has been cut off for nonpayment of any city utility bill or other action resulting in the unauthorized use of city services, service will not be restored until the unpaid bill and service fees set forth in the schedule established by the city manager and approved by the Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta from time to time are satisfied. Before service is restored, services fees shall be paid by the user cumulatively for each of the following actions taken to prevent the unauthorized use of city services: (1)	Turn on after delinquent unauthorized cut off;(2)	Locking meter;(3)	Removal of meter;(4)	Removal of straight line;(5)	Removal of unauthorized relocated meter; and(6)	Cutting water off at main.Payment of these fees shall not exempt any user from any civil or criminal action resulting from a violation of this chapter. (c)	Pursuant to section 366 of the Bankruptcy Code (11 U.S.C. § 366), the combined utility may not alter, refuse or discontinue service for 20 days after receiving notice of entry of an order for relief under the Bankruptcy Code. Within 20 days after the date of entry of such order, the debtor or trustee acting on the debtor's behalf, shall furnish adequate assurance of payment, in the form of a deposit or other security, to maintain utility service after that date. The amount of such adequate assurance may vary based upon the circumstances of each case. (Ord. No. 2010-23, 6-10-2010)
Sec. 98-776. - Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of the combined system. (a)	Any person who acts:(1)	Intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, or other apparatus belonging to the combined system; (2)	Intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; (3)	In any way to interfere with the proper action of officers and employees of the combined system; (4)	Intentionally to divert any services to another person who knowingly receives the benefit of such services without proper charge; or (5)	Otherwise intentionally and without authority uses or receives the benefit, without consent of the city, of any utility services: Shall be guilty of a violation of this article and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed six months. (b)	Any person who, with knowledge of such violation, receives the benefit of any utility service offered or provided by the combined system, without proper charge, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. (c)	Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person in lawful possession of the premises receiving the benefit of service without proper charge as a result of improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering or diversion. (d)	Violations of this article shall be prosecuted before the Municipal Court of the City of Valdosta. (e)	In addition to any fine or imprisonment authorized by this section, upon conviction, a violator may be ordered to pay restitution to the city in the amount found by the court for rates, fees or other charges avoided by the violator's action and for equipment or property of the city or its combined system damaged or destroyed by such action. (Ord. No. 2010-23, 6-10-2010)
Sec. 98-777. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances.     All ordinances or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this article are repealed to the extent necessary to eliminate such conflict. (Ord. No. 2010-23, 6-10-2010)
Secs. 98-778—98-800. - Reserved. 
Chapter 102 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Business regulations, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 86; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94.State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 102-1—102-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note—Ord. No. 2015-2, adopted Jan. 22, 2015, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 102-31—102-76, pertained to similar subject matter.
Sec. 102-31. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Company means the holder of a license to operate a taxicab business under the provisions of this article, whether a person, firm, partnership or corporation.     Driver means any person who drives or operates a taxicab on the streets of the city for a licensed taxicab company.     Driver's permit means the written authority granted by the city for an individual to drive or operate a taxicab within the city.     License means the right and privilege granted by the city for the operation of a taxicab business incorporating the use of one or more taxicabs within the corporate limits of the city.     Police chief or chief of police means the individual employed by the city as the chief of the police department of the city.     Street means any street, alley, lane, avenue, court or public place in the city.     Taxicab means a motor vehicle for hire which conveys passengers between locations of their choice and is a mode of public transportation for a single passenger or small group for a fee. Such term shall also mean taxi or cab, but not a bus or school bus, limousine, passenger car, or commercial motor vehicle.     Taximeter. A meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. All taximeters shall be calibrated or certified annually by a reputable vendor as operating properly with proof of calibration or certification provided to the City of Valdosta no later than January 31st of each calendar year. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-32. - Indemnity for benefit of city.     Any taxicab company operating under this article shall hold the city harmless against any and all liability, loss, costs, damages or expenses which may accrue to the city by reason of the negligence, default or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company under this article. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make the city liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any taxicab company, its servants, agents, drivers or other employees, during the operation by the company of a taxicab business or service, either in respect to injuries to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-33. - Identification and markings generally.     Every taxicab shall have a sign plainly indicating on the door on each side of the vehicle, in letters not less than four inches high, the full name of the taxicab company operating the vehicle, including words such as "Taxicab", "Taxi", or "Cab". Such sign shall be professionally applied and shall be either painted or permanently affixed to each side of the vehicle in clearly visible colors. There shall be no outside advertising of any kind on taxicabs. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-34. - Numbers generally.     There shall be shown on the door on each side and on the rear of each taxicab a number at least four inches high, such number to be separate and distinct from that on any other public vehicle or taxicab in the city. Such number shall be assigned to such taxicab and its owner by the chief of police. Such number shall be professionally applied and shall be either painted or permanently affixed on the vehicle. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-35. - Registration of number and names of owner and operator.     The number assigned a taxicab in accordance with this article, together with the names of the owner and operator of the taxicab, shall be registered with the chief of police in a log to be kept for such purpose. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-36. - Safe mechanical condition of taxicabs required.     Every taxicab operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety and pollution control equipment remaining intact and operative, at all times when the taxicab is in service. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-37. - Cleanliness of taxicabs required.     Each vehicle operating under this article shall be kept painted, and in a clean, sanitary condition, free of litter and debris, and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. The chief of police, upon observing violations of this section or any other provision of this article which deals with the physical condition of taxicabs, shall place a deadline decal on the windshield of the vehicle, such decal to list all violations. No driver or other unauthorized person shall remove or deface a deadline decal. No driver shall use a vehicle to transport passengers for hire while a deadline decal is in place. The deadline decal will be removed after correction of all listed violations. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-38. - State license tag for taxicabs required.     Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle as a taxicab under the provisions of this article, the owner of such vehicle shall secure and display on the vehicle a current state license registration tag. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-39. - Authority for removal of taxicabs from streets.     The chief of police shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the city any vehicle used as a taxicab which is in violation of this article and to prohibit operation of such taxicab until all deficiencies have been corrected. An order of the chief of police to remove a vehicle from the city streets may be appealed to the city manager through the administrative hearing process provided in this article. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-40. - Manifest.     Each taxicab driver, operator or company shall maintain a daily manifest upon which shall be recorded all trips made by each vehicle each day, showing time and place of origin, destination of each trip and amount of fare. All such completed manifests shall be returned to the taxicab company by the driver at least weekly or shall be maintained by the company at its offices at the conclusion of each driver's daily tour of duty. Each taxicab company shall retain and preserve all drivers' manifests for at least 12 months; and such manifests shall be made available to the city, to any officer of the police department, or to the chief of police at all reasonable times. All manifests shall be kept in a legible condition. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-41. - Required.     No person shall operate a business involving the use of one or more taxicabs on the streets of the city unless a license for such business has first been granted by the city. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-42. - Application.     Application for a license required by this article shall be made on the form provided by the city clerk and shall provide for such information as is required for other business license applicants. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-43. - Fee.     Each person operating a taxicab shall pay an annual license fee to the city as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. Such annual license fee shall be prorated for the remainder of the initial year. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-44. - Duration.     For purposes of this section, the license year shall begin on January 1 of each calendar year and end December 31 next following. Each license issued under this article shall be effective only for the calendar year stated in the license unless sooner suspended or revoked. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-45. - Issuance.     Upon the payment of the required license fee and the filing of the proper application, the city shall issue to the applicant named in the application a license for each vehicle described in such application and with respect to which such tax has been paid, which license shall describe the vehicle for which it is issued and state for what license year it is issued. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-46. - Display.     It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any taxicab for hire in the city without having conspicuously displayed on the taxicab a valid current license accurately describing the taxicab in which it is displayed. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-47. - Fixed place of business required.     Each taxicab company, as a condition for holding a city business license, shall establish and maintain a fixed headquarters on private property for the operation of the company's business. Such headquarters shall conform to the requirements of the city zoning ordinances and other applicable ordinances of the city or county (if located in the unincorporated area of the county), and shall provide adequate off-street parking space for all taxicabs not in service. Such company headquarters shall not be moved except by the approved transfer of the company's business license to another location. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-48. - Coverage required.     Any taxicab company desiring to do business with the city shall give and maintain a policy of indemnity insurance with an indemnity insurance company authorized to do business in the state for each vehicle in use as a taxicab, or a self-insurance certificate issued under state guidelines and regulated by the state insurance commission. The minimum coverage shall be $25,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, $50,000.00 for injury to more than one person which is sustained in the same accident, and $25,000.00 for property damage resulting from one accident. Such indemnity insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who is injured or who sustains damage to property caused by the negligence of a taxicab company, its servants or agents. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-49. - Blanket policy.     Any company or person operating a taxicab in the city shall give a separate policy of indemnity insurance or certificate of self-insurance for each separate taxicab for hire, except where such company or person actually owns or holds legal title to more than one taxicab, in which event, such company or person may give one policy of indemnity insurance covering all the taxicabs actually owned. This latter provision, however, shall not apply to any group of persons separately owning taxicabs who may be jointly operating or doing business under a licensed taxicab company name. The taxicab company is responsible for ensuring that individual persons operating taxicabs under such license shall comply with all state laws and local ordinances governing insurance coverage. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-50. - Notice when voided.     Before any policy of insurance or certificate of self-insurance required by this article is voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice shall be given, in writing, to the chief of police at least 30 days before it shall be effective. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-51. - Required.     No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or operates a taxicab company shall permit a taxicab to be driven, and no taxicab operating under a taxicab company licensed by the city shall be driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of such taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-52. - Application.     Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall submit an application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city. Such application shall be made under oath and shall state: (1)	The age of the applicant;(2)	His address;(3)	Length of time he has resided in the city;(4)	His knowledge of the streets and traffic laws of the city and how obtained;(5)	Whether he has any physical infirmities; and(6)	Whether he has been convicted of a violation of any of the laws of the state or of this Code or other ordinances of the city and, if so, when and of what offense, and the sentence of the court. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-53. - Physician's certificate required.     Each application for a driver's permit shall be accompanied by a certificate from a reputable physician of the city certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not inflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. In the case of renewal of a driver's permit, the certificate shall be updated every two years. Should the chief of police determine, in his opinion that the health of any driver has deteriorated to the extent that it might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver, the driver shall be required to provide an updated physician's certificate upon the request of the chief of police within five working days of such request. Failure to comply with the request shall subject such driver to suspension of the driver's permit in accordance with provisions of section 102-64. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-54. - Qualifications of applicant.     An applicant for a driver's permit under this article must: (1)	Not be less than 18 years of age.(2)	Have no physical infirmity which might make such applicant an unsafe or unsatisfactory taxicab driver. (3)	Not have been convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs within two years or convicted of any drug violation within five years prior to the date of the application for such permit, or have been convicted of reckless driving within one year prior to the date of the application for such permit, or been convicted of any of these offenses three or more times within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit. Nor shall a permit be issued to any person who has within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit been convicted of any crime relating to transporting persons for immoral purposes (prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, or any sex-related offense), or who has been convicted of, been on probation, parole or served time on a sentence for a felony. A plea of nolo contendere to any of the offenses set out in this section shall be deemed a conviction. (4)	Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Services. (5)	Be a resident of the state for at least three months immediately preceding the date of application. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-55. - Photographs of applicant.     Before any permit is granted under this article, the chief of police or his designee shall maintain a photograph of the applicant. One copy of the photograph shall be attached permanently to the driver's permit for display in the vehicle which the applicant is to drive, and another copy of the photograph shall be filed for record by the chief of police. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-56. - Current state driver's license required.     Any person applying for a taxicab driver's permit under this article must show that he has a current motor vehicle operator's license issued or approved by the state, and that the license is not under suspension or revocation. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-57. - Police investigation of applicant.     The chief of police or his designee shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit; and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application. The chief of police is required to further determine, to the best of his ability, whether such person is a careful and capable driver of a motor vehicle, whether such person is familiar with and understands the traffic rules and regulations, and whether such person is of good moral character. Such investigation shall be made of each such driver at least annually and may be as often as the chief of police shall deem such an investigation needed or proper. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-58. - Driver's fees.     Before any permit is granted under this article, the appropriate fees set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-59. - Examination of applicant; issuance or denial of permit.     It shall be the duty of the chief of police to examine the applicant, his references, police and traffic record, and other vouchers, and thereafter to either grant or refuse the permit. Upon refusal to grant a permit, the applicant shall have the right to enter an appeal as provided in section 102-67. Any refusal, shall be based upon objective evidence of criminal and/or traffic law convictions which demonstrates a pattern of undue risk to community if the individual is allowed a permit. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-60. - Permit to be displayed.     The permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be placed on display in the taxicab to be operated by the holder of the permit in a display case or holder designed for that purpose on the dashboard or on the sun visor facing the passenger compartment, in the clear view of the passengers at all times when the taxicab is for hire. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-61. - Alteration of permits prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate or destroy a taxicab driver's permit or cause or allow such behavior. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-62. - Not transferable.     Any taxicab driver's permit issued under this article is not transferable from one company to another and is to be used solely by the person to whom it is issued. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-63. - Duration; renewal.     Any taxicab driver's permit issued under this article shall be in effect for 12 months from the date of issue. Permits may be renewed, upon application and payment of the required fee, for each 12-month period thereafter unless the permit for the preceding period has been revoked or is under suspension. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-64. - Suspension. (a)	The chief of police shall have the authority to suspend a taxicab driver's permit for the following reasons: (1)	The driver is charged with operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs, or reckless driving; (2)	Failure to provide a physician's certificate as required by section 102-53; (3)	Making any false statement in the application for the permit; or(4)	Operating a taxicab in violation of any provisions of this article or applicable state law. (b)	The suspension of a taxicab driver's permit for the above reasons, may be appealed to the city manager as provided for in section 102-67. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-65. - Revocation.     If any driver holding a permit under this article at any time ceases to meet the qualifications described in this article, or fails to correct satisfactorily any false statement made in the application for the permit, or fails to operate his taxicab in accordance with the provisions of this article, he may have his permit permanently revoked by the city manager or temporarily suspended. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-66. - Driving after suspension or revocation prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle for hire or taxicab for the carriage of passengers during any period in which his permit to do so is suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-67. - Administrative hearing. (a)	The ordinance codified in this article shall be administered by the chief of police, who shall have authority to suspend a taxicab driver's permit up to six months. The chief of police may recommend revocation of a permit to the city manager. (b)	Any decision of the police chief to suspend a taxicab driver's permit may be immediately appealed within ten days by the taxicab driver in writing to the city manager. (c)	Any appeal of a suspension or recommendation for revocation by the police chief shall require an administrative hearing. Such hearing shall be informal and shall be presided over by the city manager or his designee. The decision of the city manager shall be provided to the taxicab driver in writing within ten days of the hearing. The decision of the city manager shall be final. (d)	If a taxicab driver is suspended three times within any three-year period, and if each appealed suspension is upheld, the fourth such suspension with such three-year period shall be for a period of one year. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-68. - Maximum rates of fare; posting required. (a)	Meter rates. As a condition of licensing by the City of Valdosta and operating within the city, all taxicab companies and drivers shall ensure all vehicles utilized as a taxicab shall be equipped with an operating and calibrated taximeter as defined by section 102-31 of this article by March 31st of 2015. (1)	The fee rates shall be as follows:a.	A one-time pickup charge of $3.00 may be assessed for each individual request for a taxicab service, regardless of the number of passengers being transported for each incident request; b.	$0.35 per wait minute may be assessed by the use of a taximeter upon the customer entering the taxicab and at any point when the customer enters the taxicab and said taxicab is stationary until the point of arrival of the destination of the customer; c.	Upon arrival to the pickup location for a customer, a $0.35 per minute wait time fee may be assessed after five minutes after arrival and the customer has not entered the taxicab; d.	A rate of $0.25 may be assessed for each one-tenth of a mile traveled with a breakdown of the total travel cost accumulated by use of a taximeter, using the maximum rate of $2.50 per mile. (2)	The fee rates as reflected in subsection (1) of this section shall be posted prominently in a location clearly visible to all passengers of taxicabs licensed under this article. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-69. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-70. - When lower fares authorized.     It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, operator or driver of any taxicab to routinely charge or collect any fares for or with respect to the transportation of passengers within the city other than the maximum fares provided for in this article unless the operator of such taxicab shall first file with the city a schedule of lower fares to be uniformly charged in operation of all taxicabs used in the taxicab business of such operator, which schedule of lower fares shall contain a description of such vehicle, including make, year, model and motor number, used in the taxicab business of such operator. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-71. - Excessive fares prohibited.     The schedules of lower fares provided for by section 102-70 shall in no event contain any charge or fare which in any particular is in excess of the maximum fares provided for by this article. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-72. - Conformance with authorized fares required.     It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, operator or driver of any taxicab with respect to which taxicab a schedule of lower rates has been filed with the city in accordance with sections 102-70 and 102-71 to charge or collect any fares for or with respect to the transportation of passengers within the city other than the fares provided for and set out in such schedule of lower rates. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-73. - Variation from fares prohibited; exception.     Any schedule of lower fares filed with the city in accordance with sections 102-70 and 102-71 shall be binding upon all owners, lessees, operators and drivers of the particular vehicles described in the schedules from the time such schedule is filed with the city and until such schedule is superseded by the filing of a new schedule by the operator of the taxicab business involved or until such schedule is revoked and nullified by such operator giving written notice to the city revoking the same; however, no such schedule shall be superseded or revoked within 30 days after filing without the approval of the mayor and council. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-74. - Schedule; binding on all vehicles in business filing.     Every schedule of lower fares filed with the city under this article shall contain, and be binding with respect to, every vehicle used as a taxicab in the business of the operator filing such schedule. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-75. - Rates must be displayed in vehicles.     It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any taxicab for hire in the city without having conspicuously displayed on the taxicab the schedule of rates under or by which such taxicab is being operated. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Sec. 102-76. - Charging for hand baggage prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, operator or driver of any taxicab being operated in the city for hire, to charge any of its passengers any sum for hand baggage or hand luggage. The only charge to be made to such passengers for transportation shall be such passenger fares as shall be fixed by the mayor and council. (Ord. No. 2015-2, 1-22-2015)
Secs. 102-77—102-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WRECKERS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Wrecker driver required to remove glass and parts of vehicle being towed, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-276.
Sec. 102-111. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Chief means the chief of the police department of the city or any officer specifically designated by him to administer and carry out the provisions of this article.     Disabled means a motor vehicle disabled on a public way or other public place in such a manner as to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian travel or access to public or private property.     Operator includes all persons owning or operating wreckers for, on behalf of, or within a wrecker service in the city and all officers, agents and employees of such person who are engaged in the business of wrecker service.     Wrecker means an automotive vehicle equipped and used for the purpose of towing or hauling wrecked or disabled automobiles or other motor vehicles.     Wrecker service means any person regularly engaged in the business of towing or hauling wrecked or disabled motor vehicles for hire within the city, whether or not such wrecker service maintains an office within the corporate limits of the city. (Code 1976, § 7-1177)Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-112. - Administration; prosecution for violation; compliance. (a)	It shall be the duty of the chief to administer and carry out the provisions of this article. All law enforcement officers of the city shall have authority to prosecute violations of this article. (b)	It shall be unlawful for any wrecker service or operator to tow or haul any motor vehicle which has been wrecked, abandoned or disabled on a public way or other public place within the jurisdiction of the city from the scene of the wreck, abandonment or disablement except in compliance with the provisions of this article. (Code 1976, § 7-1178)
Sec. 102-113. - Rotation; exception; application required. (a)	At all times, when necessary for the police department to remove any motor vehicle for any cause from any place within the jurisdiction of the city, no wrecker shall be used to tow or haul such vehicle unless that wrecker is on the city's rotation system; however, this section shall not be construed to prohibit the police department from using a wrecker owned by the city to tow or haul an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle to be impounded in connection with a criminal investigation or to prohibit the use of a wrecker not in the rotation system under circumstances where police jurisdiction is not involved. For purposes of this section, police jurisdiction shall be deemed to exist in all cases of vehicular wreck or collision, all cases in which a criminal offense is under investigation, all cases in which a vehicular disablement results in obstruction of use of or travel on a public place or way, and all cases of abandonment of a vehicle on a public right-of-way or public place. (b)	In order to be placed on the rotation system, the owner or operator of a wrecker shall file application with the chief, supplying the following information: (1)	Title certificate number of the wrecker and date issued and name, home and business address and telephone number of the owner of the wrecker; (2)	Complete home and business address and telephone numbers of the principal operator of the wrecker; (3)	Description of the wrecker to be registered, including the make, model, manufacturer's serial number and capacity; (4)	Date vehicle was first placed in service as a wrecker;(5)	Name of the wrecker service operating the wrecker and all persons having a financial interest in the service; (6)	Persons, including all agents and employees, authorized to operate the wrecker and class of driver's license held by each operator; (7)	The location and telephone number of the office or garage to and from which the wrecker is operated; (8)	The name and address of the insurance company providing motor vehicle liability coverage for the wrecker and wrecker service and general comprehensive liability coverage for business operations, the policy number of each insurance policy, and the policy limits provided by each policy; and (9)	Current occupation tax certificate.(Code 1976, § 7-1179)
Sec. 102-114. - Inspection; rating and equipment; wrecker service obligated to remove broken glass. (a)	The chief or his designee shall inspect each wrecker before approving the application for placement on the rotation system to determine whether the wrecker is serviceable, properly equipped and in compliance with the requirements of this article and with other applicable laws. Thereafter, the chief shall inspect each wrecker annually. (b)	Each wrecker vehicle shall have a minimum rating of not less than 10,000 pounds gross weight, and shall be minimally equipped with the following additional equipment: one broom, one shovel, one ABC type fire extinguisher, one two-way radio capable of transmitting and receiving over a distance of ten miles under normal conditions, and a revolving amber emergency light mounted on top of the cab or boom of the vehicle. (c)	The removal of broken glass and other debris from the scene of an accident shall be part of the wrecker service's obligation pursuant to this article. When two or more wrecker services are assigned to one accident, all shall be equally responsible for cleaning debris from the wreck area. (Code 1976, § 7-1180)
Sec. 102-115. - Emergency light display; storage of towed vehicles. (a)	A wrecker operator shall not display the amber emergency light except upon arrival at the scene where a call originated and when leaving the scene with the vehicle in tow. Each wrecker operator shall abide by all applicable traffic regulations and shall be responsible for any violations incurred in the process of responding to a call. (b)	Each wrecker service shall maintain an area for storage of towed vehicles, either within or without the city, sufficient to provide storage in a manner not inconsistent with applicable zoning ordinances and other laws. If outside the city, the storage area shall be not more than three miles from the city limits by the shortest route of vehicular travel. The storage area shall be enclosed or the entire perimeter fenced. Towed or hauled vehicles shall not be parked or left standing on any city right-of-way at any time or under any circumstances. All stored vehicles shall be subject to reclamation 24 hours a day. (Code 1976, § 7-1181)
Sec. 102-116. - Insurance required; marking of wreckers required. (a)	In addition to the motor vehicle liability insurance required by state law, each wrecker service shall maintain general comprehensive liability and garage and extended operation insurance on business operations providing a minimum of $25,000.00 single-limit coverage per occurrence. The chief may require each wrecker service to furnish copies of its insurance certificates showing the amount of coverage and expiration of the policies required by this article and other laws. (b)	Each wrecker shall have the name, address and telephone number of its business displayed on both sides of the vehicle. This information shall be permanently painted onto the side of the vehicle in block letters in contrasting color not less than 2½ inches in height. Attachment to the vehicle of removable signs for this purpose is strictly prohibited. (Code 1976, § 7-1182)
Sec. 102-117. - Rotation call; procedure. (a)	It shall be the duty of the chief to prepare and maintain a rotational call list of wreckers which meet the qualifications, standards and requirements enumerated in this article. Each wrecker service shall have no more than one listing on the rotational call list for each business address. (b)	At any time it becomes necessary for the police department to remove any vehicle for any cause, the police radio operator, or such other person as may be designated by the chief, shall engage the services of those on the rotational call list by calling them in alphabetical order and in rotation; however, deviation from the alphabetical order shall be permitted if: (1)	The next wrecker service on rotation does not have a wrecker available with sufficient capacity to handle the call; or (2)	The owner or person in possession of a vehicle or person in possession of a vehicle about to be removed designates a wrecker service of his preference. (c)	If the wrecker service called in the rotation does not respond within 30 minutes after receiving the call, the next designated wrecker service in the rotation shall be called. (d)	If such person designates a wrecker service of his preference, that wrecker service shall be called whether or not it is next on the rotational call list, and such designation shall not interfere with such wrecker service's position on the call list; however, if it is necessary to skip over one or more wrecker services because they do not have a wrecker with sufficient capacity to handle a particular call, the wrecker service skipped over shall not lose position on the rotation list; but the wrecker service which handles the call shall lose position. (e)	All calls to wrecker services shall be made by a police radio operator, or such other person as may be designated by the chief; and in no event shall an investigating officer undertake to call directly for a wrecker service. Police officers are strictly prohibited from recommending any particular wrecker service to any person, and any police officer violating this provision shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action. (Code 1976, § 7-1183)
Sec. 102-118. - Solicitation prohibited; violation to respond unless called. (a)	It shall be a violation of this article for any wrecker operator, wrecker service or other person to solicit business at the scene of a motor vehicle accident or other vehicular disablement, whether such solicitation is conducted from a wrecker vehicle, private automobile, other motor vehicle, or on foot. (b)	It shall be a violation of this article for any wrecker operator to proceed to the scene of an accident or vehicular disablement unless called as provided in this article. Upon being so called, a wrecker operator shall not block traffic and shall maintain his vehicle in such position as not to impede emergency vehicles and/or normal vehicular traffic. (Code 1976, § 7-1184)
Sec. 102-119. - Removal of vehicle.     No vehicle shall be removed from the scene of a wreck, abandonment or disablement until it is released by the investigating officer. The chief or other officers of the city police department may direct that a vehicle to be removed shall be impounded or towed or hauled to the city's impoundment area, and in such event it shall be a violation of this article for any wrecker operator to remove a vehicle to any other location. No vehicle shall be released or moved until a written release is obtained from the police department. The police officer may, in his discretion, require inside secured storage of the vehicle until any investigation and processing is completed. (Code 1976, § 7-1185)
Sec. 102-120. - Vehicle inventory; procedure. (a)	Whenever any vehicle is removed by a wrecker service without the owner or operator present, the police officer shall make a thorough inventory of all equipment, accessories, personal articles or other items either attached to or located within the vehicle. This inventory shall be completed on the form supplied by the police department and signed by the officer in charge of the removal. Upon acceptance of the vehicle, and prior to its removal, the agent or employee of the wrecker service performing the removal shall sign the inventory form. The officer shall retain the original, and the wrecker service shall retain a copy. (b)	Whenever the vehicle owner picks up his vehicle, the wrecker service shall provide him with a copy of the inventory form. (Code 1976, § 7-1186)
Sec. 102-121. - Maximum fees and charges allowed; grounds for suspension. (a)	All wrecker services participating in the rotation system shall adhere to those maximum fees and charges as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (b)	The chief may suspend the wreckers and/or the operators of any wrecker service from the rotation system upon any of the following grounds: (1)	Charging fees in excess of those approved by the mayor and council.(2)	Failure of a wrecker to pass inspection.(3)	Any violation of the provisions of this article or other law.(Code 1976, § 7-1187)
Sec. 102-122. - Violations. (a)	A conviction of violation of section 102-18(a), prohibiting solicitation at the scene of a wreck or vehicular disablement, or section 102-18(b), prohibiting a wrecker from coming to the scene unless called as provided in this article, shall result in mandatory suspension of the wrecker service from the rotation system for a period of one year. (b)	Any wrecker service suspended by the chief shall be notified in writing of the suspension, to take effect within ten days after notice, the reasons for suspension in writing, the witnesses relied upon by the chief, and that the wrecker service shall be granted a hearing upon written request filed with the city manager within five days. The city manager, upon hearing the matter, may affirm the decision of the chief or reinstate the wrecker service. (c)	Any person who shall violate any of the provisions or sections of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. (Code 1976, § 7-1188)
Secs. 102-123—102-150. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] ZONING ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF VALDOSTA, GEORGIA AN ORDINANCE REGULATING WITHIN THE CITY OF VALDOSTA THE LOCATION; HEIGHT; BULK; NUMBER OF STORIES AND SIZE OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES; THE SIZES OF YARDS, COURTS, AND OTHER OPEN SPACES; THE DENSITY AND DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION; AND THE USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND LAND FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY, RESIDENCE, RECREATION, AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, CONSERVATION, SANITATION, PROTECTION AGAINST FLOODS, PUBLIC ACTIVITIES, AND OTHER PURPOSES; CREATING DISTRICTS FOR SAID PURPOSES AND ESTABLISHING THE BOUNDARIES THEREOF, DEFINING CERTAIN TERMS USED HEREIN; PROVIDING FOR THE METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT; DEFINING THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS; PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS; REPEALING CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note—Published in this appendix is the city's zoning ordinance, as originally adopted by the mayor and council in January 1966, and as amended through August 10, 2006. Amendments to the zoning ordinance after August 10, 2006, are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the ordinance as amended through August 10, 2006. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-6(10); adult establishments, ch. 4; location of retail liquor and retail beer businesses, § 6-45; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 42; floods, ch. 50; historical preservation, ch. 58; landscape development, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 86; subdivision regulations, app. B; airport zoning ordinance, app. C.State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60; authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV.
SECTION 1. - ENACTMENT, SHORT TITLE, JURISDICTION, PURPOSE 
1-1. - Enactment Clause.     The Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta, under the authority of the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, Georgia L. 1957, Page 420, No. 358; and the Amendments thereto, hereby ordains and enacts into law the following sections. 
1-2. - Short Title.     These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance for the City of Valdosta." 
1-3. - Jurisdiction.     These regulations shall govern the use of all land and the developments thereof within the corporate limits of the City of Valdosta. 
1-4. - Purpose.     The purpose of these regulations shall be to promote the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density and distribution of population, and the uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the City of Valdosta so as to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to prevent urban sprawl; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; to promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; to protect property against blight and depreciation; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; to conserve the value of buildings and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and structures throughout the City of Valdosta; and for other purposes. 
SECTION 2. - DEFINITIONS     For the purposes of these regulations, certain terms of words used herein shall be defined as follows: 
2-1. - Interpretation of Certain Terms and Words.     Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular.     The word "person" includes a firm, co-partnership, company, corporation, or association.     The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes the word "structure."     The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory.     The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."     Acceleration/Deceleration Lanes. Paved exits and entrances off a major thoroughfare onto private property for the purpose of expediting the free flow of traffic. Said lanes shall be constructed in accordance with the State Department of Transportation specifications. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-10-02, P.C. File # VA-2002-45.)     Accessory Building. A detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to, customarily associated with, and related to the principal structure or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use, and has a separate means of egress. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 6-5-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-33.)     Note: Accessory structures will be considered as attached to the principle structure by means of a covered breezeway and/or walkway where the roof system of the attachment is designed as like construction as the principle building and the distance of the breezeway and/or walkway does not exceed a distance of 20 feet. In no case shall there be more than one breezeway and/or walkway attached to the principle structure. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 6-5-03, P.C. File # VA-2002-33.)     Administrator, Zoning. The person, officer, or official and his/her authorized representative, whom the City Council has designated as its agent for the administration of these regulations. (Refer to Section 10-1.)     Adult Entertainment. Performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are characterized by the display or exposure of specific anatomical areas.     Adult Entertainment Establishment. Any commercial establishment, which has as its primary purpose or business the offer for sale of any book, publication or film which depicts nudity, or sexual conduct or engages in services such as bath houses, massage parlors, wrestling parlors or like activity including a night club, cabaret, lounge or other establishment which features adult entertainment.     Apothecary. One who prepares and sells drugs or compounds for medicinal purposes. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council on 9-11-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-58.)     Bed and Breakfast Inn. A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided or offered to transient visitors for compensation.     Boarding or Rooming House. A building dedicated to the lodging or feeding or both of three or more non-transient persons of separate families as defined herein for compensation.     Buffer Yard. An area of land which includes landscape material established for the purpose of separating, screening, or shielding a use from a dissimilar or more intense use.     Building. Any structure, except a trailer, which has a roof and which is for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.     Building Height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building.     Care Home. An orphanage, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, boarding home for the aged, or similar use established to render domiciliary care, but not including facilities for the care of mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics, drug addicts and not including nursery schools.     Care Home, Personal. A building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals and personal care for non-family ambulatory adults for compensation. Personal care homes are categorized as follows:     Family Personal Care Home means a home for adults in a family type residence, noninstitutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons.     Group Personal Care Home means a home for adult persons in a residence or other type building(s), noninstitutional in character, which offers care to seven through 15 persons.     Congregate Personal Care Home means a home for adults which offers care to 16 or more persons.     Church. A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.     Club or Lodge, Private. An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public.     Condominium. A building containing three or more individually owned dwelling units and related, jointly owned, common areas as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia.     Curb Cut. The providing of ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street.     Day Care Centers. Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody, 19 or more children under 18 years of age and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council on 9-11-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-44.)     Density. The overall intensity of land use for the total project. When referred to residential areas it is the number of housing units permitted per acre in the zoning district involved in accordance with the terms of the zoning ordinance or as authorized under the development standards of this ordinance.     Dwelling, Manufactured Home. A new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq. For the purposes of the administration of this ordinance, the term manufactured home shall not be interpreted to include mobile homes. For the purposes of this definition, "singlewide" shall be construed as any manufactured or mobile home having a width of between eight and 16 feet and is transported entirely in one section. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-18-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-77.)     Dwelling, Mobile Home. A new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. These were built prior to June 15, 1976 and do not meet current Department of Housing and Urban Development manufactured home codes. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-18-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-77.)     Dwelling, Modular Home. See Industrialized Building. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-18-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-77.)     Dwelling, Single-family. A detached building used and either designed or constructed for one dwelling unit.     Dwelling, Single-family Attached. One of a series of two or more family dwelling units on separate lots attached to another dwelling unit on an adjoining lot by a common party wall.     Dwelling, Site Built. A dwelling, other than a modular home, manufactured home, or mobile home, which is constructed on site on a permanent foundation. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-18-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-77.)     Dwelling, Two-family, or Duplex. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for two adjoining dwelling units that are connected by a fire rated common wall and/or if two story by a fire rated common floor.     Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for more than two adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a common wall or common floor connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the building. This includes apartments, condominiums, or any other type of multi-family structure.     Dwelling Unit. An enclosure of one or more rooms in addition to kitchen and bathroom facilities, but excluding closets, designed or constructed as a unit for residential occupancy by one family.     Family. Three or less persons occupying a dwelling unit unless all members are related by blood, marriage, or adoption.     Family Day Care Homes. A private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, [at least] three but not more than six children under 18 years of age who are not related to such persons and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council on 9-11-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-44.)     Floor Area, Gross. The total number of square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls, excluding basement areas, porches, carports, and garages.     Floor Area Ratio. The relationship of total gross floor area of a project and the total amount of land as described by the legal description. The ratio is the result of dividing the total gross floor area by the total amount of land.     Good Moral Character. A person is of good moral character if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five years.     Group Day Care Homes. Any place operated by any person(s), partnership, association or corporation wherein are received for pay for group care not less than seven nor more than 18 children under 18 years of age for less than 24 hours without transfer of legal custody and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council on 9-11-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-44.)     Halfway House/Transition House. A temporary residential living arrangement for persons leaving an institutional setting and in need of a supportive living arrangement in order to readjust to living outside the institution. Temporary residents receive therapy and counseling from support staff that are present whenever residents are present. Operators of such facilities shall be able to provide appropriate documentation regarding licensing and certification. Minimum square footage requirements shall meet those required for residential uses provided in the International Property Maintenance Code. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 8-10-06, P.C. File # VA-2006-38.)     Home Business. Any business occupation or profession customarily conducted on residential property and carried on by an occupant thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes. This includes, but is not limited to, uses such as home beauty shops with more than one operator, pet grooming, and other similar uses, including Home Occupation uses that do not meet the Home Occupation restrictions. Such uses are operated out of the proprietor's residence. Any use that would otherwise be allowed by right under the existing zoning, shall not be deemed to be a Home Business.     Home Business Sign. A sign for a legally existing home business on residential premises, containing no commercial message except advertising for services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located. (Adopted by Mayor/Council June 10, 2004, P.C. File # VA-2004-24.)     Home Occupation. Any business occupation or profession customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by an occupant thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. This includes, but is not limited to, uses such as accountant, architect, art instructor, beauty shop (with no more than one operator), daycare (with no more than six children and on a lot no smaller than 6,000 square feet), drafting, dressmaking, insurance agent, manufacturing agent (provided that no items are stored or delivered from the premises), music teacher, notary public, photographer, real estate agent, or consultant. (Refer to Section 6-1.)     Home Occupation Sign. A wall sign for a legally existing home occupation on residential premises, containing no commercial message except advertising for services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located. (Adopted by Mayor/Council June 10, 2004, P.C. File # VA-2004-24.)     Hospital. Any institution receiving in-patients, or a public institution receiving out-patients, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of senile psychotics or drug addicts, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry.     Impervious Surface. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water including streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar structures. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.)     Industrialized Building. Certain manufactured buildings which are regulated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Georgia law defines an Industrialized Building as "any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof." Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the "Industrialized Buildings Act", Georgia Law 1982 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110). An industrialized building must meet all requirements of the district in which it is located. Industrialized buildings designed for residential uses are often referred to as "modular homes". For the purposes of enforcement of this ordinance, industrialized residential homes are subject to the same standards as site built homes. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-18-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-77.)     Junk Yard. Use of property for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials, and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.     Junk Yard Storage Area. Property and/or buildings used for the permanent or temporary storage or inoperable vehicles, machinery or other equipment or materials awaiting salvage, restoration or sale, but not including exterior displays or new or used merchandise in operable condition for retail or wholesale distribution.     Lot. A lot of record, or any combination of lots of record, held in a single ownership by one person, or in common ownership by more than one, which has both lot area and lot dimensions equal to or greater than the lot width and lot area requirements established by this ordinance for the zoning district in which such tract of land is located and for the use proposed for the tract of land. (Refer to Section 3-22.)     Lot, Corner. A lot having frontage on two or more public streets at their intersection. (Refer to Section 3-11.)     Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court, or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. (Refer to Section 9-1.)     Lot, Through. A lot other than a corner lot, having frontage on more than one street.     Lot Width. The distance between the side lot lines, measured along the minimum front yard setback line as established by this ordinance, or if no setback line is established the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the street right-of-way line.     Minor. Any person under 18 years of age.     Mobile Home. Any trailer, vehicles, or similar portable structure mounted on wheels, or designed for mounting on wheels, intended for dwelling purposes, including structural additions, except camping type trailers parked and unoccupied. Such unit shall be considered a mobile home whether or not the wheels have been removed and whether or not on a permanent foundation.     Operator. The manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment.     Owner(s). If a sole proprietorship, the proprietor; if a partnership, all partners (general and limited); if a corporation, all officers, directors and persons holding at least ten percent of the outstanding shares.     Planning Commission. As utilized in this ordinance, the Planning Commission shall mean the Greater Lowndes Planning Commission, or their representative. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.)     Principal Building. The building containing or to contain the principal use of a lot.     Principal Use. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied, or maintained.     Public Space. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated or reserved for public or private use as an amenity to the development. Public space shall not be interpreted to include public street right-of-way or individual private front, side, or rear yards. Storm water management facilities may be incorporated into the public space, but shall not consist of more than 75 percent of the required amount of public space. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.)     Public Street. Right-of-way dedicated to the city or owned by the city for public street purposes.     Residential. Pertaining to the use of land, means premises such as homes, town homes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums or apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein.     School. A facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education including any playgrounds, stadiums, or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. This shall include but not be limited to public and private schools used for primary, secondary, or post-secondary education.     Setback. The shortest distance between the centerline of a street and the principal building or structure on a lot.     Shopping Center. Two or more commercial establishments planned and managed as a single unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property.     Sign. (See Section 8 - Sign Regulations.)     Special Exception. A Special Exception is a use, which within certain districts specified by this ordinance is not permitted as a matter of right but may be permitted within these districts by the City Council. (See Section 5-1.2) (Amendment adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council on 2-6-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-05. Administratively changed the item number from 2-50 to 2-51.)     Specified Anatomical Areas. Shall include any of the following: (a)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. (b)	Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.     Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools, and fall-out shelters but does not include walls or fences.     Tourist Home. A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided or offered to transient visitors for compensation.     Townhouse. One of a group of three or more attached dwelling units under fee simple or condominium or cooperative ownership, as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia.     Travel Trailer. A vehicular portable structure not exceeding 32 feet in length or eight feet in width designed for travel, recreational and vacation uses.     Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. (Refer to Section 11-6.2.)     Yard, Front. That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way and the principal building of the lot and extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line.     Yard, Rear. That area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building on the lot.     Yard, Side. That area of a lot between the side lot lines and the principal building on the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard.     Zoning Map, Official. The zoning and other related data coverages of the computerized VALOR GIS database. Printed maps of this database are maintained and kept on file in the offices of the Zoning Administrator and the Planning Commission. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council on 11-6-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-71.) 
SECTION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
3-1. - Interpretation and Application.     In interpreting and applying these regulations, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of these regulations. Except as hereinafter provided, these regulations shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul, or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of these regulations impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits, or any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
3-2. - Zoning Affects All Land and Buildings.     No buildings, structures, or land shall be used or occupied; and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
3-3. - Every Use Must Be Upon a Lot.     No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot, as defined by this ordinance, except as provided in Section 3-23 or Section 9-1. 
3-4. - Only One Principal Building Per Lot.     Except as herein provided (Refer to Section 6-3), there shall be no more than one principal building or structure upon any lot other than within an M-1 or M-2 district. 
3-5. - Open Space Not to be Encroached Upon.     No open spaces shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and such other regulations required by this ordinance for the district in which such building is located. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and planted buffer strips shall be construed not to be encroachments of yards. (Refer to Section 3-25.) 
3-6. - Required Open Space May Not Be Used by Another Building.     No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required or in connection with any building, structure, or use by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space for any other building structure, or use except as provided in Section 7-6. 
3-7. - Reduction of Yards or Lot Area.     Except as provided in Section 3-23, no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use. 
3-8. - Encroachment on Public Rights-of-Way.     No building, structure, service area, or required off-street parking and loading facilities, except driveways, shall be permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
3-9. - Location of Accessory Buildings or Uses.     Accessory buildings on residential lots, when located within a side yard, shall be located no closer to property lines than would be allowed for a principal building. Accessory buildings shall not be located in the front yard of the principal use. Within a rear yard, an accessory building on a residential lot shall be located at least ten feet from all rear and other property lines, except that in the case of corner lots, accessory buildings shall be set back from the centerline of an abutting street right-of-way a distance equal to three-quarters the front yard setback established for the zoning district in which the accessory buildings are located. In the case of a through lot (Refer to Section 3-11), accessory buildings shall conform to front yard setbacks on both streets. Swimming pools shall conform to front yard setbacks on both streets. Accessory buildings or uses on non-residential lots shall comply with the minimum yard requirements established for the zoning district in which such accessory buildings or uses are located.     3-9.1. Accessory Building on Separate Lot: An accessory building may be permitted as a Special Exception by the City Council on a separate lot from the lot of the principal building provided that: (a)	The lot upon which the accessory building is located shall adjoin the lot which contains the principal use; and (b)	All requirements established for the zoning district in which such accessory building is located shall be complied with; and (c)	Any structure or building erected shall meet the requirements of the City of Valdosta Building Code and shall be approved by the Building Inspector; and (d)	Provided the City Council may require design features such as buffer strips, screening, etc., as may be found necessary to protect the purpose of the ordinance.     3-9.2. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools accessory to residences shall be enclosed by a fence of a minimum height of four feet.     3-9.3. Accessory Building—Size and Number Limitations: Only one accessory building shall be permitted on residential lots; however, this shall not apply to swimming pools, garden arbors, playground equipment, decks, or patios. Accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum square footage as indicated in the following: Lot SizeMaximum Square Footage0—21,780 square feet600 square feet—No more than 3buildings21,781 square feet—43,560 square feet800 square feet—No more than 3buildingsOver 43,561 square feet1,000 square feet plus 150 square feet for each additional whole acre—No more than 5 buildings—(Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council 9-11-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-57.)  Any increase in square footage requirements shall be allowed only upon proper application and granting of a variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals. (Refer to Section 11-6.2.) 
3-10. - Every Lot Shall Abut a Street.     No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut an open public street, except as provided for in planned developments. (Refer to Section 6-3.) 
3-11. - Lots With Multiple Frontage.     In the case of a corner lot, side yard setback requirements from the centerline of the street right-of-way shall be equal to 75 percent of that required for the front yard setback for all zoning districts. On a corner lot where the main entrance into a residence is facing a side yard, it shall be permissible for purposes of this ordinance to construe the residence to be fronting on the street other than that street which said entrance faces, and side and rear yard requirements may be provided accordingly. If a building is constructed on a through lot having frontage on two roads not at an intersection, a setback from each road shall be provided equal to the front yard requirement for the district in which the lot is located. 
3-12. - Visibility at Intersections.     On corner lots within all zoning districts except the C-D zoning district, no fence, shrubbery or other obstruction to the traffic sight vision, except utility poles or light or sign standards, shall exceed a height of three feet within a triangular area formed by the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets or a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way line, and a diagonal line which intersects the right-of-way lines at two points, each 20 feet distance from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, or, in the case of a rounded corner, from the point of intersection of their tangents; provided, however, signs, lights, or similar objects which are totally located at least 12 feet above the finished grade shall be permitted. 
3-13. - Uses Prohibited.     If either a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being permitted in a district, either as a matter of right, or as a Special Exception, then such use, class of use, or structures for such uses, shall be prohibited in such district. 
3-14. - Zoning of Annexed Areas.     Areas annexed to the City of Valdosta subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance shall be placed in the R-E zoning district, unless other zoning (such as, but not limited to, existing compatible Lowndes County Zoning) is formally requested and approved with the annexation petition. All rezoning requests which accompany an annexation petition shall pay the required fee for zoning amendments. (Refer to Section 12-2.1). Such annexed and R-E zoned areas shall remain R-E until such time as the Comprehensive Zoning Plan of the city has been extended to include the annexed area and a zoning change is executed in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance for zoning amendments. 
3-15. - Reserved. 
3-16. - Zoning to Apply When Lot is Divided by District Boundary Line.     In the event that a district boundary line on the zoning map divides a lot of record held in one ownership on the date of passage of this ordinance, each part of the lot so divided shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by this ordinance for the district in which each such parcel is located; except, however, that if the property owner of such a lot, other than a through lot, so desires, he may extend a use allowed on the greater portion of said lot 50 feet beyond the district boundary line in accordance with setbacks and yard requirements of the district into which he is encroaching. 
3-17. - Height Limitations of Walls and Fences.     Within any residential district, no wall or fence shall exceed eight feet in height within or along a boundary of a front or side yard. 
3-18. - Buffer Yard Requirements.     Buffer yards shall be required along the side and rear yards of the proposed development wherever the proposed development abuts a different existing or permitted use. The existing use of the zoning classification of the adjacent property, shall determine the type of buffer yard required. Vacant property will not require a buffer. a)	Buffer yard specifications. The following tables prescribe buffer yard types as well as minimum number of trees and shrubs per 100 linear feet. Where feasible and appropriate, developers are encouraged to exceed these minimum requirements. Buffer Type Required New DevelopmentExisting DevelopmentSingle-family Subdivision/DuplexMulti-familyOffice/Institutional/ProfessionalCommercialIndustrialRecreationSingle/Two-family (new subdivisions only)CCBBDMulti-familyBDCBDOffice/Institutional/ProfessionalCDCommercialBBIndustrialAARecreationCD Buffer Type Descriptions Buffer Component (per 100 linear feet)Buffer TypeABCD# Canopy Trees7432# Understory Trees11644# Shrubs5025 20 20 Buffer Width4020 15 10 A minimum 50 percent of all canopy trees, and minimum of 75 percent of all understory trees and shrubs shall be evergreen vegetation. All trees and shrubs used for buffer yard calculations must adhere to specifications of the Valdosta Tree and Landscape Ordinance (Valdosta Code of Ordinances, Article J, Part 9, Chapter 4 [Chapter 62]). Planting areas must be mulched with approved material. Upon maturity, buffer yards shall not contain any unobstructed openings more than ten feet in width. b)	Location. Buffer yards shall be located on the side and rear yard of the lot or parcel and extend inward from the parcel boundary line for the required depth. Buffer yards shall not be located in any portion of an existing or dedicated public right-of-way or private street, or stormwater detention/retention area. Buffer yards shall not be used for any parking or loading purposes, nor contain any structures. Only approved driveways and pedestrian pathways may encroach into a required buffer yard. c)	Existing vegetation. Existing vegetation may be retained and used to meet buffer requirements. In the event existing vegetation does not satisfy buffer requirements, it shall be supplemented with additional plantings. Proposed plant materials shall be grouped or massed to achieve a natural looking and unified buffer. d)	Maintenance. The entire buffer yard shall be maintained as green open space with the required plantings consistent with the requirements of the Valdosta Tree and Landscape Ordinance [Chapter 62 of the Valdosta Code]. Maintenance of a required buffer yard shall be the responsibility of the property owner or any consenting grantee. If the plant materials die, they shall be replaced within 60 days. e)	Supplemental fencing. For all buffer types, buffer yard widths may be reduced up to 50 percent in exchange for an opaque fence or solid wall between the height of six feet and eight feet being erected along the property line where buffer yards are required. Such fence or wall shall consist of durable materials, be constructed to last at least ten years with minimum maintenance and shall be plumb and aligned to achieve an aesthetically pleasing appearance. The planting requirements may be reduced up to 25 percent if the supplemental fence option is selected as described above. 
3-19. - Screening of Service Areas Within 100 Feet of Public Street.     Screening requirements for such areas shall be as prescribed in the Valdosta Tree and Landscape Ordinance [Chapter 62 of the Valdosta Code]. 
3-20. - Reserved. 
3-21. - Side and Rear Yards Not Required Next to Railroad.     Within any non-residential district, side yards and rear yards shall not be required adjacent to railroad rights-of-way. 
3-22. - Substandard Lots of Record.     Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, which has an area or a width which is less than required by this ordinance, shall be subject to the following exceptions and modifications identified in Sections 3-23 and 3-26. 
3-23. - Permitted Modification of Setback Requirements.     When a building or structure is proposed on a lot and when on either or both lots which adjoin such lot at the street right-of-way line there exists a principal building which does not conform to the setback requirements of this ordinance, the required setback for such building or structure shall be as follows: (1)	Where only one said adjoining lot contains a principal building with a nonconforming setback, the setback shall be the computed average of (a) the normal setback requirement with (b) the nonconforming setback; or (2)	Where both adjoining lots contain a principal building each with a nonconforming setback, the minimum setback shall be the computed average of the two nonconforming setbacks.     3-23.1. Signs on buildings with nonconforming setbacks. Where signs are allowed within a district and when such signs are permanently attached to the side of a building which has a nonconforming setback, said sign may be closer to the street right-of-way than is normally required for structures within that district; provided that no part of said sign shall be closer to the street right-of-way than is any part of the wall of the nonconforming building to which the sign is attached; and provided further that said sign shall not project into the side yard more than six inches.     3-23.2. Cul-de-sacs. On cul-de-sacs approved by the City Engineer the minimum front yard setback line can be increased up to 15 feet further back from the right-of-way line and must be established on a recorded plat. 
3-24. - Structures Permitted Above the Height Limit.     The height limits of these regulations shall not apply to a church spire, belfry, cupola, dome, or ornamental tower not intended for human occupancy, monument, water tower, observation tower, transmission tower, chimney, smoke stack, conveyor, flag pole, radio or television tower, mast or aerial, parapet wall not extending more than four feet above the roof line of the building, and necessary mechanical appurtenances. 
3-25. - Permitted Encroachments of Yards and Setbacks.     Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutter, and fire escapes may project not more than three feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways which are or may be used for access and service and/or emergency vehicles. 
3-26. - Modification of Side Yard Requirements.     When a lot of record has a width less than the frontage required in the district in which it is located and said lot cannot be increased in width as provided in Section 3-23, then the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to reduce the side yard requirements for such lot; provided, however, that there shall be not less than an eight-foot side yard. 
3-27. - Use Change of Residential Structure.     When a lot within a residential zone is changed by rezoning, the rezoning application shall include a site plan drawn to scale, showing the lot, the street, the house, the driveway and the proposed off-street parking; this site plan shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to the Zoning Administrator accepting the application. If the lot was rezoned by governmental petition, the site plan will be required when the change in use is requested through the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. Where a lot and house is configured such that the minimum development standards of this ordinance or other ordinances of the City of Valdosta cannot be adhered to, the City Engineer has the authority to allow subsequent improvements as follows: a.	Pavement width.b.	Pavement encroachment to adjacent property lines.c.	Driveway radius encroachment to beyond the property line.Off-street parking in front of the residential structure shall not be allowed. However, off-street parking or development in front of existing structure may be considered and approved by the Valdosta City Council only after review of a site plan submitted as a part of the rezoning request. 
3-28. - Residential Development in Downtown Commercial (C-D) Zoning District.     Residential development in the C-D district is subject to a parking plan for the downtown area approved by the Central Valdosta Development Authority (CVDA). 
SECTION 4. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
4-1. - Establishment of Districts.     In order that the purposes of this ordinance as defined in Section 1 may be accomplished, there are hereby established within the City of Valdosta, Georgia, the zoning districts identified as follows:     E-R Environmental Resource. The purpose of this district is to protect the natural resources of the City of Valdosta and provide for appropriate recreational and institutional uses oriented towards these natural resources. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-9-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-56.)     R-E Estate Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family detached residential areas with minimum lot sizes of one acre.     R-25 Single-Family Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family detached residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 25,000 square feet.     R-15 Single-Family Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family detached residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 15,000 square feet.     R-10 Single-Family Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family detached residential area with minimum lot sizes of 10,000 square feet.     DR-10 Two-Family Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide areas for one- and two-family residential uses with minimum lot sizes of 10,000 square feet for single-family residences and 13,000 square feet for duplexes.     R-6 Multi-Family Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide orderly development of high density residential areas for one, two, and multi-family dwellings, said areas being protected from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment.     R-6S Single-Family Residential. The purpose of this section is to provide single-family detached residential areas with minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet. These areas being protected from uses which are incompatible to a desirable single-family residential environment.     R-H Historic Residential. The purpose of this district shall be to protect and preserve historic residential neighborhoods within the Historic District.     R-P Residential Professional. The purpose of this district shall be to create and provide areas in which residential, professional, educational and institutional uses not normally involving the sale of merchandise can be compatibly mixed while maintaining a healthy living environment for the residents of the district.     O-P Office Professional District. The purpose of this district shall be to create and provide areas in which residential, professional, educational and institutional uses not normally involving the sale of merchandise can be compatibly mixed while maintaining a healthy living environment for the residents of the district.     C-N Neighborhood Commercial. The purpose of this district is to provide for and to protect areas that are convenient to and will serve immediately adjacent residential neighborhoods.     C-C Community Commercial. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect convenient areas for community shopping facilities consisting of a wide variety of sales and services.     C-H Highway Commercial. The purpose of this district shall be to provide for and encourage the proper grouping and development of roadside uses which include a wide variety of sales and services that will best accommodate the needs of the city and the traveling public in order to reduce highway traffic congestion, traffic hazards, and blight along the public streets of the city.     C-D Downtown Commercial. The purpose of this district shall be to enhance and protect shopping facilities in the central business district of the city. To be considered for this district, properties must be located within the official boundaries of the Central Valdosta Development Authority set forth in the 1974 amendment to the Georgia constitution, which created said authority. The official boundaries of the Central Valdosta Development Authority are as follows: "The Central Valdosta Area shall consist of that area bounded on the north by Magnolia Street, on the east by Lee Street, on the south by Branch Street and on the west by Toombs Street. Said area shall include all properties abutting on the north side of Magnolia Street, the east side of Lee Street, the south side of Branch Street and the west side of Toombs Street within the area described." (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 7-6-06, P.C. File # VA-2006-37.)     M-1 Manufacturing. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those industrial uses which do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust, and which do not possess other objectionable characteristics which might be detrimental to surrounding neighborhoods, or to the other uses permitted in the district.     M-2 Manufacturing. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those industrial uses which cannot comply with the regulations of the M-1 district.     PRD Planned Residential District. The PRD district is intended to allow flexible site planning and building arrangements for both single- and multi-family residential development under a unified plan so that innovative land planning methods may be utilized which fosters natural resource conservation and neighborhood cohesiveness as well as neo-traditional developments. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.)     PCD Planned Commercial District. The PCD district is intended to allow flexible site planning and building arrangements for business and commercial developments under a unified plan so that innovative land planning methods may be utilized which foster natural resource conservation and reduce traffic congestion. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.)     PMD Planned Mixed Use District. The PMD district is intended to allow flexible site planning and building arrangements for commercial, office and residential uses under a unified plan which fosters natural resource conservation and reduces congestion. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.)     C-A Adult Commercial. The purpose of this district shall be to provide a reasonable location within the community for the development of adult-oriented businesses including adult entertainment establishments. 
4-2. - Zoning and Street and Road Classification and Major Thoroughfare Plan, Valdosta, Georgia, Maps.     The boundaries of each zoning district are shown on the Official Zoning Map as defined by this ordinance. Said map shall be maintained by the Director of the Planning Commission, certified by the Zoning Administrator, and shall be kept on file in the offices of both the Planning Commission and the Zoning Administrator. Said map is hereby made a part of this ordinance.     Accurate copies of the "Street and Road Classification and Major Thoroughfare Plan, Valdosta, Georgia" shall be on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator at all times. Said map shall accurately show all map amendments made in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and the date when said amendments became effective. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to see to it that the "Street and Road Classification and Major Thoroughfare Plan, Valdosta, Georgia", displayed in his/her office is kept up-to-date and accurately shows all amendments. 
4-3. - Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries.     When uncertainty exists with respect to the location of boundaries of any zoning district as shown on the "Zoning Map of the City of Valdosta," the following rules shall apply:     4-3.1. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the centerline of a street, highway, railroad right-of-way line, stream bed or river bed; such centerlines shall be construed to be such district boundaries.     4-3.2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.     4-3.3. Where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the corporate limit line of the City of Valdosta, then such corporate limit lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries.     4-3.4. Where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as being set back from a street, road, highway, railroad, stream, or river, and parallel thereto, then such district boundaries unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of such street, road, highway, railroad, stream, or river and as being parallel thereto. 
4-4. - Overlay Districts.     Overlay Districts shall be defined as: special purpose zoning classification used to supplement, but not change the regulations of the current zoning districts (called the "underlying district") in an effort to protect and promote public/private investment. More stringent controls generally apply within the overlay district than would normally be required in the underlying districts. (Section 4-4 in its entirety was amended and adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council on 12-10-02, P.C. File # VA-2002-45.)     4-4.1. Inner Perimeter Road Overlay District.     4-4.1.1. Description. The Inner Perimeter Road (IPR) Overlay District shall be defined as the area extending 400 feet in depth from the outer most edge of the existing right-of-way of Inner Perimeter Road. The IPR Overlay District applies to all lands within the legal jurisdiction of the City of Valdosta.     4-4.1.2. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of the IPR overlay district is to provide for a superior environmental along a major transportation corridor through the application of an overlay district. The overlay district regulations are intended to supplement the regulations of the underlying districts and to provide for harmony and compatibility of development over the length of the corridor.     The district is established to protect the public investment in a major highway and ensure that this can continue to serve its primary function of moving volumes of traffic safely. Provisions of the IPR overlay district are intended to expedite the free flow of traffic and reduce the hazards arising from unnecessary points of ingress and egress and cluttered roadside development.     The overlay district is intended to enhance the value of adjacent lands by preserving land, extending the useful life of the highway, avoiding land uses that conflict with the roadside and the surrounding area and reducing the risks of creating blighted areas. Insuring the attractiveness of roadside uses will contribute to and enhance trade, tourism, capital investment and the general welfare.     4-4.1.3. Lot Width. The lot width for properties having direct or indirect access to Inner Perimeter Road will be determined by Section 5-2 (Development Standards) of this ordinance.     4-4.1.4. Traffic Circulation and Access. Within the IPR Overlay District there shall be two classifications known as IPR-1 and IPR-2.     IPR-1: This classification will be used as an overlay district to regulate the portions of Inner Perimeter Road that are considered "rural" in nature and maintain a set maximum speed limit at 55 miles per hour. Uses in this district will follow all applicable development standards according to the underlying district and have the following provisions:     Median Cuts: Median cuts will be permitted as one for every one-quarter mile or 1,320 feet. Establishing the location of the median cuts will be done on a first come, first serve basis.     Curb Cuts: Curb Cuts will be permitted no closer than one for every 440 feet. Like median cuts, establishing the location of the curb cuts will be done on a first come, first serve basis.     IPR-2: This classification will be used as an overlay district to regulate the portions of Inner Perimeter Road that are considered "urban" in nature and maintain a set maximum speed limit of 45 miles per hour. Uses in this district will follow all applicable development standards according to the underlying district and have the following provisions:     Median Cuts: Median cuts will be permitted as one for every one-eighth mile or 660 feet. Establishing the location of the median cuts will be done on a first come, first serve basis.     Curb Cuts: Curb cuts will be permitted no closer than one for every 220 feet or as required by the Georgia Department of Transportation. Like median cuts, establishing the location of the curb cuts will be done on a first come, first serve basis.     Once a section of Inner Perimeter Road is designated as being "urban" in nature, a third lane will be added in each direction of travel as deemed an appropriate by the Georgia Department of Transportation. This third lane will be added on the inside of the existing lanes and be taken from the existing median. Subsequently, in the areas of three lanes, the median will become raised and a controlled left turn lane will be incorporated.     Along with the third lane, a deceleration/acceleration lane will be constructed. This lane will be placed in the existing right-of-way on the outsides of the existing lanes of traffic. The purpose of these deceleration/acceleration lanes will be to allow access to properties along the Inner Perimeter Road Corridor.     Unless a pre-existing hardship is present, a minimum 24-foot wide connectivity easement will be required for all properties sharing a common curb cut. The purpose of this easement will be for inter-connectivity sharing of curb cut access among properties and two-way traffic flow between properties.     Circulation drives shall interconnect all lot access points with all vehicle parking, loading, servicing, and like areas and structures, thereby creating an on-site circulation network which, together with any service drives abutting the lot, will provide a safe and convenient means for lot servicing and fire protection. Where applicable, the following scale will be used to determine connectivity: 1)	Less than 500 feet of road frontage - connectivity on both adjoining properties.2)	Greater than or equal to 500 feet and less than 1,000 feet of road frontage - connectivity on at least one adjoining property and connectivity to all adjoining lots that have less than 500 feet of road frontage. 3)	Greater than or equal to 1,000 feet of road frontage - connectivity on all adjoining lots with less than 500 feet of road frontage.     4-4.1.5. Signage. All signage shall comply with and be governed by the standards set forth in Section 8 Sign Regulations in addition to the following criteria:     A maximum of one freestanding sign per parcel, per street frontage shall be permitted. All freestanding signs shall be mounted on a permanent foundation and shall be limited to a maximum height of 15 feet. The maximum sign area for freestanding signs shall be as prescribed in Tables B and C of Section 8 Sign Regulations, and in no case shall a sign area exceed 150 square feet. 
SECTION 5. - SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED USES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
5-1. - Table of Permitted Uses.     Within the various zoning districts as indicated on the "Zoning Map of the City of Valdosta," no building, structure, or land shall be constructed, erected, altered, or used except as indicated in the following schedules.     5-1.1. Uses Permitted by Right. Uses permitted as a matter of right are indicated on the following schedule by the letter "X" in the appropriate column.     5-1.2. Special Exceptions. Uses permitted only after special review and approval of the City Council are indicated on the following schedule by the letters "SE" in the appropriate column. Requests to approve a use by Special Exception shall be advertised, reviewed and processed in the same manner as an amendment to the Official Zoning Map as described in Section 12 Amendment. In the event that a rezoning is also necessary for the proposed use, the Special Exception request and rezoning request may be processed and heard in conjunction with each other at the required public hearing. Special Exception requests will be reviewed after Council has: (1) reviewed the proposed site plans for the use, its location within the community, its arrangement and design, its relationship to neighboring property and other conditions peculiar to the particular proposal which would determine it desirability or undesirability; (2) has found the proposal not to be contrary to the intent of this ordinance; and (3) has approved the use as specified. Special Exceptions shall only be approved based on findings by the City Council that: (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council on 2-6-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-05.) (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 4-8-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-13.) (a)	The proposed use will not be contrary to the purpose of this ordinance.(b)	The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood, nor affect adversely the health and safety of residents and workers. (c)	The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such facility, vehicular movement, noise or fumes generation, or type of physical activity. (d)	The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses of adjacent properties; and the proposed use will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of said use. (e)	The parking and all development standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may be granted have been met. Provided that the City Council may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood; and provided that wherever the City Council shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations that any term, condition or restriction upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said City Council shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing. If activities towards the Special Exception have not commenced within 12 months after approval by the City Council, or if the Special Exception is discontinued for a period in excess of 12 consecutive months, the request shall be rescinded and subject to re-submission in the same manner as an amendment as described in Section 12 of this Ordinance. Special Exceptions shall not be transferable except upon written approval of the City Council. (Amendment adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council on 2-6-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-05.) "USE TABLE" —- Zoning Ordinance, City of Valdosta, Georgia X —denotes a use allowed by rightSE —denotes a use allowed only by Special Exception LAND USEZONING DISTRICTE-RR-ER-25R-15R-10DR-10R-6SR-6R-HR-PO-PC-NC-CC-HC-DC-AM-1M-2RESIDENTIAL & RELATED USESAccessory Buildings or Uses (Refer to Section 3-9) XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXAnimals; keeping of pets indoors, provided that the principal building is used to house said pets and no outside enclosure is used. XXXXXXXXXXXAnimals; keeping of horses, dogs, and provided that:XXXXXXXXXXa) No more than 2 horses, 2 dogs, or 2 cats are kept on any one lot; provided, however, that an exception is made and an additional dog may be kept on a lot when the occupant or owner of the premises has a medical need or is handicapped and the dog in question is a trained animal used to benefit or aid a handicapped or medically ill individual; (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council April 10, 2003.) b) The distance from an enclosure for horses to the nearest principal building shall not be less than 300 feet and the distance from any property line shall be not less than 75 feet.c) The distance from the enclosure for dogs and cats to the nearest property line shall not be less than 75 feet unless the enclosure incorporates at least 1/3 of the Lot and is bounded by both side lot lines. Boarding or Rooming HouseXXXXXXChurch or Other Place of Worship; including Sunday School buildings, parish houses, convents, nursery school, kindergartens and other related uses on the same premises and operated by the church; provided that within an R-E, R-25, R-15, R 10, R-6, R-6S, DR-10, PRD-15, PRD-10, PRD-6, R-P and O-P: SESESESESESESEXXXXXXa) The lot size shall be no less than 3 acres;b) Any building or structure established with any such use shall have minimum side and rear yard of 50 feet;c) Any lot for a church shall front on a major street, secondary street or collector street as specified on the Official Street and Road Classification and Major Thoroughfare Plan of Valdosta, Georgia. College or University; including dormitories or fraternities/sororities if located on main campus. SEXXXXXXXXXXXDwelling — Single-family Detached, including Residential Industrialized Buildings. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-18-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-77.) XXXXXXXXXXXSEDwelling — Single-family AttachedXXSEXXXA Dwelling — Two-familyXXSEXXXA Dwelling — Multi-FamilyXXXA Family Residential; provided, no more than one shall be permitted on a lot with another dwelling; and provided such shall be permitted only within a rear yard. Such structure shall be accessory residential and intended for use by family members related to occupants of the principle structure. The lot on which such use is to be established shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for a two-family dwelling; and provided further that said accessory structure is not to be used for rental purposes. XXXXXXXXXXFraternity or Sorority; limited to properties directly adjacent to or abutting a main college campus. SESESESESESEXXXXGarage Apartment; provided no more than one shall be permitted on a lot with another dwelling; and provided such shall be permitted only within a rear yard; and provided that the lot on which such use is to be established meets the minimum lot area requirements for a two-family dwelling. XXXSEXXHalfway House/Transitional Housing; provided no other such house is located within one block. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 8-10-06, P.C. File # VA-2006-38.) XXHome Business (Refer to Section 6-2) SESESESESESESESESESEXXXXXXHome Occupation (Refer to Section 6-1) XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXManufactured Home (Refer to Section 6-13.) (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-18-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-77.) SEManufactured Home Park; provided that:SEXa) Access to manufactured home parks shall be by paved public street and either on or within 1,000 feet of and readily accessible to a major, secondary, or collector street as designated on the Official Street and Road Classification and Major Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Valdosta; andb) The manufactured home park meets the requirements of the Mobile Home Park Ordinance for the City of Valdosta; andc) The area beneath each such structure must be enclosed with materials manufactured for such purposes, including but not limited to brick, concrete, rock or other materials approved by the Building Inspector. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-18-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-77.) Personal Care Home, Family (Adopted by M/C 2-10-05) SESESESESEXXSESESESESEPersonal Care Home, Group; provided that minimum lot size shall be 1 acre.SESESEXXSEPersonal Care Home, Congregate; provided that minimum lot size shall be 1 acre.SESEXXXSEPlanned Development (Refer to Section 6-3)Public Owned Recreation Center, YMCA and Institution of a similar natureXSESESESESESESEXXXXSchool; Elementary, Junior or Senior HighSESESESESESESESESESESESEFamily Day Care Homes (6 children or less); refer to Section 6-1 and Section 6-5. (Approved by Valdosta Mayor/Council on 9-11-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-44).) XXXXXXXXXXXXGroup Day Care Homes (7 to 18 children); provided that all the requirements of Section 6-5 are met before the application is submitted. (Appr. by Vald. Mayor/Council 9-11-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-44.) SESESESESESESEXXXXBUSINESS USESAmbulance Service or Rescue SquadXXXXAmusement or Recreational Activities (Commercial); carried on outside a building such as a golf or baseball driving range, miniature golf course, softball field, and uses of similar nature. XXXXXXAmusement or Recreational Activities (Commercial); carried on outside a building which produces noise and/or noxious fumes, such as drag strips, race tracks, motorcycle races, ATV (all terrain vehicles) and uses of a similar nature. SEXXAmusement or Recreational Activities (Commercial); carried on wholly within a building, such as cinema, theater, auditorium, and uses of a similar nature. XXXXAnimal Hospital, Commercial Kennel, Veterinary Clinic or Animal Boarding Place, located at least 300 feet from the nearest residential district. XXXApothecary (Stand Alone); provided that:XXXXXXThe principal building does not exceed 1,200 sq. ft. in R-P or O-P. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council on 9-11-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-58.) Apothecary - Accessory Use; provided that:XXXXXXa) The use is completely contained within the principal building;b) No outside signage is used;c) There is no direct ingress or egress from the street;d) Hours of operation to be the same as the principal use. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council on 9-11-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-58.) Art StudioSESEXXXXAutomobile Parking Lot or Parking Garage (Commercial)XXXXXAutomobile Service Station; provided that major auto repair shall not be permitted, nor shall there be outside storage of materials or equipment other than merchandise offered for sale in a C-C, C-H, or C-D district. XXXXXAutomobile, Truck, Farm Equipment, or Motorcycle Sales, Repair, or Upholstery, Paint Shop, or Tire Recapping (including rebuilding/sales of parts and equipment indoors only, no outside storage of equipment or parts except for M-1 and M-2 districts) XSEXXAuto WasherteriaSEXSEXXBank, Financial InstitutionSESEXXXXXXBed and Breakfast InnSESESEXXXXBookbinding, Printing, Engraving, Blueprinting, Photostatting, or Letter ShopXXXSEXXBuilding Contractor and Related Activities such as sale and storage of building supplies and materials. Provided that equipment and materials temporarily stored or displayed outside shall be completely enclosed by a suitable fence, and that no sawmill or planning mill operations shall take place on the premises within any district other than the M-2 district. XSEXXBusiness OfficeSEXXXXXXXBusiness SchoolSESESEXXXClothing or Dry Goods Store; including shoe stores, men's shops, women's shops, variety stores and stores of a similar nature. XXXXClub or Lodge (private)SEXXXCultural Facility; libraries, museums, and similar facilities.SEXXXXXXDance School or StudioSESEXXXXDay Care Centers (19 or more children) (Approved by Valdosta Mayor/Council on 9-11-03 (P. C. File # VA-2003-44.) SESEXXXDrive-in TheaterXXDrug StoreXXXElectrical Repair and similar repair of a heavy commercial nature.XXXExperimental LaboratoryXXXFarmers MarketSEXXXXFeed, Seed, and Insecticides, and Fertilizer Retail SalesXXSEXXFlower ShopXXXXXXFood Store; including retail bakeries, meat markets, dairy products, confectioner shops, liquor stores, and stores of similar nature. XXXXFreight Express OfficeXXXXFuneral HomeSESEXXXFurniture Upholstery ShopXXXXXGlass Sales and StorageXSEXXGolf Course (commercial purposes)SEXXXGolf Course (Residential Purposes); provided that:SESESESESESESESESEXXXa) It shall be for daytime use only; andb) All greens and fairways shall be setback at least 100 feet from any exterior lines; andc) All trees and structures shall meet minimum setback requirements for single-family residences within the district. Growing of Crops, GardensXSESEXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXHome Furnishings and Hardware; such as appliance sales and repairs, hardware stores, paint stores, sporting goods stores, furniture stores, and stores of a similar nature. SEXXXHospital, Nursing Home; provided that:SESESEXXXa) The lot size for such use shall be no less than 3 acres; andb) Any building or structure established with any such use shall have minimum side and rear yard of 50 feet; andc) The setback shall be 25 feet more than required for other structures within the same district; andd) The lot upon which any hospital is built shall front on a major street or secondary street as specified on the Official Street and Road Classification and Major Thoroughfare Plan of Valdosta. HotelXXLaboratory Serving Professional Requirements; Medical, Dental, Medical SuppliesXXXXXXXLaunderette or Washerteria (Self-service laundries)SEXXXLocksmith, GunsmithXXXXMedical or Dental Clinic and similar professional uses including: accounting, attorney, architects, land surveyors, insurance, real estate, engineering firms and uses of a similar service oriented concern. Provided that no window display of products shall be allowed. XXXXXXMotelXXXMusic Teaching StudioSESEXXXXNeighborhood Dry cleaning Plant, Laundry Pick-up Station: (Amended and adopted 12-5-02) SEXXXa) The dry cleaning plant and its operation shall meet the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.; andb) The dry cleaning plant shall serve not more than one pick-up and delivery station exclusive of one occupying the same premises as the plant; andc) The dry cleaning plant shall be designed to operate in a manner that will not emit smoke, odor, or objectionable waste material and which will not produce noise that will carry beyond the walls of the building occupied by such plant; and fuel for operation of equipment shall be smokeless fuel; andd) The applicant for the dry cleaning plant shall certify in writing, at the time of application, that all the above conditions will be met. Newspaper or Magazine Publishing and DistributionXSEXXNightclub, LoungeXXXOffice Equipment Sales and ServiceXXXXPawn ShopXXXPersonal Service Shop; such as hair care services and services of a similar nature.SESEXXXXPest Control; providing no outside storage other than within an M-1 or M-2 district.XSEXXPhotography StudioSESEXXXXProfessional OfficeXXXXXXRadio StudioXXXXXXXRailroad or Bus Passenger StationXXXXXRailroad Freight StationXXXXResidential Trailer Sales Room and Sales LotXXRestaurants and Food Catering Service (For E-R: if in conjunction with or secondary to an approved primary use) XXXXXXRetail Auto Parts and Tire StoreXXXXRetail Sales and Services not elsewhere classifiedSEXXXXXShell Home Display YardXXShrubbery SalesXXXSpecialty Shops, such as gift shops, jewelry stores, jewelry repair and stores of a similar nature. XXXXTaxidermistXXSEXTaxi OfficeXXXXXTelecommunications TowerSESESESESESEXXTelegraph or Messenger ServiceXXXXTelevision StationXXXXXTrade SchoolsXXXTravel Trailer or Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park; provided that:Xa) No travel trailer park shall be located except with direct access to a designated highway, or major or secondary street, with a minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet for that portion used for entrance and exit. No entrances or exit shall be through a residential district, or shall require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district.b) The minimum lot area park shall be 3 acres.c) Spaces in a travel trailer park may be used by travel trailers provided they shall be rented by the day or week only, and an occupant of such space shall remain in the same trailer park for a period of not more than 30 days.d) Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a trailer park are permitted as accessory uses in any district in which trailer parks are allowed provided such establishments and the parking area primarily related to their operations shall not occupy more than 10% of the area of the park.e) No space shall be so located that any part intended for occupancy for sleeping purposes shall be within 20 feet of the exterior property line.f) In addition to meeting the above requirements, the travel trailer park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval of the Lowndes County Health Department. Utility Trailer Rentals and Rent-allsXXSEXXVending Machines; located out-of-doors subject to yard and setback requirements for the respective districts. XXXXXXWHOLESALING and INDUSTRIAL USESAcid Storage and ManufacturingXFeed, Grain, or Fertilizer Wholesaling and StorageXXXFreezer Locker Service, Ice StorageXXXGreenhouse and Plant Nursery (commercial) Heavy equipment allowed only in M-1 and M-2 districts. XXXXHeavy Manufacturing; any manufacturing, packaging, processing, or handling of materials provided that any uses such as the manufacturing of cement, corrosive acids, bone distillation, drop forge industry, fat rendering, fertilizer manufacturing, organic materials reduction, meat processing plants, and the like which produce noise, odors, dust, fumes, fire hazards, or other nuisance feature shall be set back not less than 500 feet from any M-2 district boundary. XJunk Yard or Auto Graveyard; provided that:Xa) Minimum of 3 acres;b) Front yard setback increased 50 feet over requirements in Section 5-2;c) Cannot be adjacent to R-E, R-25, R-15, R-10, DR-10, R-6S, R-6, R-H, PRD or R-P zones; andd) An 8-foot high solid fence or wall shall be erected to screen the storage yard from view from the street. Light Manufacturing:SEXXa) Appliance and electronic device assembly plant including the manufacturing of parts for appliances and electronic devices; andb) Manufacturing of food, cosmetic and pharmaceutical products, but not including fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and rendering plants; andc) Machine shop and related activities; andd) Construction of signs, including painted signs; ande) Cooperage; andf) Bottling and canning plants; andg) Light sheet metal products such as ventilating ducts and eaves; andh) Ice manufacturing; andi) Laundry, cleaning, and dyeing plants; andj) Musical instruments, toys, novelties, and similar products; andk) Ceramic products; provided that kilns shall only be by gas or electricity; [and]l) Assembly of products from previously prepared materials; andm) Tinsmith and roofing services; andn) Other manufacturing processing, packaging, or handling of a similar nature which shall not omit or produce more smoke, noise, odor, dust, vibration or fumes than the uses listed herein. Lumber Yard, Coal Storage Yard, or storage not specifically listed in this column; such yards if within an M-1 district shall be enclosed by a fence and no storage shall be permitted outside such fence. XXPetroleum Bulk Plant (Storage and wholesale distribution)XXPlaning or Saw MillXRailroad Classification and Repair YardXRaising or Sale of Livestock and Fowl; except otherwise permitted. (Refer to "animals")XSanitary Landfill or Incineration (private)XXTruck TerminalXXXWarehousing (not related to sales on the premises) - Storage facilities for personal property other than commercial warehousing or storage is permitted in C-C, C-H districts by SE provided there is not outside storage. SESESEXXWholesaling of a Light Commercial Nature when operated in conjunction with or as part of a retail outlet. SEXXXWholesaling (not covered in other parts of this list).SEXXMISCELLANEOUSAdult Entertainment Establishment; provided that:Xa) No adult entertainment establishment shall advertise its location by signs more than 6 inches in height placed on the front of the building which shall state the name of the business and hours of operation only.b) No adult entertainment establishment shall advertise its location with flashing or other kinds of lights, signs, banners, or other devices, intended to attract the attention of the general public to its location.c) Adult book stores shall maintain all windows in a clear unobstructed manner so as to provide an open and unobstructed view throughout the interior of the book store.d) Adult movie houses shall maintain all windows in a clear and unobstructed manner, so that the entire reception area, lobby, ticket sales area of the theater is open and unobstructed to view by the public from all adjoining public thoroughfares and rights-of-way.e) Adult service establishments (bath houses, etc.) shall maintain all windows in a clear and unobstructed manner, so that the entire reception area, lobby, ticket sales area of the service establishment is open and unobstructed to view by the public from all adjoining public rights-of-way. Armory; for meetings and training organizations.XXXCarnival, Rodeo, Horse Show, or Athletic Event, Community Fair or Other Event of interest to the public XXXXPrison, Correctional Rehabilitation FacilitySEXXReligious Meetings held in a tent or other temporary structure not to exceed 30 days.XXXTemporary Buildings and Storage of Materials (in conjunction with construction of a building) on a lot where construction is taking place or on adjacent lots such temporary uses to be terminated upon completion of construction. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX A = Allowed by SE if located on the ground floor. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 11-6-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-71.) (Environmental Resource Zoning District adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-9-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-56.)     Development Standards. Within the various zoning districts as indicated on the "Zoning Map of the City of Valdosta, Georgia," no building or structure, excluding all signs other than the advertising signs, shall be constructed or erected except as indicated in the following schedule: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDZONING DISTRICTE-RR-ER-25R-15R-10DR-10R6-SR-6R-HR-PO-PC-NC-CC-HC-DC-AM-1M-2Minimum Gross Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit (Sq. Ft.)N/AN/AN/A600eff/1-BR800 >1BRN/AN/AN/A- Single (Detached3,0002,3001,2001,0001,000800800800800800800- Single (Attached)------800800800- Two-family (Duplex)----1,000800800800-800- Multi-Family------+++—-+++-800Minimum Lot Area For Development (Sq. Ft.)None43,560(1acre)25,00015,00010,00010,000++6,0006,000++++6,0006,000++++6,0006,000NoneNoneNone1AcreNoneNoneMaximum Unit Density (# residential units/acre)N/A11.72.94.3++7.2 7.2 (Sgl)12(mf) 7.2 12(dup) 7.2 (Sgl.)12(mf) 7.2 12(mf)N/AN/A12(mf)N/AN/AN/AMinimum Lot Width (Feet)60 150125100808060 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 None150NoneNoneMinimum Front Yard Setback (Feet from Centerline of Right-of-way)- Major/Secondary Streets80 *100 *100 *80 *80 *80 *80 *80 *80 *80 *8080 *100 *80 *None100 *100 *100 *- Collector Streets65 *85 *85 *65 *65 *65 *65 *65 *35 *65 *6565 *70 * 65 *None70 70 * 70 * - Residential Streets55 *75 *75 *55 *55 *55 *55 *55 *35 *55 *5555 *N/AN/ANoneN/A55 *55 *Minimum Side Yard Setback (Feet)None20 1010101088 +88 +8NoneNoneNoneNone40NoneNoneMinimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet)124030 30 30 30 30 30 20 30 30 30 1212None4012NoneMaximum Building Height (Feet)None **353535353535None **60 None **None **None **None **None **None **None **None **None **Maximum Building Area (s.f.) (non-residential) (square feet per parcel or per commercial center) NoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNone8,000NoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNone * Plus ½ any amount which the right-of-way width exceeds 50 feet for residential streets, 60 feet for collector streets, and 80 feet for Major and Secondary Streets. ** The minimum distance from other property lines to any building over 35 feet in height shall be increased one foot for every two feet (or part of two feet) of building height greater than 35 feet. + Except 20 feet for multi-family with three or more floors. ++ Single-family Detached - 10,000 Sq. Ft. - 4.3 Units Per Acre; Two-family (Duplex - 13,000 Sq. Ft. - 6.6 Units Per Acre) +++ Two Bedroom and Larger: 800 Sq. Ft.; One Bedroom (not to exceed 25 percent total units) 600 Sq. Ft. ++++ Two-family (Duplex): 9,000 Sq. Ft. lot minimum; Three Family (Triplex): 12,000 Sq. Ft. lot minimum (Environmental Resource (E-R) Zoning District adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-9-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-56.) 
SECTION 6. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN USES 
6-1. - Home Occupation.     A home occupation as defined by this ordinance shall be governed by the following requirements:     6-1.1. Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the principal dwelling, unless the occupation requires off-site work, in which case only administrative functions may be conducted at the premises.     6-1.2. Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation.     6-1.3. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the dwelling.     6-1.4. Except as otherwise stated by this Section, there shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation, including but not limited to, outside storage of materials or equipment, nor shall such items be displayed in a manner to be viewed from the outside of the dwelling.     6-1.5. No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted.     6-1.6. No machinery or equipment causing noise, smoke, odor, vibration, electrical interference, or other objectionable condition may be used, nor may the occupation otherwise constitute a nuisance in the neighborhood.     6-1.7. Instruction in music and similar subjects shall be limited to two students at a time.     6-1.8. No more than two vehicles used in conjunction with the home occupation shall be allowed; provided that any vehicles of 7,500 pounds or greater gross vehicle weight capacity (gvwc) shall be parked in the rear yard.     6-1.9. Unless otherwise specified, there shall be no more than one client or customer on the premises at any one time.     6-1.10. Signs for Home Occupations shall be limited to one.     6-1.11. No variances shall be considered to the above criteria and any occupation that does not meet the above criteria shall be considered a Home Business, if it meets the Home Business restrictions. (Adopted by Mayor/Council June 10, 2004, P.C. File # VA-2004-24.) 
6-2. - Home Business.     A home business as defined by this ordinance shall be allowed by Special Exception only, and be governed by the following restrictions:     6-2.1. Home businesses shall conform to the restrictions of the Home Occupation regulations Sections 6-1.3, 6-1.5, and 6-1.8 as it pertains to the property.     6-2.2. Accessory buildings used for home businesses shall be subject to all applicable accessory structure standards.     6-2.3. A sign for a Home Business shall be allowed as a matter of right provided that the sign is no more than two square feet in size and is mounted to the wall of the primary building. Other types of signage may be allowed by Special Exception; provided that the total number of signs does not equal more than one per Home Business. No sign shall be approved that is larger than two square feet, except where located on an arterial street where a sign up to 12 square feet may be approved. No variances shall be considered to this subsection. (Adopted by Mayor/Council June 10, 2004, P.C. File # VA-2004-24.) 
6.3[6-3]. - Planned Development. A.	Master Plan. The developer of the proposed planned development shall file a master plan along with the planned development rezoning request with the Planning Commission. Being a rezoning, the process shall follow the same process for rezonings as prescribed by this ordinance except that Planned Development requests shall require an additional month for review prior to being heard by the Planning Commission. Prior to submission, however, PD requests must have been reviewed by all departments including Fire, Engineering, Health, Utilities, Building Inspections, Landscaping, Planning, etc. Any application will be deemed incomplete if the applicant does not show where each of these agencies has reviewed the proposal. Said master plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 1)	An attached statement describing why standard zoning districts are insufficient and how the proposed development conforms to those parameters and ideals set forth in Section 4-1 of this ordinance. 2)	Name or Names of the Proposed Development. Name or names and addresses of the owners and designers of the site of the master plan and his/her seal. 3)	Date, appropriate north arrow and scale.4)	The boundary line of the tract to be developed drawn accurately to scale and with accurate lineal and angular dimensions. 5)	A map to an appropriate scale showing the location of the development.6)	Contours with a minimum vertical interval of one foot referred to sea level datum shall be provided for both existing and proposed topography. 7)	The location and extent of existing and proposed public rights-of-way, easements and water and drainage courses within the tract. 8)	The location and type of existing buildings and structures proposed to be retained or removed and an indication of the use for each retained building. 9)	The general location of proposed buildings and an indication of the use for each building.10)	Proposed lot layout in sketch form.11)	Dwelling unit density (not necessary for PCD).12)	Minimum standards for interior lot development including setbacks, distances between buildings, etc. 13)	General architectural elevation and proposed materials to be used.14)	The percentage of development maintained as public space (as defined by this ordinance) and impervious surface. 15)	Public transportation facilities or provisions (if any).16)	Landscape and buffer plan.17)	Sidewalks as required by the City of Valdosta Subdivision Regulations.Nothing in this subsection shall be misconstrued as preventing the City Council from requiring more stringent design standards. No variances to this section shall be allowed. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council 5-6-04 - P.C. File # VA-2004-20) B.	Plan Amendments. Any increase in density or intensity of development or other major change shall constitute a plan amendment and shall require resubmittal of the Master Plan. Minor changes to the design of an approved planned development and net decreases in overall density or intensity may be submitted for administrative approval. Said changes will require review and approval by all necessary agencies. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.)     6-3.1. Planned Residential Development (PRD). A.	Purpose and Intent. The PRD district is intended to allow flexible site planning and building arrangements for both single and multi-family residential developments under a unified plan so that innovative land planning methods may be utilized which fosters natural resource conservation and neighborhood cohesiveness as well as neo-traditional developments. This may permit buildings to be clustered or arranged in an unconventional manner to maximize public space, create a pedestrian scale and incorporate other public benefits. In this district, smaller lots than would otherwise be permitted under traditional zoning districts may be allowed; however, the purpose is not merely to allow smaller lots or reduce development requirements but to achieve other goals including the protection of sensitive environmental, historic, or aesthetic resources as well as the provision of site amenities such as parks, public space, walking trails, etc. The PRD district is not intended to encourage greater density of development, but rather to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning techniques which result in quality residential patterns that conserve and create public space, reduce vehicle trips and provide stable developments that enhance the surrounding area. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.) B.	Allowed Uses. All dwelling types shall be allowed in the PRD district including manufactured homes. Any use requiring a Special Exception within the R-6 zoning district shall be processed as a Special Exception. No recreation centers, schools, churches or other institutional type uses shall be permitted. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.) C.	Development Standards. A planned residential development shall conform to the following restrictions and development standards. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.) Maximum Impervious Surface70%Minimum Public Space30%Minimum Exterior Setbacks*30' from all property lines, including the right-of-way.Minimum Screening Along Exterior Tract BoundariesSee Section 3-18 of this ordinance and the Valdosta Tree and Landscape Ordinance [Chapter 62 of the Valdosta Code].  * There is no minimum setback for interior lot lines, except as otherwise indicated within the approved master plan. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.)     6-3.2. Planned Commercial Development (PCD). A.	Purpose and Intent. The PCD district is intended to allow flexible site planning and building arrangements for business and commercial developments under a unified plan so that innovative land planning methods may be utilized which foster natural resource conservation and reduce traffic congestion. This may permit buildings to be clustered or arranged in an unconventional manner to maximize public space, create a pedestrian scale and incorporate other public benefits. In this district, small[er] lots than would otherwise be permitted under traditional zoning districts may be allowed; however, the purpose is not merely to allow smaller lots or reduce development requirements but to achieve other goals including the protection of sensitive environmental, historic or aesthetic resources as well as the provision of site amenities such as parks, public space, walking trails, etc. The PCD district is not intended to encourage greater density of development, but rather to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning techniques which result in commercial development patterns that conserve and create public space, reduce vehicle trips and provide quality developments that enhance the surrounding area. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.) B.	Allowed Uses. All types of commercial and office uses shall be allowed within a PCD. Any specific use that would normally require Special Exception approval in all of the office and commercial zoning districts shall require such review within a PCD if not included within the original master plan. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.) C.	Development Standards. Minimum Exterior Setbacks*30' from all property lines, including the right-of-wayMaximum Impervious Surface70%Minimum Public Space30%Minimum Screening along Exterior Tract BoundariesSee Section 3-18 of this ordinance and the Valdosta Tree and Landscape Ordinance [Chapter 62 of the Valdosta Code].  [*] There is no minimum setback for interior lot lines, except as otherwise indicated within the approved master plan. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.)     6-3.3. Planned Mixed Use Development (PMD). A.	PMD Purpose and Intent. The PMD district is intended to allow flexible site planning and building arrangements for commercial, office and residential uses under a unified plan which fosters natural resource conservation and reduces congestion. This may permit buildings and uses to be clustered or arranged in an unconventional manner to maximize public space, create a pedestrian scale and incorporate other public benefits. In this district, smaller lots than would otherwise be allowed under traditional zoning districts may be allowed; however, the purpose is not merely to allow smaller lots or reduce development requirements but to achieve other goals including the protection of sensitive environmental, historic, or aesthetic resources as well as the provision of site amenities such as parks, public space, walking trails, etc. The PMD district is not intended to encouraged greater density of development, but rather to facilitate compatible commercial and residential uses and provide quality developments that enhance the surrounding area. This district may also be utilized to foster the adaptive reuse of existing buildings. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.) B.	Allowed Uses. The PMD district shall allow all types of uses except those allowed only within the C-A, M-1, and M-2 districts. General use classifications, such as residential and commercial, shall be indicated within the master plan. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.) C.	Development Standards. Maximum Impervious Surface65%Minimum Public Space35%Minimum Exterior Setbacks*30' from all property lines, including the right-of-wayMinimum Screening along Exterior Tract BoundariesSee Section 3-18 of this ordinance and the Valdosta Tree and Landscape Ordinance [Chapter 62 of the Valdosta Code].*  * There is no minimum setback for interior lot lines, except as otherwise indicated within the approved master plan. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 5-6-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-20.) 
6-4. - Historic Residential (R-H) Neighborhoods.     This district will be permitted provided it is in accord with the following:     6-4.1. Requirements for Eligibility. a)	The neighborhood must be located within the Historic District.b)	The majority of buildings or structures within the neighborhood must be rated as a historical building.     6-4.2. Designation as a Historic Residential Neighborhood. In order for a neighborhood to receive the R-H designation, a majority of the owners shall petition the Planning Commission to have their neighborhood rezoned. Such petition shall include a map indicating the proposed boundaries of the R-H District and indicate which buildings or structures have been designated historic by the Board of Review. Also, to be included shall be the names and addresses of all property owners supporting the petition. The residents shall submit the petition for rezoning two weeks prior to the scheduled meeting to allow for complete review prior to said meeting. Upon approval by the Planning Commission, the Planning Director shall apply for rezoning on behalf of the Planning Commission.     6-4.3. Historic Residential Neighborhood Land Use Determination. Prior to approval by the Planning Commission of a petition requesting the designation of a Historic Neighborhood, the Planning Commission, in conjunction with the neighborhood association, shall determine the allowable future land use for the proposed area. Such land use plan shall be graphically depicted in the form of a map which shall be drawn at a scale of one" = 400' or greater. Each parcel shall be indicated and described by street number and lot number. Said land use map shall be required as part of the zoning application filed with the Zoning Administrator.     6-4.4. Development Standards for R-H District. a)	Protective Maintenance of Historic Buildings. Historic buildings shall be maintained to meet the requirements of the Minimum Housing Code and the Building Code. Where buildings are irreparable, or a health hazard to the neighborhood, or detract from the visual context of a neighborhood, the Director of Inspections shall serve notice to owners of said structure requiring the demolition of such. In addition, owners of said structure shall make such repairs as will secure the building and upon failure to do so, the Director of Inspections shall cause such building or portion thereof to be secured in which even the cost thereof shall be charged to the owner of the premises and collected in a manner provided by law. b)	Not Historic Buildings. The construction of a new building or structure, and the moving, reconstruction, alteration, major maintenance, or repair involving a change materially affecting the external appearance of any existing non-rated building, structure, or appurtenance thereof within a Historic Residential Neighborhood, shall be generally of such form, proportion, mass, configuration, building material, texture, and location on a lot as will be compatible with other buildings in the Historic Residential Neighborhood, and particularly with buildings designated as Historic and with places to which it is visually related. c)	Visual Compatibility Factors. Within a Historic Residential Neighborhood, new construction and existing buildings and structures and appurtenances thereto which are moved, reconstructed, materially altered, repaired, or changed in color shall be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which they are visually related generally in terms of the following factors: 1)	Height. The height of proposed buildings shall be visually compatible with adjacent buildings. 2)	Proportion of Building's Front Facade. The relationship of the width of building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible to buildings, squares, and places to which it is visually related. 3)	Proportion of Openings Within the Facility. The relationship of the width of windows to height of windows in a building shall be visually compatible with buildings and places to which the building is visually related. 4)	Rhythm of Solids to Voids in Front Facades. The relationship of solids to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually compatible with buildings, and places to which it is visually related. 5)	Rhythm of Buildings on Streets. The relationship of buildings to open space between it and adjoining buildings shall be visually compatible to the buildings, and places to which it is visually related. 6)	Rhythm of Entrance and/or Porch Projection. The relationship of entrances and porch projections to sidewalks of buildings, and places shall be visually related. 7)	Relationship of Materials and Texture. The relationship of materials and texture of the facade of a building shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in the buildings to which it is visually related. 8)	Roof Shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related. 9)	Walls of Continuity. Appurtenances of a building such as walls, wrought iron, fences, evergreen landscape masses, building facades shall, if necessary, form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street, to insure visual compatibility of the buildings and places to which it is visually related. 10)	Scale of a Building. The size of a building, the building mass of a building in relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches, and balconies shall be visually compatible with the buildings, and places to which it is visually related. d)	Parking. 1)	Within any historic residential neighborhood, curbside vehicular parking will not be allowed. This is to say, all residents of a building shall park all vehicles within the property boundaries appurtenant to said building. 2)	The number of parking spaces for property located within a historic residential neighborhood shall conform to the requirements stated in Section 7-8 of this ordinance.     [6-4.5.] Family Day Care Homes and Group Day Care Homes. [Family day care homes and group day care homes] shall conform to the following regulations: Number of Children1-6 7-12 13-18Site PlanNo additional requirementsConceptual Site Plan required at time of application.Conceptual site plan required at time of application.ParkingRequirementsNo additional requirementsOne space for each employee plus one space for every four children kept.One space for each employee plus one space for every four children kept.Parking andDrivewayAdequate ingress and egress from the street required.A circular drive is required unless extenuating circumstances exist, in which case an alternative proposal will be considered provided it meets the intent of the requirement and ensures equal or greater safety for pick-up and drop-off as well as ingress and egress and is approved by the City Engineer prior to submittal of applications. A circular drive is required unless extenuating circumstances exist, in which case an alternative proposal will be considered provided it meets the intent of the requirement and ensures equal or greater safety for pick-up and drop-off as well as ingress and egress and is approved by the City Engineer prior to submittal of applications. Roadway FrontageNo additional requirementsNo additional requirementsProperty must be located on or adjacent to an urban minor or principal arterial or urban collector as designated by the City of Valdosta's Major Thoroughfare Plan. Pick-up and Drop-offPick-up and drop-off shall be conducted on the property and not in the public right-of-way.Pick-up and drop-off shall be conducted on the property and not in the public right-of-way.Pick-up and drop-off shall be conducted on the property and not in the public right-of-way. (Note: Section 6-5 was adopted by Valdosta Mayor and Council on 9-11-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-44.) 
6-6. - Manufactured and Mobile Homes.     6-6.1. No mobile homes shall be permitted within the city limits of Valdosta.     6-6.2. Singlewide manufactured homes shall be restricted to Manufactured Home Parks.     6-6.3. All new manufactured homes shall be installed as required by O.C.G.A., §§ 8-2-160 and 8-2-164. For the purposes of administration of this section, installation shall mean the construction of a foundation system and the placement or erection of a manufactured home on the foundation system. This also includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing or anchoring such home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such home. Said installation shall be performed by a person who is able to obtain a license pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-164.     6-6.4. Manufactured homes may only be used as a dwelling unit.     6-6.5. A curtain wall, also known as skirting or underpinning, shall be constructed of masonry material and shall be un-pierced, except for required minimum ventilation and access so that the area under the home is enclosed to the ground level. Said access shall remain closed when not being used for that purpose.     6-6.6. After placement on the lot and before occupancy, all tongues, axles, transporting lights and other towing apparatus are to be removed from the site.     6-6.7. Utility meters shall be mounted directly to the manufactured home, to a pedestal, or to a pole as required by the building and electrical codes as adopted by the City of Valdosta.     6-6.8. At all exterior doors there shall be a landing as required by the building codes as adopted by the City of Valdosta. Said landing shall be constructed in a manner as to be permanently affixed to the ground.     6-6.9. All new manufactured homes shall be situated on the lot so that the conventional front of the home faces the front yard as defined by this ordinance.     6-6.10. All new manufactured homes must meet the minimum size requirements for the district in which they are to be located. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 12-18-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-77.) 
SECTION 7. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND SERVICE REQUIREMENTS 
7-1. - Scope of Provisions.     Except as provided in this section, no application for a building permit shall be approved, unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvements, or use, a plat plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. These provisions shall not apply to the C-D district. 
7-2. - Parking Spaces May Not Be Reduced.     Off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum required number for the use or facility to which they are assigned. 
7-3. - Drainage, Construction, and Maintenance.     All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or public streets and shall be constructed of asphalt, concrete, solid brick pavers, or any other material approved by the City Engineer with concurrence from the Fire Chief and the Public Works Director where applicable. All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the expense of the owners thereof, in a clean, orderly, dust free and undeteriorated condition.     7-3.1. Requirements for Unpaved Parking. Unpaved parking areas may be approved by the City Engineer with conditions including, but not limited to, the following:     7-3.1.1. Unpaved spaces shall be located on the periphery of parking areas, in locations that will receive less use than those paved and more remotely located to the use served.     7-3.1.2. Stormwater management facilities shall be provided for all vehicular use areas, whether paved or unpaved. The developer must demonstrate that stormwater management facilities can be expanded to accommodate future required paving.     7-3.1.3. Use of the unpaved parking area shall not cause the introduction of sediment or debris onto city rights-of-way and easements.     7-3.2. Inspection. At least six months after a final certificate of occupancy is issued, an inspection will be made by the City Engineer or designee. If findings indicate that the unpaved spaces are in good condition or are infrequently used, such unpaved spaces may remained unpaved. If findings show that the spaces receive as much use as the paved spaces, or have deteriorated, such unpaved spaces shall be paved within 90 days of written notice to the owner of the property. If paving is deemed necessary by the City Engineer, the property owner may be required to expand the stormwater management facilities (as provided in Section 7-3.1.2). 
7-4. - Separation from Walkways, Sidewalks, Property Lines and Streets.     All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, property lines, and streets by concrete curbing. Curbing located in parking areas shall be constructed a minimum of three feet from private and/or public property lines so that parked vehicles will not project over such lines. 
7-5. - Parking Area Design.     Parking stalls shall have a minimum width of 8½ feet and length of 20 feet. There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. Interior driveways shall be at least 24 feet wide where used with 90-degree angle parking, at least 18 feet wide where used with 60-degree angle parking, at least 12 feet wide where used with 45-degree parking, and at least 12 feet wide where used with parallel parking; or where there is no parking interior driveways shall be at least ten feet wide for one-way traffic movement and at least 20 feet wide for two-way traffic movement. 
7-6. - Joint Parking Facilities.     Two or more neighboring uses, of the same or different types, may provide joint facilities; provided that the number of off-street parking spaces are not less than the sum of the individual requirements. 
7-7. - Pavement Markings and Signs.     Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and pavement directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
7-8. - Number of Parking Spaces.     In order to assure a proper and uniform development of public parking areas throughout the area of jurisdiction of this ordinance, to relieve traffic congestion on the streets, and to minimize any detrimental effects on adjacent properties, off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained as called for in the following schedule. For any use or class of use not mentioned in this schedule, the requirements shall be the same as a similar use as mentioned herein.     Parking requirements for additions to existing uses shall be based upon the new addition even if the existing use is deficient. These regulations shall apply to all districts except C-D district. USEMINIMUM # PARKING SPACESREQUIREDApartment and Multi-family dwelling1½ spaces for each efficiency/studio or one-bedroom dwelling unit, one space per bedroom for each dwelling unit with two or more bedrooms, plus visitor parking equal to one space per ten dwelling units — minimum of three visitor parking spaces. Auditorium, stadium, assembly hall, gymnasium, theater, community recreation center, church (a) One space per four fixed seats in largest assembly room or area, or(b) One space for each 40 square feet of floor area available for the accommodation of movable seats in the largest assembly room, or combination of fixed and movable seats; or(c) One space per each 150 square feet of gross floor area; whichever is greatest. Automobile fueling stationOne space (in addition to service area) for each pump and grease rack, but not less than six spaces. Automobile sales and repair, service stations, and auto washerteriasSame as #3 above [automobile fueling station] plus one space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area of the shop or washerteria. Bowling AlleyFour spaces per alley plus requirements for any other use associated with the establishment such as a restaurant, etc. Club or LodgeOne space for each two employees plus one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area within the main assembly area plus additional spaces for other uses permitted within the premises. Combined UsesParking spaces shall be the total of the space required for each separate use established by this schedule. Dance SchoolOne space per 150 square feet of gross floor area plus safe and convenient loading and unloading of students. Fraternity or SororityOne parking space for each two residents and one space for each resident manager.Golf CourseTwo spaces for each hole, plus requirements for any other use associated with the golf course. Halfway House/Transition HouseOne space for each employee plus one space for every two residents. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 8-10-06, P.C. File # VA-2006-38.) High Schools, Trade Schools, Colleges, and UniversitiesOne space for each two teachers, employees and administrative personnel plus safe and convenient loading of students plus five spaces for each classroom. Hospital or Care HomeOne space for each patient.HotelOne space for each guest room, suite, or unit plus any of the spaces otherwise required for accessory uses. Indoor and Outdoor Recreational Areas (commercial) YMCA, and Similar Uses(a) One space for each 150 square feet of gross floor, building, ground area, or combination devoted to such use; or(b) One space for each vehicle used directly for the conduct of the business. Industrial or Manufacturing Establishment or WarehouseOne parking space for each two employees on largest shift plus one space for each company vehicle. Kindergarten and Nursery SchoolsOne space for each employee plus safe and convenient loading of students.MotelOne space for each unit plus all of spaces required for accessory uses.Office, Professional Building, or Similar UseOne space for each 300 square feet of the gross floor area.One- and Two-Family DwellingOne space per each unit (residential driveways will satisfy this need).Personal Service EstablishmentOne space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area.Restaurant or Place Dispensing Food, Drink, or RefreshmentsEquivalent of six spaces per ten seats (0.6 spaces per seat) with minimum of five parking spaces provided. Drive-thru facilities shall accommodate a minimum of five cars for each stacking lane. Retail Stores of AllOne space per 150 square feet gross floor area for the first 20,000 square feet, plus one space per 200 square feet for the next portion up to 100,000 square feet, plus one space per 250 square feet for the next portion up to 200,000 square feet, plus one space per 300 square feet for any portion over 200,000 square feet. Schools, ElementaryOne space for each teacher, one space for each two employees and administrative personnel, and one for each classroom, plus safe and convenient loading and unloading of students. Shopping CenterOne space per 200 square feet gross floor area for the first 50,000 square feet, plus one space per 250 square feet for the next portion up to 150,000 square feet, plus one space per 300 square feet for any portion over 150,000 square feet. Swimming PoolOne space for each 200 square feet of water surface area plus requirements for additional uses in association with the establishments such as a restaurant, etc. Trailer ParkOne space for each trailer stall plus one space for each two employees.Wholesale EstablishmentOne space for each employee plus sufficient space to accommodate vehicles used in the conduct of the business. Adult Entertainment EstablishmentsOne parking space per 100 square feet of gross building area or one for each three customer seats, whichever is greater.  (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 11-6-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-71.) 
7-9. - Minimum Number of Loading Spaces Required.     Industrial, wholesale, and retail operations shall provide loading space as follows:     7-9.1. Spaces Appropriate to Functions. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as appropriate to the functions and scope of operation of individual or groups of buildings and uses.     7-9.2. Design of Loading Spaces. Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park and unpark vehicles for loading and unloading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way.     7-9.3. Ingress and Egress. Ingress and egress to off-street loading spaces shall conform to driveway entrance regulations of the City of Valdosta. 
7-10. - Curb Cut Requirements.     In any district as described below where the lowering or cutting away of curbs, or the placement of asphalt and/or driveway pipe on non-curbed sections for the purpose of ingress and egress is required to the property, such curb cuts or asphalt width shall be placed through the entire right-of-way and shall be subject to the following provisions:     7-10.1. Residential Curb Cuts. R-E, R-25, R-15, R-10, DR-10, R-6, R-6S, R-H, PRD, O-P, and R-P Zoning Areas (excluding multi-family development):     7-10.1.1. No more than two combined entrances and exits shall be allowed any parcel of property, the front of which is less than 200 feet on any one street. Additional entrances or exits for parcels having a frontage of excess of 200 feet shall be permitted at the rate of one entrance/exit for each additional 100 feet.     7-10.1.2. At street intersections (corner lots), no curb cuts shall be located within 25 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or such lines extended; or within 15 feet of the intersection of two property lines or such curb lines extended whichever is more restrictive. On major, secondary or collector streets, no driveway shall be within 70 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or curb lines extended.     7-10.1.3. The distance between any two curb cuts on the same side of the street shall be not less than ten feet. Said distance shall be measured between the point of tangency of the curb return radius and the established curb of the abutting street.     7-10.1.4. All driveways shall be constructed so as to have at least five feet from any property line (excluding right-of-way), except that a curb return may become tangent to a curb line at a point where such property line extends with the curb line.     7-10.1.5. The maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 24 feet measured at the right-of-way line.     7-10.1.6. The sum of the two curb return radius for any curb cut shall not exceed 15 feet.     7-10.1.7. When development on sites where existing curb cuts are abandoned and access is no longer afforded due to parking lots, buildings or other permitted structures, the driveway shall be removed, the sidewalk (if existing) shall be replaced, the curb and gutter shall be replaced, fill dirt backfilled to its natural state; where it is a piped driveway to a dirt or paved street, said pipe shall be removed, asphalt removed and the shoulders and ditch regraded to its natural pre-existing state.     7-10.2. Commercial and Multi-Family Curb Cuts.     7-10.2.1. No more than two combined entrances or exits shall be allowed any parcel or frontage which is less than 300 feet on any one street. On parcels less than 150 feet, only one entrance shall be allowed provided it is a two-way driveway (two one-way driveways shall be allowed in lieu of the one two-way). Additional entrances or exits for parcels of property having a frontage in excess of 300 feet shall be permitted at the rate of one entrance-exit for each additional 150 feet.     7-10.2.2. No driveway shall be located closer than 150 feet of an existing driveway on an abutting lot. Existing lots of record less than 150 feet frontage shall be allowed one combined entrance/exit not to exceed 24 feet at right-of-way line.     7-10.2.3. At street intersections (corner lots), no curb cuts shall be located within 70 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or within 60 feet of the intersection of two property lines where such lines extended whichever is more restrictive. Within the CD (Downtown Commercial) zoning district, Mayor/Council, at their discretion, may grant a variance to this requirement.     7-10.2.4. All driveways shall be constructed so as to be at least 12.5 feet from any property line except that a curb return may become tangent to a curb line at a point where the property line extended intersects such curb line.     7-10.2.5. Maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 35 feet measured at the right-of-way line; minimum two-way shall be 24 feet at right-of-way line with a maximum of 12½-foot radius. No two driveways on the same property shall be closer than 25 feet.     7-10.2.6. The maximum width of any curb cut in a C-H, C-C, M-1 or M-2 zone shall not exceed 35 feet at the right-of-way line, except as set forth in Section 7-10.2.2.     7-10.2.7. The sum of the two curb return radius for any one curb cut shall not be less than 25 feet, nor greater than 40 feet.     7-10.2.8. When development on sites where existing curb cuts are abandoned and access is no longer afforded due to parking lots, buildings, or other permitted structures, the driveway shall be removed, the sidewalk (if existing) shall be replaced, the curb and gutter shall be replaced, fill dirt backfilled to its natural state; where it is a piped driveway to a dirt or paved street, said pipe shall be removed, asphalt removed and the shoulders and ditch regraded to its natural pre-existing state.     7-10.3. Planned Residential Development Curb Cuts. (PRD-15, PRD-10 and PRD-6 Zoning Areas.)     7-10.3.1. No more than one combined entrance and exit shall be allowed any parcel of property, the total area of which is less than or equal to two acres. Additional entrances for parcels having areas greater than two acres will be granted at the rate of one combined entrance and exit per two acres.     7-10.3.2. At street intersections (corner lots), no curb cuts shall be located within 70 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or within 60 feet of the intersection of two property lines where such lines extended whichever is more restrictive.     7-10.3.3. The maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 24 feet measured at the right-of-way line.     7-10.3.4. The sum of the two curb return radius for any one curb cut shall not exceed 15 feet.     7-10.3.5. All driveways shall be constructed so as to be at least 12½ feet from any property line except that a curb return may become tangent to a curb line at a point where the property line extended intersects such curb line. 
7-11. - Solid Waste Container Pad.     All site plans for apartments and commercial buildings shall include a solid waste container paid that has easy and safe access for the front end loader. The number of pads shall be based on the following criteria, if apartments: 0.2 cubic yards per unit; minimum container shall be four cubic yards. 
7-12. - Water Meter Locations.     Where authorized on private property, water meters and boxes shall not be placed closer than five feet from any building structure, nor placed in any driveway, parking stall or other location where vehicular traffic could traverse across. Furthermore, meter boxes shall be located so that storm water from the building or property shall not drain into or across it. 
SECTION 8. - SIGN REGULATIONS 
8-1. - Purpose and Intent.     8-1.1. In General. The regulation of location, size, placement, and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities in the City of Valdosta without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the community, to take advantage of the beauty of the community's natural environment, and to protect property values therein. Signs are recognized as a development standard in keeping with other development standards such as uses permitted, building setbacks, minimum parking requirements, minimum lot size, minimum landscaping, maximum unit density, etc. It is therefore the intention of the City of Valdosta to establish regulations governing the display of signs which will: A.	Promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.B.	Enhance the economy, business, and industry of the City by promoting reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs. C.	Restrict signs and lights which increase visual clutter, or increase the probability of traffic accidents by obstructing vision or creating undue visual distraction. D.	Promote signs which are compatible with their surroundings in terms of zoning, existing land use, and architectural characteristics. As these or any regulations can only establish the mechanical limits of signs and not enforce a level of visual quality in sign design, anyone planning a sign is strongly encouraged to consider: 1.	The character of the proposed sign and the audience for which the sign is designed. The applicant is urged to think not only of the sign itself, but also the effects such a sign will have upon the character of the surrounding area. 2.	The character of the sign structure; that is, the physical means of supporting the sign, and whether that structure could be made an integral part of the sign rather than a separate and frequently distracting element. Before applying for a permit or erecting an exempted sign, anyone contemplating a sign is also encouraged to contact the Building Inspector's office of the City of Valdosta and/or a private firm or individual engaged in sign/graphic design for advice or assistance in planning a sign.     8-1.2. Jurisdiction. This ordinance shall apply to all properties located within the corporate limits of Valdosta, Georgia. This ordinance shall not relate to the copy or message on athletic field scoreboards, official signs of any government, gravestones, commemorative plaques, or display of construction not defined herein as a sign.     8-1.3. Applicability of Other Code Requirements. (a)	All signs and other advertising structures shall be constructed and/or maintained in strict conformity with the building and electrical codes adopted by the City of Valdosta. (b)	If any provisions or requirements of this ordinance are found to be in conflict with any other provision or requirement of this ordinance or of any other applicable governmental law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or other governmental regulation of any kind, the more restrictive rule or standard shall take precedence.     8-1.4. Variances. Variances from the provisions of this ordinance may be requested. All such variances shall be considered and decided by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with officially adopted procedures and standards contained in the City of Valdosta Zoning Ordinance. Granting of a variance shall not establish precedence in the consideration of any other variance request. 
8-2. - Definitions.     Words and phrases used in this ordinance [section] shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in the zoning ordinance of the city shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinance. Principles for computing sign area and sign height are contained in this section. Words not defined herein shall be defined in accordance with Webster's Dictionary, latest edition.     Abandoned Sign — A sign and/or sign structure which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person, or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product, service, or activity available on or off the premises where such sign and/or sign structure is located. Off-premises signs with content denoting availability of advertising space are not considered abandoned.     Advertise — To inform; to notify; to announce; or attract public attention in order to arouse desire to purchase or invest.     Advertising Device — Any structure or device, situated upon or attached to real property, which is erected or intended for the purpose of advertising.     Air and Gas Filled Device — Any sign using, either wholly or in part, forced air or other gas as a means of supporting its structure.     Animated Sign — Any sign of which all or any part thereof visibly moves or imitates movement in any fashion whatsoever; and any sign which contains or uses for illumination any light(s) or lighting device(s) which change color, flash or alternate, show movement or motion, or change the appearance of said sign or any part thereof automatically.     Area of Sign (Sign Area) (Copy Area) — The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed.     Attention Getting Device — Any pennant, valance, propeller, spinner, ribbon, streamer, search light, balloon, or similar device or ornamentation designed for or having the effect of attracting the attention of potential customers or the general public.     Banner — A temporary sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind excluding flags, emblems, and insignia of political, professional, religious, educational, or corporate organizations providing that such flags, emblems and insignia are displayed for non-commercial purposes.     Beacon — Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same parcel as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.     Bench Sign — A sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way.     Billboard — Any structure or portion thereof on which lettered, figured, or pictorial matter is displayed for advertising purposes, except for the name and occupation of the user of the premises or the products primarily sold or manufactured on the premises or noncommercial messages, and having an area of 125 square feet or more. Any signboard carrying a message accepted in this definition which also carries extraneous advertising of 125 square feet or more shall be considered a billboard. (See Section 8-4.9).     Building Marker — Any sign indicating the name of a building, the date and incidental information about its construction, and is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.     Building Official — The Director of Inspections of the City of Valdosta, or his/her authorized representative.     Building Sign — Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign.     Canopy — Any permanent roof-like structure, including awnings and marquees, projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of a building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.     Canopy Sign — Any sign attached to, or made a part of, the front, side, or top of a canopy.     Commercial Message — Any wording, logo, or other representation that directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.     Commercial/Office Center — A single parcel of land containing two or more businesses or establishments, including all forms of retail, wholesale, and services.     Construction Sign — A sign announcing the proposed or existing construction of a building or project.     Copy — The wording or graphics on a sign surface in either permanent or removable form.     Directional Sign — An unofficial or non-standard traffic control sign, containing no commercial message except logos, intended to direct or regulate the movement of traffic and/or pedestrians. This includes but is not limited to "enter," "exit," "drive through," and directional arrow signs. These signs may be freestanding or mounted on a building.     Directory Sign — A sign which gives the name and/or occupation of the occupants of a building, or identifies the particular use of a building.     Erect — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, paint, or affix.     Establishment — A commercial, industrial, institutional, educational, office, business, or financial entity.     Flag — Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity.     Flashing Sign — (See Animated Sign.)     Freestanding Sign — Any sign which is independent from any building or other structure and is entirely supported by structures that are permanently placed on or in the ground.     Frontage, Building — The length of an outside building wall facing a street.     Frontage Street — The length of the property line of any one parcel along a street on which it borders.     Ground Sign — A freestanding sign which has no air space between the signage copy area and the ground surface.     Historic District — Any local historic district designated by the City of Valdosta, including any National Register historic districts within the city limits.     Historic Sign — Any animated neon sign over 30 years old, any existing barber pole or any other sign so designated by the Historic Preservation Commission. Extensions, additions and embellishments are not considered part of a historic sign.     Home Occupation Sign — A wall sign for a legally existing home occupation on residential premises, containing no commercial message except advertising for services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located.     Identification Sign — A sign depicting the name of a building and/or the address of an establishment on the premises where the sign is located. The name and/or address may be included as part of another signage type.     Illuminated Sign — A sign which contains an internal source of light or which is designed or arranged to reflect light from an artificial source.     Incidental Sign — A general information sign that has a purpose secondary to the use of the parcel on which it is located. This includes but is not limited to credit cards accepted, official notice of services as required by law, trade affiliations, business hours, "telephone," "self-service," etc. These signs are typically located on doors, windows or building walls. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the parcel on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.     Mansard Sign — Any sign attached to or erected within 12 inches of an actual or simulated mansard of a building, with the sign face parallel to the building surface. Since the sign is to be mounted parallel to and within the limits of the building, it is not deemed to be a roof sign.     Moving sign — (See Animated Sign.)     Municipal Sign — Any sign erected on city-owned property with the consent of the city Building Official.     Nonconforming Sign (legal) — Any advertising device or sign, including sign structures, which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption or amendment of this ordinance and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations or restrictions of this ordinance.     Non-Profit Activity — An activity, project, operation or enterprise of a temporary nature carried on by a corporation or an organization qualified as an exempt organization under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code.     Painted Wall Sign — Any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall.     Parcel (Lot) (Business Lot) — Any piece, standard lot, or parcel of land, the boundaries of which have been established by a recorded legal instrument, that is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership; said parcel being duly recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court, Lowndes County and the City of Valdosta. A parcel may include more than one contiguously platted lot under common ownership which is identified as a single unit on official tax maps, and in such case the word "parcel" shall refer to that unit of land so identified.     Pennant — Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a pole, rope, wire, or string, often in series, designed to move in the wind.     Permanent Sign — A sign permanently affixed to a building or to the ground.     Person — Any association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind.     Political Sign — A temporary sign identifying and urging voter support for or in opposition to a particular issue, political party, or candidate for public office.     Portable Sign — Any sign supported by its own frame or trailer, with or without wheels, which is designed to be transported from one place to another. This does not include typical sandwich or A-frame signs.     Premises — An area of land with its appurtenances and buildings which, because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate.     Principal Building — The building in which is conducted the principal use of the parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings. However, storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.     Projecting Sign — Any sign affixed to a building or wall which horizontally extends more than 12 inches beyond the surface of such building or wall.     Public Service Sign — A sign designed to render a public service such as but not limited to "time and temperature" signs and "flashing news" signs.     Real Estate Sign — A temporary sign erected by the owner, or his/her agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease, or sale.     Residential District — Includes all land zoned R-E, R-25, R-15, R-10, R-6, R-6S, DR-10, R-H, PRD-15, PRD-10, and PRD-6.     Revolving Sign — (See Animated Sign.)     Roof Sign — Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building and projecting above the roof line.     Roof Sign, integral — Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches.     Setback — The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line.     Sidewalk, Sandwich or A-Frame Sign — A sign which is normally in the shape of an "A" or some variation thereof and which is usually two-sided. This includes a sign mounted on an easel.     Sign — Any identification, description, illustration or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible to the general public and directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem, painting, flag, banner, pennant, balloon or placard designed to advertise, identify, or convey information.     Sign Face — The portion of a sign on which the copy is placed.     Sign Number — For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be construed to be a single display surface or device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a single unit. In cases where material is displayed in a random or unconnected manner, or where there is reasonable doubt as to the intended relationship of such components, each component or element shall be considered to be a single sign. A projecting sign or freestanding sign with identical copy on both sides (faces) of the sign, and both sign faces being less than 36 inches apart, shall be construed as a single sign.     Sign Structure — Any construction used or designed to support a sign.     Snipe Sign — A sign of any material whatsoever that is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, fence, rock, or any other similar object located on public or private property. Snipe signs shall not include "keep out," "posted," or "no trespassing" signs.     Street — Any public or private right-of-way for vehicular traffic, excluding alleyways, parking lots and driveways.     Street Frontage — The width in linear feet of a lot or parcel where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street.     Subdivision Sign — Any sign only designed to identify a subdivision, neighborhood, or residential complex.     Traffic Control Sign — A standard sign or electronic device (such as a traffic signal, stop sign, one-way, handicap, no parking, fire lane, etc.) for the purpose of directing or regulating traffic and/or pedestrians.     Under Canopy Sign — A sign that is suspended from the underside of a canopy (including awnings and marquees), is perpendicular to the wall surface of a building, and whose copy is not clearly visible from a public right-of-way.     Unlawful Sign (Illegal Sign) — Any sign erected without a permit when a permit for the sign was otherwise required by this ordinance or previously adopted ordinance or code; or a permitted sign which has not been properly erected in accordance with its permit application and approved sign permit; or an otherwise lawful and permitted sign which has become hazardous or a nuisance to the public due to poor maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment, and so declared by the Building Official.     Variable Message Board — An electronically programmable sign that provides changing information. This may include Light Emitting Diode (LED) and Tri-Face signs.     Wall Face — A measurement of area equal to the height of the structure from the ground to the coping or eave of the roof multiplied by the width of the wall associated with the individual business. The wall face is to be measured for each wall independently.     Wall Sign — Any sign affixed or attached to a wall of a building, extending no more than 12" beyond the wall and which displays only one sign surface.     Window Sign — Any sign, excluding identification and incidental signs, placed inside or upon a window, containing a commercial message, and intended to be seen from the exterior. (Ord. No. 2007-42, § 1, 9-6-2007)
8-3. - Permitting and Maintenance.     8-3.1. Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person or firm to, or cause to[,] erect, enlarge, move, convert, or replace any sign in the City of Valdosta without first obtaining a sign permit from the Building Inspector's Office. This section shall not require a sign permit for the repair or maintenance of a conforming sign for which a permit has already been issued, so long as the sign is not modified in any way different from its original condition, including changes to permanent sign copy. This section shall not require a sign permit for changes to sign copy on any off-premises sign so long as the copy material is lightweight, and does not increase the size of the sign face. A permit shall be required for a new business making any changes on an existing sign.     8-3.2. Application. All applications for sign permits shall be submitted on forms provided by the City to the Building Inspector's Office. The application shall set forth in writing a complete description of the sign and shall include but not be limited to the following information: (a)	Name, address and telephone number of the sign owner.(b)	Name, address and telephone number of the sign contractor or installer.(c)	Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the lot or parcel on which the sign is located, if different from the above. (d)	Street address and current zoning of the property location for the proposed sign.(e)	Scale plan and elevation drawings of the proposed sign indicating all applicable dimensions, including the sign's relation to property lines, street rights-of-way and other structures. (f)	Construction drawings outlining the scope and structural details of the work to be done, including details of all connections, guy lines, supports, footings and materials to be used. (g)	Electrical permit, if applicable.(h)	Written agreement to indemnify and hold the City harmless for all damages, demands or expenses of every type which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. (i)	Landscaping plan for on-premises freestanding signs, when applicable.    8-3.3. Fees. Sign permit fees shall be in accordance with the adopted fee schedule of the City of Valdosta.     8-3.4. Permit Issuance and Duration. The Building Inspector's Office shall issue to any applicant, upon receipt of a completed application and accompanying material for a sign which meets the requirements of this ordinance, a written sign permit evidencing compliance with all applicable codes and regulations. The written sign permit, or notification of denial, shall be made available to the applicant within five working days from the date of application. A permit for a permanent sign shall expire and become null and void if construction of the sign has not begun within a period of three months from the date of issuance, and completed within six months from the date of issuance. Issuance of a sign permit shall in no way prevent the Building Inspector's Office from later declaring the sign to be nonconforming or unlawful if upon further review of available information, the sign is found not to comply with the requirements of this ordinance.     8-3.5. Identification Label. After inspection of the sign by an authorized inspector of the City of Valdosta, the sign inspector may affix an identification tag bearing the approved sign permit number. The identification tag shall be permanently attached to the sign or its supporting structure in such a manner as to be visible from a street right-of-way.     8-3.6. Maintenance. All signs and required signage landscaping shall be maintained as follows: (a)	Signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and maintained at all times so as not to be detrimental to public health and safety. This includes, but is not limited to, keeping the sign free from faulty wiring, loose fastenings and sharp or otherwise dangerous protrusions. (b)	No trash or rubbish shall be allowed to accumulate in the area around a sign and all weeds shall be kept out. If required landscaping dies, it shall be replaced no later than 30 days after written notification from a designated official of the city. (c)	Removal of abandoned signs. Any abandoned sign(s) and/or sign structure(s) shall be removed by the property owner or sign owner no later than 30 days after written notification from the Building Official or other designated official of the city. If the property owner or sign owner fails to comply within 30 days after written notification, the City may cause the removal of the sign at the property owner's or sign owner's expense.     8-3.7. Enforcement. (a)	This ordinance shall be enforced as provided by the City Code of the City of Valdosta. Each day of violation shall be regarded as a separate offense. (b)	Removal of Signs. Any of the following signs shall be immediately removed upon notification from the Building Inspector or his/her authorized representative: (1)	A sign that is classified as unlawful under the terms of this ordinance.(2)	A sign that does not conform to the Standard Building Code.(c)	Revocation of Permit. A sign permit shall be revoked if it is found not to be in compliance with this ordinance due to misinformation or significant error on the sign permit application. 
8-4. - General Regulations.     8-4.1. Prohibited Signs. The following signs and advertising devices are prohibited within the city limits: (a)	Signs displaying any words, characters, or illustrations of an obscene, indecent, or immoral nature as defined by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Valdosta. (b)	Signs which advertise or encourage an illegal activity as defined by local, state or federal laws. (c)	Animated signs; including those that flash, blink, change image or show any form of movement, excluding historic signs and those officially designated for public service. Variable message boards are permitted if they meet the conditions set forth in Section 8-4.7(f). (Approved by Valdosta Mayor/Council 3-11-04, P.C. File # VA-2003-78.) (d)	Signs that resemble any official traffic control device or emergency vehicle markings.(e)	Signs which make use of the words "stop", "look", "danger", or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse vehicular traffic. (f)	Unshielded illuminated devices that produce glare or create a hazard or nuisance to motorists or occupants of adjacent properties. (g)	Signs attached to or painted on vehicles of any type which are conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way, and obviously parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians. (h)	Snipe signs.(i)	Roof signs or any nonfreestanding sign which extends above the roof line of a building.(j)	Signs which emit visible smoke, vapor, particles or odor.(k)	Signs with lighting or control mechanisms which cause radio, television, or other communications interference. (l)	Motion picture mechanisms used in such a manner as to permit or allow images to be visible from a public right-of-way or sidewalk. (m)	Signs located on benches, waste containers or other forms of street furniture.(n)	Strings of lights, pennants or other similar attention-getting devices.    8-4.2. Exempt Signs. Except as otherwise provided, the following on-premises signs may be erected without securing a permit; provided that each is in accordance with the prescribed conditions and all other applicable codes and regulations. (a)	One professional nameplate for each establishment. Each professional nameplate shall not exceed two square feet in area. (b)	One separate identification sign for each establishment when affixed to a building wall or window and limited to a maximum size of two square feet. The purpose of the sign is to identify the establishment's street address, suite or unit number, etc. (c)	Informational bulletin boards for public, charitable, educational or religious institutions when located on the premises of said institution and affixed to a building wall. Bulletin boards may not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall be located at least 15 feet from any property line when said institution is located in a residential district. (d)	Legal notices and official instruments.(e)	Flags, cumulatively subject to the maximum area limitations of Table B or C (unless located in commercial or industrial zoning districts), and the following provisions: (1)	Limited to singular official flags of each of the following: The United States or other recognized sovereign nation, Georgia, Lowndes County, City of Valdosta, flags which depict affiliation or membership in an off-site nonprofit organization (such as FDIC) and do not convey a commercial message, or any other flag sanctioned by the City of Valdosta. (2)	Flag poles shall not exceed 40 feet in height (total length) and flags must be flown in accordance with standard protocol. (3)	Government-owned parcels are exempt from total flag area limitations.(4)	In residential districts, flags which do not convey a commercial message and are attached to an occupiable building. These typically include family crests and symbols of hospitality or yearly seasons. (f)	Decorative flags, banners and bunting for citywide celebrations, conventions, and commemorations when specifically authorized by the City Council for a prescribed period of time. (g)	Holiday lights and decorations.(h)	One "building marker" per building.(i)	Nonadvertising directional signs or symbols (e.g., entrance, exit, caution, slow, or no trespassing) located on and pertaining to a parcel of private property not to exceed two square feet in area. (j)	Identification signs at the entrance drive of residences, estates, farms, ranches and plantations which do not exceed two square feet in area. (k)	One nonilluminated real estate sign per street frontage, each containing a maximum of two sign faces back to back, and provided as follows: (1)	Maximum sign area (per face) shall be limited to six square feet in all residential districts, and 24 square feet in all nonresidential districts. (2)	Multiple listing strips, sale pending, and sold signs may be allowed when attached to a real estate sign and are subject to the same maximum area requirements. (3)	One on-premises open house or open for inspection sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, may be allowed in addition to the above area requirements. Similar off-premises signs for directional purposes may be allowed at street intersections on other private properties with the consent of the property owner. These signs may not be erected in a public right-of-way and they must be removed when the premises are no longer open for inspection. (4)	All real estate signs shall be removed when ownership or occupancy has changed and the property is no longer for sale, rent or lease. (l)	Signs for temporary garage sales, yard sales and the like, located in residential districts and subject to the following provisions: (1)	On-premises signs shall be limited to one per parcel and a maximum area of four square feet. (2)	Similar off-premises signs for directional purposes, not exceeding two square feet in area, may be allowed at street intersections on other private properties with the consent of the property owner. These signs may not be erected in a public right-of-way. (3)	All signs must be removed at the close of the sale.(m)	One single-sided construction sign per street frontage located on property where building is actually in progress under a current building permit. This shall be a freestanding sign not to exceed ten feet in height, 12 square feet in all residential districts, 32 square feet in all nonresidential districts, and shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. The sign may include the names of persons and firms performing services or labor, or supplying materials to the premises. Such sign must be removed before a certificate of occupancy for any building or structure on the premise is issued. (n)	Political signs provided as follows:(1)	The sign shall not be located, in whole or in part, on any public lands or public right-of-way and shall not be attached to any sign or utility pole, rock or any form of vegetation. (2)	All signs shall not exceed six square feet in area in all residential districts and 24 square feet in all nonresidential districts. (3)	The city building official or designated representative shall, without notice, immediately remove or cause to be removed any and all political signs in violation of this section. The removal will be at the expense of the candidate and the owner of property on which the sign is located. (4)	All political signs must also meet corresponding sign type regulations for the zoning district in which the sign is located. Freestanding political signs are not subject to the maximum number requirements for on-premises freestanding signs. (o)	Window signs which advertise temporary sales and special promotions for activities, services, goods or products available within the building. These signs shall still be subject to certain maximum sign area limitations for window signs in Tables B and C. (p)	Signs incorporated on machinery and equipment at the manufacturer's or distributor's level, and which only identify or advertise the product or service dispensed by the machine or equipment. This includes signs customarily affixed to vending machines, newspaper racks, telephone booths and gasoline pumps. (q)	One directory sign per building, which contains no commercial messages of any kind, which is attached to the building wall and limited to a maximum of 24 square feet. (r)	Traffic control signs erected on public or private property which meet Department of Transportation standards and contain no commercial message of any kind. Signs located on private property shall not exceed two square feet. (s)	Works of art which do not contain a commercial message.(t)	Signs painted on or otherwise attached to motor vehicles which are not conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way and obviously not parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians. This may include signs for realtors, delivery trucks, lawn service, etc. (u)	Historic signs.(v)	Municipal signs.    8-4.3. Location in General. (a)	All signs shall be located on and over private property only, except those specifically permitted by this ordinance. (b)	No sign shall be attached to any utility pole, fence, rock, tree or other form of vegetation. (c)	All signs shall be erected in such a manner as to not interfere with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. (d)	No sign shall be attached to or placed against a building in such a way as to prevent egress through any door or window required or designed for access to any building; nor shall any sign be attached to or obstruct a fire escape, or interfere with openings required for proper light or ventilation. (e)	All signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance from all overhead utilities in accordance with National Electrical Code specifications. In no case shall any sign be installed within three feet horizontally or vertically from an overhead utility line or utility guy wire.     8-4.4. Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning District. ** (SEE TABLE A) **     8-4.5. Maximum Size and Number. (a)	Height. Unless otherwise provided, no freestanding sign shall exceed 35 feet in height. (b)	Number. Except for exempted signs listed in section 8-4.2 freestanding signs shall be limited to one sign per street frontage per parcel. In the case of multiple street frontages, the freestanding sign on the primary street frontage (as designated by the property owner) shall comply with the maximum sign areas listed in Tables B and C. Freestanding signs on secondary street frontages shall be permitted and shall not exceed ½ of the maximum sign areas listed in Tables B and C. Secondary freestanding signs shall be oriented for viewing from the secondary street and shall be located a minimum distance of ½ the secondary lot frontage from the primary street's right-of-way line. In the case of two intersecting street frontages, and at the Building Official's discretion, freestanding signs for both the primary and secondary frontages may be combined into a single freestanding sign at 1½ times its maximum permitted sign area, only if the sign is located near the corner of the property and oriented so that it is easily viewed from both street frontages. There is no limit on number of other sign types (unless otherwise provided); only limits on total sign areas. (c)	Sign area, single-use parcels. Except for the exempted signs listed in Table B, the maximum total area for all signs on each parcel shall not exceed the "Maximum Total Square Feet" listed in Table B. The maximum total area for all signs of each sign type (including the exempted signs listed in Table B) on each parcel shall be as indicated in Table B. (d)	Commercial/Office Centers. Building signs for each establishment shall be limited to the maximum sign areas listed in Table C. Establishments within the center which front or face more than one street frontage shall not be entitled to additional sign square footage. These establishments may elect to have signs facing each street; however, the total sign square footage for each establishment shall remain the same. Sign area allowances are non-transferable from one establishment to another. (e)	Sign Area and Height Computations. The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height. (1)	Area of Single-faced Signs. The area shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself. (2)	Area of Multifaced Signs. The area shall be computed by adding together the area of all individual sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 36 inches apart, the two faces shall be considered one sign and the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. (3)	Height. The height of a freestanding sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign or sign structure, whichever is higher. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: (1) existing grade prior to construction or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower.     8-4.6. Sign Setbacks. (a)	Unless otherwise provided, no freestanding or portable sign at its nearest point shall be closer than five feet (vertical line ground distance) from a street right-of-way line or property line. (b)	All freestanding signs containing copy area between a height of three feet and nine feet above ground shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from the intersection of two street right-of-way lines, or the intersection of a street right-of-way line with a driveway pavement edge. Sign supports in excess of two feet in diameter or which cumulatively provides less than 70 percent visibility, shall be subject to this same setback requirement.     8-4.7. Special Signage Types. (a)	Portable Signs. In addition to all permitting procedures and other applicable regulations of this ordinance, all existing and future portable signs shall comply with all of the following: (1)	Portable signs shall be limited to one per parcel and shall only be used in lieu of a permanent freestanding sign for a period not to exceed three months from the date of permit issuance, or until the permanent sign is installed, whichever comes first. (2)	Portable signs shall not be erected or placed in a required parking space and must be securely tied down in accordance with the Standard Building Code. (3)	All existing portable signs shall be removed within three months from the effective date of this ordinance. (4)	If lighted, portable signs shall be internally lit, and:a.	Must have UL label, or equivalent.b.	Electrical service must be provided from a building in accordance with all applicable electrical codes and shall be approved by the Building Official. (b)	Banners. One banner may be allowed on a temporary basis for a maximum of 240 days per calendar year upon obtaining a special banner permit. A permit shall be for a 60 day period. An applicant, at the time of making an application, shall select one of the following options per calendar year: A.	Banner displayed 60 days; banner removed 60 days.B.	Banner displayed 60 days; banner removed 30 days.C.	Banner displayed concurrently, without removal, not exceeding 240 consecutive days.A special banner permit must be obtained each 60-day period. All banners under any of the above stated options must comply with the following limitations: (1)	Each business location shall be limited to four permits per calendar year and banner display shall not exceed the total of 240 days in one calendar year. (2)	Banners must be physically attached to [a] building or some other permanent structure which requires a building permit for construction excluding a freestanding sign. (3)	With a special banner permit, banners will be allowed over and above the wall signage maximum of the business; banner area shall not cumulatively exceed 100 square feet or 50 percent of the total wall signage maximum allowed for the business, whichever is more restrictive. (4)	Said banner shall be professionally printed and shall be limited to one message or product per banner. (c)	Menu Signs at Drive-through Restaurants. One sign per drive-through traffic lane may be used to display menus for restaurant drive-through windows. Each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, eight feet in height, and if illuminated, the sign must be internally lit. (d)	Subdivision Signs. Subdivision signs and any accompanying landscaping shall not be located in a public right-of-way. (e)	Special Temporary Signs and Devices. The following signage types shall be permitted with a special temporary sign permit for periods up to 30 days after which time said temporary sign or device must then be removed for at least 30 days before another permit may be issued to same business or non-business parcel: (1)	A-frame, sandwich type, sidewalk or curb sign within a commercial zoning district. Signs may be two-sided and shall be limited to six square feet per side. Maximum height shall be five feet above the sidewalk or ground and shall be located within ten feet of the entrance of the building. A-frame signs shall be located so as to not obscure safe vision of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. One A-frame sign may be allowed for each entrance to the building or business. (2)	Search lights and beacons used for special promotions and attracting attention to a new business "grand opening." For each such event, prior written notice shall be given to officials of Moody AFB and the Valdosta Airport Authority. Such devices shall not create a nuisance or interfere with vehicular traffic, and shall adhere to all applicable regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Said signs may be permitted for periods not to exceed ten consecutive days. In the event an objection for some valid reason is filed by Moody AFB or the Valdosta Airport Authority, the ten-day permit may be denied. (3)	Tethered balloons or other inflatable signs.(f)	[Variable Message Boards.] One variable sign message board will be permitted in C-C or C-H zoning only in conjunction with a freestanding sign. The square footage on the variable message board will be included in the total allowable size of the freestanding sign and shall meet the following requirements: (1)	A variable message board shall change messages no more than 12 times per minute.(2)	Messages shall not be illuminated by blinking, intermittent, or flashing lights.(3)	Only white, amber, red, or green lights shall be allowed. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 5-19-05, Ordinance No. 2005-32.) (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 3-11-04, P.C. File # VA-2003-78.)     8-4.8. Landscaping. All permanent on-premises freestanding signs shall have a landscaped area at the base of the sign which is a minimum three feet wide on each side, and at least the length of the sign. The landscaping shall consist of a dense vegetative ground cover or a minimum one shrub per three linear feet of landscaped area on each side of the sign. Landscaped areas containing shrubs greater than three feet high shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from the intersection of two-street right-of-way lines, or the intersection of a street right-of-way line with a driveway pavement edge. Landscaped areas shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Off-premises signs shall be exempt from landscaping requirements.     8-4.9. Billboards. Unless otherwise provided, billboard signs shall be subject to all of the following requirements in addition to all other applicable requirements of this ordinance. Where they are in conflict the following requirement shall apply: (1)	An exception shall be made in the event any billboard is located on property annexed to the City of Valdosta. In that event, the number of billboards shall immediately increase by the number of billboards contained within the newly annexed area. In the event any billboard contained within the newly annexed property does not comply with this ordinance said billboard shall be considered legal non-conforming. (a)	All billboard signs shall be located a minimum of 1,250 feet measured as a radius from any other billboard regardless of location. (b)	The number of billboard faces within the corporate limits of the City of Valdosta shall not exceed the number of faces within the corporate limits of the City of Valdosta as of September 7, 2007. An inventory of these existing faces shall be maintained by the Planning and Zoning Office. Additionally, no more than eight variable message sign faces shall exist within the corporate limits of the City of Valdosta. In addition thereto, billboard permits and applications for permits approved on or before September 7, 2007 shall be counted in the total number of billboard faces permitted. (c)	Any existing billboard structure or face may undergo minor repairs to ensure the safety and aesthetic quality of the entire sign structure and face. This minor repair shall not result in any modification of the sign structure, face or increase in the overall square footage or depth of the sign face. (d)	Any replacement billboard shall be a single tier billboard not to exceed 300 square feet of sign face and must meet all current standards at the time of replacement. A variance may be considered for the spacing requirement of 8-4.9(1)(a); however, in no case shall a variance be granted for a distance less than that of the distance between the original billboard and the nearest billboard. (2)	Existing billboards faces may be modified to include variable message boards provided all of the following provisions are met: A)	Each message shall remain fixed for a minimum of ten seconds.B)	When a message is changed, it shall be accomplished in three seconds or less.C)	Messages shall not be illuminated by blinking, scrolling, intermittent or flashing lights. D)	No variable message board shall be placed within 5,000 feet of another variable message board measured in a radius from any other variable message sign, regardless of location. E)	Submittal of a complete sign application and receipt of proper permit in accordance with section 8-3 of this ordinance. F)	Any new variable message billboard shall not exceed 300 square feet in copy face.    8-4.10. Nonconforming Signs. (a)	Repairs and maintenance. Any legal nonconforming sign may be repaired or restored to its original condition, subject to all of the following: (1)	The cost of the repairs or the restoration does not cumulatively exceed 50 percent of its total replacement cost. Accumulation shall begin with the effective date of this ordinance. (2)	The repairs or restoration do not involve any change from its original permanent copy.(3)	The repairs or restoration remain subject to all other applicable regulations.(b)	Compliance for single-use parcels. All legal nonconforming on-premises signs located on a single-use parcel shall be removed or altered to conform with all existing sign regulations upon any of the following: (1)	The issuance of a sign permit for any new additional sign, or changes to an existing sign which result in an increase to the sign's total copy area. (2)	The issuance of a sign permit for changes in permanent sign copy to an existing on-premises sign, which exceeds the 50 percent cumulative total of sign areas for all legally existing on-premises signs normally requiring a permit under this ordinance. Accumulation shall begin with the effective date of this ordinance. (c)	Compliance for commercial/office centers. Legal nonconforming signs located in commercial/office centers shall be removed or altered to conform with all existing sign regulations in the event the following should occur: (1)	For nonconforming freestanding signs, the issuance of a sign permit for a new freestanding sign. (2)	For nonconforming building signs for a particular establishment, the issuance of any sign permit for that particular establishment, excluding repairs and maintenance. (Ord. No. 2007-42, §§ 2, 3, 9-6-2007; Ord. No. 2008-35, 7-24-2008)
8-5. - Special District Regulations.     8-5.1. Historic District. Off-premises and portable signs are prohibited in historic districts. On-premises signs located or maintained within the city's designated historic districts shall comply with the following regulations in addition to other requirements of this ordinance. Where these regulations conflict with other regulations of this ordinance, the most restrictive shall take precedence: (a)	Certificate of Appropriateness. All signs otherwise requiring a sign permit, including banners, shall also require a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission in accordance with the provisions of the Historic District Ordinance. They are subject to all criteria for issuance of the certificate and the following special provisions for the below-listed sign types. All other sign types shall follow provisions described elsewhere in these regulations, and are also subject to the criteria for issuance of the certificate. Where these are in conflict with the Certificate of Appropriateness, the criteria for issuance of the certificate shall take precedence. (1)	Wall Signs. One wall sign shall be permitted along the primary side (designated main entrance) of a building and shall be limited to a maximum size of the greater of: 50 square feet, or one square foot per two linear feet of building frontage; not to exceed 125 square feet. Wall signs on secondary street frontages shall be permitted and shall be limited to the same maximum size limitations; but in no case shall exceed 50 square feet. (2)	Freestanding Signs. One freestanding sign shall be permitted for each street frontage, per parcel of land. Maximum height shall be ten feet from ground level for each sign. Maximum total sign area shall be 40 square feet for the primary street frontage (as designated by the property owner), and 20 square feet for any secondary street frontage. (3)	Canopy Signs. One canopy sign shall be permitted along the primary side (designated main entrance) of a building and shall be limited to a maximum size of 12 square feet. (4)	Projecting Signs. Projecting signs shall be mounted perpendicular to a building front with a maximum projecting length of five feet. The minimum height shall be eight feet from ground level and the maximum total area of all projecting signs shall be 20 square feet per parcel. (b)	Approval of Historic Preservation Commission. All signs located within historic districts shall require review and approval by the Historic Preservation Commission prior to issuance of a sign permit. In addition to the other requirements for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the following information shall be submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission: (1)	Name, address, and telephone number of both the sign owner and the sign builder or erector. (2)	Sketch showing the layout and dimensions of the proposed sign.(3)	Site plan with dimensions showing the sign's location in relation to nearby buildings, structures, and streets. (4)	Photograph showing the sign's location and adjacent properties.    8-5.2. Interstate 75 Corridor; High Rise Identification Signs. One additional on-premise sign per parcel, which is zoned for commercial or industrial uses, may be allowed within 1,500 feet of the I-75 right-of-way (said distance measured in a straight line perpendicular to the right-of-way of I-75). Such sign shall be located in the rear yard setback area of the parcel and shall have a minimum height of 75 feet clearance above the finished grade, a maximum overall height of not more than 200 feet, shall contain not more than 250 square feet of signage area, and shall be located no closer than 500 feet radial distance from any other such high rise sign. This sign shall be exempt from the maximum total signage area allotment for the parcel on which it is located, and it shall remain subject to all other applicable regulations.     8-5.3. Downtown Commercial (C-D) Zoning District. In order to promote a pedestrian-oriented market area in the downtown district, A-frame, sandwich type, sidewalk and easel signs may be permitted on the sidewalk in front of the respective business during business hours only. These may be two-sided and shall be limited to six square feet per side. Maximum height shall be five feet above the sidewalk and minimum setback shall be two feet from the street curb. They shall be located so as to not obstruct safe vision of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. These signs shall also require a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission and are subject to all other applicable regulations. TABLE A. PERMITTED SIGNS BY TYPE AND ZONING DISTRICT SIGN TYPE ZONING DISTRICT(R)(P)CN, CCCHCDCAM-1M-2E-RinstFreestanding Signs —SSSS—SSSSBuilding Signs (on-premises only) Building Marker (historical)a AAAAA—AAAACanopy—SSSS—SSS—Identification;sup\sup;AAAAAAAAAAIncidentalc AAAAA—AAAAProjecting——SSS—SSS—Home Occupationd AS——A—————Home Businesst SS——S—————Mansard———S——SS——Under Canopy—SSSS—SSSAWall—SSSSSSSSSWindow——SSS—SSS—Miscellaneous Signs Directional—SSSS—SSSSBannerse SSSSS—SSSSFlagsf AAAAAAAAAAPortableg ——SS—SSSS—SubdivisionSS———————— KEY (R) = All residential zoning districts (R-E, R-25, R-15, R-10, R-6, R-6S, DR-10, R-H, PRD-15, PRD-10, PRD-6) and single-family or duplex residential use parcels within R-P and O-P zoning districts. (P) = All professional office zoning districts (R-P, O-P, PPD) excluding parcels containing single-family or duplex residential uses. inst = Institutional uses allowed in residential zones or neighborhoods. A = Allowed without sign permit. S = Allowed only with sign permit. — = Not allowed. (E-R amendment adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 2-10-05, P.C. File # VA-2005-14.) TABLE B. MAXIMUM SIGN AREA (SQ. FT.) BY SIGN TYPE AND ZONING DISTRICT SINGLE USES SIGN TYPE ZONING DISTRICT(R)(P)CNCCCHCDCAM-1M-2E-RinstFreestanding Signs t 24 h 507512512;sup§\sup;12512524 32Building and Miscellaneous Signs Directional;sup\sup; 81212126121286Wall, Canopy,Mansard, Projecting (combined)24 *******12*Home Occupation24412Home Businesst 12121212Under Canopy6j 6j 6j 6j 6j 6j 6j 44Window (whichrequire a permit)+++++++Portable323232323232MAXIMUM Total Square Feet (for all of the above) 232125200500100505005005050Signs Exempt from Above Totals Building Marker(historical)4444444444Flags60 60 60 60 Identification22222222222Incidental22322k 22k 2k 32Subdivision24 h 24 h 24 h 24 h 24 h 24 h 24 h  KEY (R) = All residential zoning districts (R-E, R-25, R-15, R-10, R-6, R-6S, DR-10, R-H, PRD-15, PRD-10, PRD-6) and single-family or duplex residential use parcels within R-P and O-P zoning districts. (P) = All professional office zoning districts (R-P, O-P, PPD) excluding parcels containing single-family or duplex residential uses. This also includes multi-family residential uses in R-6 zoning districts. inst = Institutional uses allowed in residential zones or neighborhoods. * = For each building side, the greater of either (a) or (b). (a)	Fifty square feet.(b)	One square foot per linear foot of building frontage, not to exceed 250 square feet.+ = Window signs requiring a sign permit are subject to the "Maximum Total Square Feet" requirement for each parcel. All window signs combined (permitted and exempt) shall not exceed 30 percent of total window surface or 100 square feet, whichever is less. (E-R amendment adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 2-10-05, P.C. File # VA-2005-14.) TABLE C. MAXIMUM SIGN AREA (SQ. FT.) BY SIGN TYPE AND ZONING DISTRICT COMMERCIAL/OFFICE CENTERS SIGN TYPEZONING DISTRICT(P)C-DCN, CCCH, CA, M-1, M-2Signs for Entire Commercial Center Freestandingp 12n 12;sup§\sup;75125Directional;sup\sup; 121212Building Signs (for each establishment) Wall, Canopy,Mansard (combined)12***Window (whichrequire a permit)+++Under Canopyl 6668Maximum Total Square Feet (per establishment for all above building signs) 1288125250Signs Exempt from Above Totals Building Marker444Flagsf 60 Identificationm 222Incidentalm 222 KEY (P) = All professional office zoning districts (R-P, O-P, PPD). This also includes multi-family residential uses in R-6 zoning districts. * = For each store/unit front, the greater of either (a) or (b). (a)	Fifty square feet.(b)	One square foot per linear foot of unit frontage, not to exceed 250 square feet.+ = Window signs requiring a sign permit are subject to the "Maximum Total Square Feet" requirement for each establishment. All window signs combined (permitted and exempt) shall not exceed 30 percent of total window surface or 100 square feet, whichever is less. NOTES: a May include only building name, date of construction or historical data on historic site. ;sup\sup; Only name of building and/or address of establishment allowed on sign. c No commercial message of any kind allowed which is legible from any location off the parcel on which the sign is located. d No commercial message allowed except advertising for services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located. e Subject to special regulations for banners as described in this ordinance. f Subject to special regulations for flags as described elsewhere in this ordinance. g Subject to special regulations for portable signs as described in this ordinance. h Overall height shall be limited to a maximum of eight feet. ;sup\sup; These signs may be freestanding or mounted on a building or wall, and there may be more than one sign per parcel. Each sign shall be limited to a maximum of three square feet. If freestanding, the sign shall be limited to a maximum of 2½ feet high. j Maximum of one under canopy sign per building entrance. k Gasoline stations shall be allowed up to four square feet. l Maximum of one under canopy sign per street frontage, per establishment. m For each establishment. n Plus five square feet per tenant when tenant identification panels are included. The sign shall be limited to a maximum height of eight feet and in no case shall the total sign area exceed 50 square feet. p Parcels with multiple street frontages may be permitted secondary freestanding signs at one-half the maximum sizes shown, in addition to the primary freestanding sign. However, except for commercial centers, secondary signs are subject to the "Maximum Total Square Feet" requirements for each parcel. r Off-premises signs located within 100 feet of the I-75 right-of-way line may be allowed a maximum size of 500 square feet and are exempt from the parcel's maximum total square feet allotment. ;sup§\sup; Limited to sandwich, A-frame or easel signs. See special district regulations for Downtown Commercial (C-D) zoning district. t One variable message board will be allowed per property provided it represents at least ten percent, but not more than 25 percent, of the maximum sign area allowed in the zoning classification. Permits for variable message boards shall not be granted for properties currently having illegally, nonconforming signs until or unless said nonconforming signs are removed or replaced. (Adopted by Mayor/Council 3-11-04, P.C. File # VA-2003-78.) (Ord. No. 2007-42, §§ 4, 5, 9-6-2007)
SECTION 9. - NONCONFORMANCES 
9-1. - Nonconforming Lots.     Any lot for which a plat or legal description has been recorded in the Office of Register of Deeds of Lowndes County at the time of passage of this ordinance which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may, if vacant, be used for any of the uses permitted within the district by this ordinance or, if occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged, or extended; provided that in either case: a.	Minimum requirements of the district for front, side, and rear yard, height, and floor area shall be complied with. b.	The lot may be used for duplexes or multi-family dwellings when allowed within the district only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district. c.	The requirements of Section 3-22 are met. 
9-2. - Nonconforming Open Uses of Land.     Nonconforming uses consisting of lots used for storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junk yards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf and similar open uses where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the open use of the lot and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter under this ordinance in the district in which it is located, shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to the other requirements in this ordinance: a.	When a nonconforming open use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use. b.	A nonconforming open use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming. c.	When any nonconforming open use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
9-3. - Nonconforming Use of Structures.     Nonconforming uses consisting of structures used, at the time of passage of this ordinance, for purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located shall in addition to the other requirements of this ordinance be governed by the following restrictions: a.	Any existing nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use that is similar in its operation and effect on surrounding properties or may be changed to a conforming use. b.	Any existing nonconforming use of a structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use that generates more automobile or truck traffic, creates more noise, vibration, smoke, dust or fumes, is a more intensive use of structures than the existing nonconforming use, and is in any way a greater nuisance to the adjoining properties than the existing nonconforming use. c.	A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure which at the time the use became nonconforming were already erected and arranged or designed for such nonconforming use. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area, or volume of space occupied by the use, except that the Board of Appeals may, after a public hearing and review of the proposed plan, grant approval if it is determined that said use will not be detrimental to the neighboring properties and is non-contrary to the intent of this ordinance. d.	When any nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of one year, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
9-4. - Nonconforming Signs.     (Refer to Section 8-4.10.) 
9-5. - Reconstruction of Nonconforming Structures.     When a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use or nonconforming sign is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, or act of God, such structure or sign may be reconstructed as a nonconforming use only if the damage totals less than 75 percent of the value of the structure. Structures which do not conform to the yard requirements of this ordinance shall also be governed by this provision. 
9-6. - Changes in Zoning.     Any nonconformances created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance regulations after the date of passage of this ordinance shall also be governed by the provisions of this section. 
SECTION 10. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES 
10-1. - Zoning Enforcement Officer.     An administrative official designated as the Zoning Administrator by the City Council of Valdosta, Georgia shall administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
10-2. - Building Permit Required.     A building permit, or a sign permit in case of a sign, issued by the Zoning Administrator, is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving, or alteration of any building or structure or sign. No building permit or sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance; however, a building permit issued before the adoption of this ordinance shall remain valid with the same qualifications as issued under this ordinance. 
10-3. - Application for Building Permit.     All applications for building permits, except single-family residential, shall be accompanied by five site plans drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the lot, the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, the setback lines of the building on the "permit lot," the various easements on the lot and such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. The following is required on the site plan before the site plan is considered accepted by the director of inspections and any permits are approved: a.	City Engineer Approval:1.	Topography (MSL) existing and proposed.2.	Drainage plans.3.	Location and size of ingress/egress.4.	Water and sewer mains and services, both existing and proposed.5.	All other utility services or distribution lines (Georgia Power Company, Southern Bell Telephone, Georgia Natural Gas, Cable TV). b.	Fire Chief Approval:1.	Water (Class A fire hydrant).c.	Director of Utilities Approval:1.	Water and sewer services in the lot and the specific meter size and location.    The other required drawings to include structural, plumbing, electrical, heat and air, shall be submitted in two sets. All of the drawings shall be resubmitted, if during the city's review there are major changes made to them (major changes refers to omitted items that are required or where the number of changes to a drawing are over three items or when the handwritten changes would cause confusion or make the drawings unusable). The city shall have at the time the permit is issued two complete accurate plans. One set of plans, including the site plan, shall be kept on the job site where all of the various inspection departments shall have access during the construction and final inspection phase.     Any building permit shall become void if the work involved has not begun within six months after the date of issuance of the permit or if the work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the work of development is commenced; provided that extensions of time for periods not exceeding six months each may be allowed in writing by the Zoning Administrator. Any unapproved deviation from the site plan shall cause the Building Official to not issue a certificate of occupancy.     Single-family residential site plans need not be drawn to scale, but must be accurate as to dimensions of lot and proposed building.     The applicant for a building permit shall submit a certificate with his/her application which certifies that the lot which he proposes to develop is a lot of record. When the lot in question does not met the lot width and lot area requirements of this ordinance, then the applicant shall certify that such lot was a lot of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance or is a lot which has been created through governmental taking of property. 
10-4. - Sign Permits.     The Zoning Administrator shall receive applications for the construction of signs, as required by this ordinance. Such applications shall follow the same forms as required for building permits, and shall contain information required by this ordinance in Section 8. The Zoning Administrator shall process such sign applications and shall issue sign permits and sign permit numbers for proposed signs which comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
10-5. - Penalties for Violation.     In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, demolished, altered, repaired, moved, converted, or maintained in violation of this ordinance, the offender shall be guilty upon conviction and shall be punished as provided in Section 1-5 [1-11] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Valdosta for each separate offense. 
10-6. - Remedies.     In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator or any other appropriate authority, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the violation in the case of such building, structure, or land. 
10-7. - Certificate of Occupancy.     Certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the following provisions:     10-7.1. Certificate of Occupancy Required. A certificate of occupancy issued by the Zoning Administrator is required in advance of occupancy or use of: a.	A building hereafter erected.b.	A building hereafter altered so as to affect height, the side, front or rear yard.c.	Any building or premises where a change in the type of occupancy or use will occur.    10-7.2. Application for Certificate of Occupancy. The owner, tenant or his/her agent shall, after the plans have been accepted for permit, sign the Application for Certificate of Occupancy; subsequently, all inspecting parties to include Electrical Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Structural Inspector, Building Official, City Engineer, Fire Marshal, Director of Utilities having signed the application and having accepted the work, only then is the owner eligible for the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. It shall be allowed, however, that after completion of all minimum requirements involving the buildings and the adjacent parking lot, a temporary Certificate of Occupancy can be granted for a period not to exceed 60 days so that the owner, tenant, or his/her agent can have occupancy of the building while he is completing the site plan requirements as initially approved on his/her permit such as retention ponds, grassing, etc. A 60-day extension to the original 60-day grace period can be granted if, in the opinion of the department whose items haven't been completed, the items do not harm any property owner or the city nor cause any costs to the city. At the end of the 60 days (or extension), he shall obtain a Certificate of Occupancy. Failure to do so will be in violation of this ordinance. In the case of single-family units, acceptable driveway, water meter, grading and erosion plus the accepted electrical, plumbing, and building inspections shall constitute an application for the Certificate of Occupancy.     10-7.3. Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. Upon payment of any required fees, and completion of the application for Certificate of Occupancy (refer to Section 10-7.2), the Zoning Administrator shall sign and issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the proposed use of land or building as stated on the Certificate of Occupancy is signed thereto by the owner or his/her appointed agent and is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance and if the building and site plan, as finally constructed complies with the plans submitted and approved for the building permit. One copy of the Certificate of Occupancies issued which contains a statement for the intended use of the applicable property, floor loads, and other pertinent information, signed by the occupant or his/her agent shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator; a second copy shall be posted in a conspicuous public place on the premises.     10-7.4. Denial of Certificate of Occupancy. A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance, and the structure conforms with the applicable provisions of the building code and complies with the sketches or plans submitted for obtaining the building permit. 
10-8. - House Numbering.     It shall be duty of the Director of Inspections to assign a proper street number (an internal number system if applicable) at the time of the building permit issuance and/or to each house or building within the city and said number shall be posted prior to a residential acceptance or issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. A temporary building number for construction purposes shall be installed in a conspicuous place; where apartments or multi-units are involved, those number shall also be posted. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this code for any property owner, after being notified of such number assigned to his/her property by the Director of Inspections pursuant to this chapter, to have posted or displayed upon his/her property a number different from the number so assigned said property. 
10-9. - Coordination with Development of Regional Impact Requirements.     The Georgia Department of Community Affairs, pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act, has established criteria for the identification of certain large-scale developments, which have the potential to cause land use impacts beyond the boundaries of the respective local government where a project might be proposed. These developments known as Developments of Regional Impact (DRIs) shall be submitted, based on established DCA standards, procedures, and format, to the South Georgia Regional Development Center (SGRDC) for review and recommendation prior to issuance of any local building or development permit, utility tap, or rezoning, whichever occurs first. As such, these requirements establish an official delay in the local permitting and/or review process to allow for compliance with these requirements. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council on 11-6-03 - P. C. File # VA-2003-72) 
SECTION 11. - BOARD OF APPEALS 
11-1. - Membership.     11-1.1. Membership and Appointment. The Valdosta-Lowndes County Zoning Board of Appeals, hereinafter referred to as the Board, shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall be residents of Lowndes County, and one member shall also be an attorney who has been admitted to the Georgia Bar. The Lowndes County Board of Commissioners shall appoint three members from the County, and the Valdosta Mayor/Council shall appoint three members from the City. The attorney shall be appointed by both governing bodies jointly. None of the Board members shall hold any other public office or position in the City or County, except that two members may also be a member of the Planning Commission. Board members shall be removed for cause, upon written charges, and after public hearing. Any member of the Board shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the Board with respect to property in which the member has an interest.     11-1.2. Term of Office. The term of office for each member of the Board shall be for three years; however, in the appointment of the first Board, two members shall be appointed for three years and two for two years and one for one year. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. If one appointee be [is] from the Planning Commission and he ceases to be a member of said Planning Commission during the term of his/her appointment to the Board, his/her membership on the Board shall terminate and the governing authority may name a member of said Planning Commission to fill the unexpired term of its original appointee.     11-1.3. 1997 Expansion. The term of office for members of the Board established by amendment in July 1997, shall be appointed for a term to end May 7, 1998. All appointments in this post thereafter shall be for a term of three years.     11-1.4. Compensation. The Board members shall receive no compensation for their service except that they will be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenditures made in connection with their duties. 
11-2. - Rules and Procedures.     The Board shall elect one of its members as Chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is re-elected or his/her successor is elected. The Board of Appeals shall appoint a Secretary who may be an officer of the City of Valdosta, or of the Planning Commission. The Board shall have authority to adopt rules of procedure. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman, or in his/her absence, the acting Chairman. The Chairman, or the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of said Board and shall be a public record. The decisions of the Board shall be by resolution, which resolution shall contain a statement of the grounds of its decision or action. The full text of the resolution shall be sent to the appellant. No appeal requesting the same relief in regard to the same property shall be received or heard by the Board for a period of 12 months following the date of said resolution, except that this limitation shall not affect the right of said Board to grant a rehearing as provided in the rules of procedure adopted by said Board. 
11-3. - Administrative Assistance.     The Zoning Administrator shall provide such technical[,] administrative, and clerical assistance and office space as is required by the Board to carry out its function under the provisions of these regulations. All applications submitted for variances and appeals under the provisions of Section 11 will be forwarded to appropriate city agencies for review and comments. Appropriate agencies may be the Planning Director, City of Valdosta Attorney, Valdosta City Engineer, public works or public safety. If deemed necessary, these agencies can request input from other city departments. 
11-4. - Appeals.     11-4.1. Who May Appeal. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the governing authority affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeals shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of notification of the decision appealed from by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.     11-4.2. Legal Proceedings Stayed. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning Administrator, and on due cause shown.     11-4.3. Presentation of Evidence. The appellant, and any public agency or private individual shall be entitled to present evidence on matters before the Board and said Board may request technical service, advice, data or factual evidence from the Planning Commission and the governing authority for assistance in reaching decisions.     11-4.4. Extent of Board of Appeals' Power. The Board may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator. The Board may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to carry out the decisions of the board. 
11-5. - Public Hearing.     11-5.1. Notice of Hearing Shall Be Given. Before making its decision on any appeal, request for a variance, or any other matter within the Board's purview, said Board shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published for two consecutive issues of official legal organ of Lowndes County and notice of such meeting shall be sent by Zoning Administrator to the Planning Commission. At least 15 days notice of the time and place of such meeting shall be sent to the appellant or petitioner by US Mail to his/her last known address, and to the owners of all properties either adjoining the property with which the hearing is concerned or situated directly across a public right-of-way from said property. Such notice shall contain the name of the appellant or petitioner, the date, time, and place set for the hearing, and a brief statement of the nature of the hearing. In addition, the Zoning Administrator shall erect a sign on the subject property. Such sign shall be erected within ten feet of whatever boundary lines of such land abuts the most traveled road; and if no public road abuts thereon, then such sign shall be erected to face in such a manner as may be most readily seen by the public. The sign shall contain the following information: 1.	Application number.2.	Nature of request.3.	Time, place and date of hearing.    11-5.2. Who May Appear. Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or attorney.     11-5.3. Time Limit on Board's Decision. The Board shall reach a decision following a public hearing within 30 days. 
11-6. - Powers and Duties.     11-6.1. Appeals from Actions of the Zoning Administrator. The Board shall hear and decide upon appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of these regulations.     11-6.2. Request for a Variance. The Board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; provided, however, that a variance shall not be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance in the district in question. Such variance may be granted in an individual case upon a finding by the Board that the following exists: a.	There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; and b.	The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; and c.	Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; andd.	Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of these regulations; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance; and e.	A literal interpretation of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of any rights that others in the same district are allowed; and f.	Provided that the Board of Appeals may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood; and provided that wherever the Board of Appeals shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations that any of the terms, conditions, or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said Board shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing.     11-6.3. Continuance of Nonconforming Use. The Board of Appeals may allow a nonconforming use to be reestablished after discontinuance for 12 consecutive months where it is deemed by the Board of Appeals that: a.	The design, construction, and character of the building is not suitable for uses permitted in a district in which nonconforming use is situated; and b.	Undue hardships to the property owner would result in not allowing the building to be reopened for a nonconforming use; and c.	Adjacent property would not be unduly damaged by such use of the building; andd.	The use is to be identical or similar to the prior nonconforming use of the building.
11-7. - Forms.     Appeals shall be made on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator, and all information required on said forms shall be provided by the appellant. Forms shall be filed with the Board, and the appellant shall pay the Board for expenses incidental to the appeal. No form shall be accepted by the Board unless it contains all pertinent information and [is] accompanied by a fee necessary to defray expenses. The fee covers all advertising and administrative costs. 
SECTION 12. - AMENDMENT 
12-1. - General Conditions.     These regulations, including the zoning map[,] may be amended by the Valdosta City Council (1) on its own motion, (2) on petition, (3) or on recommendation of the Planning Commission but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. Before creating an amendment to these regulations, the governing authority shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon as set forth in this Section. 
12-2. - Application for Amendment.     12-2.1. General. Applications for amendment of this ordinance may be made in the form of proposals for amendments of the text of this ordinance or proposals for amendment of the zoning map. Applications for amendment shall be on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator, shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and shall include a fee set by the City Council payable to the city, to defray expenses. A pre-application meeting shall be held with development review staff prior to submittal of the application and these must be scheduled at least four working days in advance. Applications shall be submitted by the 25th day of each month, as an established submittal deadline, in order for the application to be reviewed by the Planning Commission the following month, and advertised and then considered at a public hearing during a subsequent month. Only complete applications will be accepted by the established submittal deadline. No application for a zoning change affecting the same parcel of property or part thereof shall be accepted by the Zoning Administrator until the expiration of at least one year immediately following the defeat of the rezoning request by the Valdosta City Council.     12-2.2. Signature of Applicant Required. All applications shall be signed by the applicant or authorized agent, and shall state his/her name and address.     12-2.3. Application for Text Amendment. In the case of a text amendment, the application shall set forth the new text to be added and the existing text to be deleted.     12-2.4. Application for Map Amendment. Applications shall include but not be limited to the following: a.	A legal survey plat of the lot in question, with the following data listed:1.	Scale of drawing should be one" = 100' or other more appropriate scale.2.	Include a location map on drawing showing landmarks.3.	Indicate present zoning of all contiguous property.4.	All utility and other easements.5.	Depict base flood lines or note that property is not within a flood zone.6.	Include north arrow and a graphic scale.7.	The distance to the nearest fire hydrant.8.	The location and size of existing water and sewer facilities.9.	Existing and proposed zoning.b.	A conceptual site plan with the following information:1.	All existing and proposed site improvements, including all buildings with usages, roadways with names, and all other site improvements relative to the development, whether required or not. 2.	Name of the applicant.3.	The date of the drawing and revision dates as applicable.4.	Existing and proposed natural features, including streams and other water resources.5.	Any additional information as necessary to allow an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. c.	A legal description by metes and bounds of the area proposed for rezoning.d.	The area in which the lot proposed to be reclassified is located, the street address, the tax Map-Parcel number(s), and the location with respect to the nearby public streets. e.	The name and address of the owners of the land.f.	The area of land proposed to be reclassified, stated in square feet of less than one acre, and in acres if one acre or more. g.	The application file number, date of application, and action taken on all prior applications filed for the reclassification of the whole or part of the land proposed to be reclassified. h.	A list of all current owners of record for properties located immediately adjacent to or directly across a public street or railroad right-of-way from the subject property. The list shall include the current names, mailing addresses, and tax Map-Parcel numbers as reflected on the current tax roll of Lowndes County. i.	Letter of intent which states the nature of the request and the reasons thereof.j.	Letter of authorization if the applicant is not the current owner or is one of multiple owners. This shall be notarized and signed by the owner(s) authorizing the applicant to submit and be responsible for the application. (Approved by Valdosta Mayor/Council at their regular meeting held 11-6-03, P.C. File # VA-2003-69.)     12-2.4.1. Application for Map Amendment by Local Government. In the case where a map amendment is requested by the local government, the local government shall adhere to the State Zoning Procedures Law. Specifically, the local government shall provide for a hearing on the proposed action. At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing, the local government shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the local government a notice of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Additionally, the notice shall include the general location of the subject property, the street address, map and parcels numbers, property size, current zoning, and proposed zoning. (Approved by Valdosta Mayor/Council 9-8-05, (6-0 vote).)     12-2.5. Referral to Planning Commission. By the 4th working day of each month, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit a copy of the completed application and accompanying materials to the Planning Commission staff, and other applicable local staff members, for review and recommendation. The Planning Commission staff shall then coordinate the review among applicable staff, and prepare a cumulative report and recommendation to the Planning Commission members. The Planning Commission shall review each application request for consistency with the adopted local Comprehensive Plan, and shall issue a finding which states the request to be either "consistent" or "inconsistent" with said Comprehensive Plan. The finding shall then be transmitted as part of a recommendation to the City Council for either approval or denial.     12-2.6. Notice of Public Hearing. a)	Posting of Property. Not less than 15 days prior to the date set for the public hearing on the application for a map amendment, and pursuant to Chapter 66 O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.], the Zoning Administrator shall erect at least one notification sign on the land proposed to be reclassified showing the application file number, the present zoning classification, the scheduled date, time and place of the public hearing, and the telephone number to call for more information. Said sign(s) shall be located within ten feet of whatever boundary line of such land that abuts the street of the advertised address and readily visible to the public. The sign shall remain on the property in the proper location until the public hearing has been held and the governing body has either approved or denied the application. If the land sought to be reclassified lies within more than one block as shown on a plat recorded in the land records of Lowndes County, then a sign shall be erected on the land in each such block. In the case of two intersecting street frontages (corner lot), a single sign may be placed at or near the corner of the intersection at the Zoning Administrator's discretion. In the case of two or more non-intersecting street frontages, a notification sign shall be placed along each non-intersecting street frontage. b)	Notification of Adjacent Property Owners. In the case of a map amendment, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a "notice of public hearing" letter and send a copy by certified mail to each adjacent property owner as described above. The notice shall include the application file number, a map depicting the location of the subject property, the present zoning classification, the proposed zoning classification, the scheduled date, time, and place of public hearing, and the telephone number to call for further information. These notices shall be postmarked not less than 15 days prior to the scheduled date of public hearing. The application shall include an additional fee to defray the expense of preparing and mailing these notices. The accuracy and completeness of the list of property owners shall be the responsibility of the applicant. c)	Newspaper Advertisement. Not less than 15 days prior to the scheduled date of public hearing, and pursuant to Chapter 66 O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.], a notice of public hearing shall be published for at least two consecutive issues in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Valdosta. Such notice shall state the application file number, and shall contain a summary of the proposed amendment in the case of a text amendment, and the location of the property, its area, owner, the current zoning classification, and the proposed classification in the case of a map amendment.     12-2.7. Public Hearing Process. a)	Notice to Interested Parties. A notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be given by the Zoning Administrator to the applicant and the Planning Commission. All application files shall be placed in the custody of the Zoning Administrator, and shall be open to public inspection during regular office hours. b)	Hearing Procedure. All public hearings on zoning matters shall be placed on the City Council agenda under a section entitled "Public Hearings." After an initial staff presentation of a specific zoning and/or annexation/zoning request by the City Council or their designated staff, citizen's comments will be heard in an orderly fashion. The Mayor, Mayor Pro-tem or designated council member will ask for those citizens speaking against the request first, followed by those in favor of the issue. All speakers will be asked to provide his or her name and address for the public record. Citizens are requested to keep their comments as brief as possible so that all who wish to be heard will have adequate time. When there are a large number of citizens wishing to testify at a given hearing, the presiding officer may invoke time limitations on speakers. In such cases, these time limits shall apply to both sides of the issue equally, and shall be a minimum of ten minutes per side. Citizens may address their comments to the City Council as a whole. Individual attacks or cross examination of Council members, city employees, or other citizens will be ruled out of order. After all citizen comments have been received, all further discussion of the specific application is reserved for the City Council. The Council retains the privilege to ask any questions of staff or any citizen present for clarification. The City Council will then vote on the application. When in the opinion of the City Council, the official public hearing has brought forth substantial new evidence not available to the Planning Commission at the time of their hearing, or should the City Council desire to request further study by the Planning Commission of a particular aspect of an application request, it is the policy of the City Council to table the matter and request the Planning Commission to restudy the request and affirm or amend its recommendation, which action shall be reported to the City Council prior to making a final decision.     12-2.8. Standards for Exercise of Zoning Powers. In order to promote the public health, safety, morality and general welfare of the City of Valdosta against the unrestricted use of property, the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the following standards, and any other factors relevant to balancing the above stated public interest, will be considered by the City Council in making any zoning decision: a.	The existing land use pattern;b.	The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts;c.	The existing population density pattern and the possible increase of the load on public facilities; d.	Whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed amendment reasonable; e.	Whether the proposed change will adversely influence existing conditions in the neighborhood or the community at large; f.	Potential impacts on the environment, including but not limited to drainage, wetlands, groundwater recharge areas, endangered wildlife habitats, soil erosion and sedimentation, floodplains, air quality, and water quality and quantity; g.	The costs required of the public in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and public safety necessities when considering the proposed change; h.	Whether the proposed change will be a deterrent to the value or improvement of development of adjacent or nearby property in accordance with existing regulations; i	Whether the proposed change is out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or the City of Valdosta; j.	Whether the proposed change will constitute a grant of special privilege to the individual owner as contrasted with the adjacent or nearby neighborhood or with the general public; and k.	The extent to which the zoning decision is consistent with the adopted local Comprehensive Plan as determined by the Planning Commission.     12-2.9. Public Hearings Records Standards. The City Clerk shall mechanically record the proceedings of all zoning public hearings. If requested by any party, verbatim transcripts of the public hearing can be prepared, but only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party. The record of the public hearing and all evidence (e.g., maps, drawings, traffic studies, etc.) submitted at the public hearing shall be noted as such and shall become a permanent part of the particular zoning amendment's file. 
12-3. - Conditional Zoning.     In certain cases where it is deemed that a proposed use is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood but the required zoning would allow uses that are too intensive to mix compatibly with the surrounding area, the Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta may, upon recommendation by the Planning Staff and/or the Planning Commission, or on its own initiative, apply certain conditions to a rezoning request in order to allow the proposed use while preserving the purpose and intent of this ordinance. In such cases where conditional zoning is approved, the approval shall be noted as follows: R-15(c), C-N(c), C-H(c), etc. Any uses would be subject to the conditions applied to the rezoning. (Mayor/Council approved text amendment at their regular meeting held March 6, 2003, P.C. File # VA-2003-16.) 
12-4. - Administrative Map Corrections.     In the event that an error is discovered with the Official Zoning Map, the Planning Director, Zoning Administrator, or their representative, may correct the error administratively, provided that the error can be proven and documented. A file must be created including all evidence and documentation as well as a map depicting the zoning prior to and after the correction. Such error correction shall not be considered an amendment. (Adopted by Valdosta Mayor/Council 4-8-04, P.C. File # VA-2004-15.) 
SECTION 13. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
13-1. - Conflict with Other Laws.     All previous zoning ordinances of the City of Valdosta are hereby repealed. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances not specifically in conflict herewith are hereby continued in force and effect, but all such ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
13-2. - Separability.     If any portion or provision of this ordinance is found unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect any other portion of this ordinance. 
13-3. - Effective Date.     This ordinance shall take effect and be enforced from and after its adoption and passage by the Mayor and Council. 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] An Ordinance Setting Forth Regulations, Specifications, and Procedures Governing Platting of Land Within the Corporate Limits of the City of Valdosta Into Subdivisions; Requiring and Regulating the Preparation and Presentation of Subdivision Plats for Such Purposes; Establishing Minimum Improvements; Defining Terms; and Providing Penalties for Violation Thereof. Be It Ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Georgia hereby ordains and enacts into law all sections and parts of these regulations. Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note—Printed in this appendix is the city's subdivisions ordinance, as adopted by the mayor and council on November 4, 1964. Amendments to the subdivisions ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or adopting any subdivision regulation saved from repeal, § 1-6(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 42; floods, ch. 50; historical preservation, ch. 58; landscape development, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 86; zoning ordinance, app. A; airport zoning ordinance, app. C.State Law reference— Approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d); Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq.; local restrictions on condominiums, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-114; Georgia Condominium Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq.
SECTION 1. - SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE, AND JURISDICTION 
Sec. 1-1. - Short Title.     These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Regulations for the City of Valdosta." 
Sec. 1-2. - Jurisdiction.     These regulations shall govern all subdivision of land into two or more parcels within the corporate limits of the City of Valdosta. 
Sec. 1-3. - Purpose.     The purpose of these regulations shall be to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare requiring the harmonious, orderly, and progressive development of land within the City of Valdosta. In furtherance of this purpose, regulation of the subdivision of land is authorized for the following purposes: a.	To encourage the development of an economically sound and stable economy.b.	To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land development. c.	To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation both vehicular and pedestrian in new land developments. d.	To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites and new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreation, educational, and other public purposes. e.	To assure, in general, the wise development of new areas in harmony with the development plan of the community. 
SECTION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 2-1. - Definitions.     For the purpose of this ordinance, the following words, terms, phrases, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section.     Words used in the present tense include the future. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular.     The word "shall" is always mandatory while the word "may" is discretionary.     The planning commission's interpretation shall be final as to the meaning of any definition, statement, requirement, symbol, and/or abbreviation used in connection with these regulations and/or application thereof. 
Sec. 2-2. - Building Line.     A line beyond which no foundation wall or part of the structure of any building shall project, with the exception of roof overhang and the subsurface projection of footings; provided, however, that such overhang and footings do not encroach upon the adjacent property or right-of-way. 
Sec. 2-3. - City.     The City of Valdosta, Georgia. 
Sec. 2-4. - City Council.     The mayor and councilmen of the City of Valdosta, Georgia. 
Sec. 2-5. - City Engineer.     The official to whom the responsibilities normally associated with this title have been delegated. 
Sec. 2-6. - City Specifications.     The current edition of printed specification and standard drawings governing construction within the City of Valdosta as issued by the city engineer. (Available on request.) 
Sec. 2-7. - Commissioner of Health.     The Lowndes County Commissioner of Health, the Lowndes County Health Department and/or the State of Georgia Department of Health. The words "commissioner of health" are used in these regulations to denote the fact that all matters pertaining to health regulations shall be directed to that official or his staff. 
Sec. 2-8. - Crosswalk.     A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use for pedestrian use only and is so designed as to provide access to adjacent streets or lots. 
Sec. 2-9. - Cul-de-sac.     A street having only one end open for access to another street and the other end being terminated by a turnaround as specified in these regulations. 
Sec. 2-10. - Development.     The act, process or state of erecting buildings, structures or making improvements. 
Sec. 2-11. - Development Plan.     The development plan for the City of Valdosta, Georgia, which may consist of the thoroughfare plan, general land use plan, street and road classification plan, and other maps, data, and descriptive matter for the physical development of the city or any portions thereof, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto. 
Sec. 2-12. - Director.     The planning director of the planning commission. 
Sec. 2-13. - Easement.     A grant by the owner of land for the use of such land by others including the public for a specific purpose or purposes. 
Sec. 2-14. - Lots.     An undivided portion of land which is designed as a distinct and separate tract and identified by a tract number, lot number, or symbol on an approved subdivision plat properly recorded, and which is or may in the future be offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement. 
Sec. 2-15. - Lot Width.     The distance between the side lot lines, measured at the minimum front yard setback line as established in the zoning ordinance and measured parallel to the street right-of-way line. 
Sec. 2-16. - Planning Commission.     The Greater Lowndes County Planning Commission. 
Sec. 2-17. - Planned Residential Development (PRD).     A subdivision planned to include open space and a variety of housing types which would also permit other land uses, including multifamily structures, churches, schools and commercial activities. 
Sec. 2-18. - Right-of-Way.     A portion of land being used or which in the future will be used as a street, road, thoroughfare, crosswalk, pipeway, drainage canal, and/or other similar uses and designed by means of right-of-way lines. 
Sec. 2-19. - Single-Family Attached Building.     A building containing two or more single-family attached dwelling units joined at one or more points by one or more party walls or common facilities not including the walls of an enclosed courtyard or similar area. 
Sec. 2-20. - Subdivider.     Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership or any agent therefor who undertakes or proposes to undertake the subdivision of land so as to constitute a subdivision of land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined. 
Sec. 2-21. - Subdivision.     The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions; the combination of a number of lots or parcels to form a lesser number; the division of land involving the dedication of a new street, easement or other public way for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, transference, legacy, development or other purposes; includes resubdivision; where appropriate relates to the process of subdividing of the land or area subdivided. For plats not included within this definition, see section 6-7, Exempt Plat Process. Exemptions are as follows: 1.	The public acquisition of land for use in widening existing streets.2.	The transference of part of one lot or tract in an existing subdivision to an adjacent lot or tract in the same subdivision providing that the transference does not reduce any lot or tract to an area or width less than the zoning minimum of the area and does not increase the total number of lots. 
Sec. 2-22. - Tax Assessor.     Lowndes County Board of Tax Assessors. 
Sec. 2-23. - Tract.     A portion of land with definite and ascertainable limits or boundaries. 
Sec. 2-24. - Utility.     Any community service available to the public by means of an overhead or underground distribution or collection system such as electricity, telephone, water, gas, cable television, and sewerage disposal. 
Sec. 2-25. - Zoning Regulations.     The zoning regulations enacted by the mayor and council of the City of Valdosta, Georgia [appendix A]. 
SECTION 3. - GENERAL 
Sec. 3-1. - Zoning Regulations.     No subdivision shall be accepted for review which does not conform with the zoning regulations applicable to the land for which it is proposed. 
Sec. 3-2. - Approval by Individual Agencies.     No subdivision plat shall be recorded with the clerk of the superior court of Lowndes County, Georgia, without said plat having first been submitted to and approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the secretary of the planning commission. The planning commission shall not approve any subdivision plat without said plat having first been reviewed and approved by the city engineer and the commissioner of health to the extent that each has jurisdiction. 
Sec. 3-3. - Subdivisions Requiring No New Street, Water or Sewer Facilities.     All subdivisions which do not involve the platting, construction, or opening of new streets, water or sewer facilities shall be accepted by the planning commission in the form of a final plat provided that the plat shall comply with these regulations in all respects. 
Sec. 3-4. - Thoroughfare Plan.     The present and future functions of the streets and roads of the City of Valdosta are classified on a map entitled "The Official Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Valdosta" and certified by the mayor of Valdosta. 
SECTION 4. - MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS—CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISIONS 
Sec. 4-1. - Density.     The overall tract of a proposed subdivision (planned residential development, PRD, excepted) to include all acreage within its boundaries, will not be designed to include a greater average number of lots per acre than listed below: 4-1.1. R-15—2.9 lots per acre. 4-1.2. R-10 and DR-10—4.3 lots per acre. 4-1.3.  R-6—7.2 lots per acre.Multifamily—12 lots per acre.R-6S—7.2 lots per acre.Exceptions to the minimum number of lots per acre may be made by the planning commission if evidence is presented by the subdivider which warrants a larger number of lots per acre. 
Sec. 4-2. - Blocks.     4-2.1. Nonresidential: Blocks for other than residential use shall be of such length and width as may be suitable for their prospective use, including adequate provision for off-street parking and maneuvering space.     4-2.2. Residential: The length of residential blocks shall not exceed 1,500 feet measured from interior street right-of-way lines nor be less than 400 feet. Blocks of more than 1,500 feet may be permitted by the planning commission if in its opinion natural or manmade barriers such as streams, railroads or previously developed subdivisions require blocks of greater size. The depth of residential blocks shall be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots, unless prohibited by natural or manmade barriers, or unless one tier backs onto a line of another person's property, and provided that this shall not prevent the inclusion of blocks of greater width including super blocks. Super blocks may contain public or joint use areas such as parks and playgrounds and shall be covered by adequate maintenance agreements if not dedicated and accepted for public maintenance.     4-2.3. Crosswalks: Rights-of-way for pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided when in the opinion of the planning commission crosswalks are necessary for direct pedestrian access to schools, shopping centers, and parks. The crosswalk right-of-way shall not be less than 20 feet wide. 
Sec. 4-3. - Easements.     4-3.1. Utility: Unless underground utilities are provided, utility easements for overhead services shall be located at the rear or side of and adjacent to the lot lines and shall be a minimum width of 20 feet. Where possible, water lines shall be located outside the curbline on the west and south sides of streets; sewer and gas lines shall be on the east and north sides. Wherever public utility easements are planned adjacent to the subdivision tract boundary or phase they shall be platted within said subdivision or phase thereof.     Water and sewer lines outside of street rights-of-way shall follow side and rear property lines where possible and a minimum easement width of 20 feet shall be provided unless it is determined by the city engineer that a greater width is necessary for maintenance or construction.     4-3.2. Drainage: Drainage easements shall be provided as required by the city engineer after review of the construction plans. Drainage easements outside of street rights-of-way shall follow side and rear property lines where possible and shall have a minimum easement width of 20 feet unless it is determined by the city engineer that a greater width is necessary for maintenance and construction. 
Sec. 4-4. - Lots.     4-4.1. Minimum Lot Size: Minimum lot size shall be as prescribed in the zoning regulations for the City of Valdosta [appendix A].     4-4.2. Minimum Lot Elevation: The lot area contained within and contiguous to the building walls and for a minimum distance of ten feet measured from all sides of said building shall have a minimum elevation of two feet above the maximum flood stage of streams or canals in the particular area being developed based on acceptable engineering procedure and approved by the city engineer, that said minimum elevation shall be subject to approval by the commissioner of health. In the event no drainage easement is provided to the side or rear of lots, the minimum floor elevation shall be at least six inches above the finished curb grade and said elevation shall be noted on the final plat. 
Sec. 4-5. - Building Lines.     4-5.1. Setback Lines: All building setback lines shall be as specified in the zoning regulations for the City of Valdosta [appendix A].     4-5.2. City Limits: Lots shall not be divided by corporate boundary lines.     4-5.3. Corner Lots: Corner lots shall be of such size and dimension that will permit the location of buildings so as to conform with the building setback lines, as prescribed in the zoning regulations. A minimum of 4,000 square feet, exclusive of required setback areas, will be provided for corner lots. If a lot is irregular, additional square feet may be required.     4-5.4. Double Frontage: Lots having street frontage both to the front and rear shall be prohibited except where it is essential to provide separation of residential development from railroad or major and secondary arterial rights-of-way. Where a railroad or major arterial abuts or runs through any portion of the subdivision, the subdivision plan shall provide that each lot backing on said railroad or arterial right-of-way shall have an average minimum depth of 170 feet with neither side yard line being less than 120 feet, which shall include a 20-foot planted buffer strip separating the lots from the right-of-way.     4-5.5. Commercial Use Buffer Zones: When a portion of the subdivision is to be devoted to commercial purposes such as a shopping center, and when it adjoins residential lots, or when a portion of a proposed subdivision adjoins an area zoned commercial or industrial, a buffer zone shall be not less than 20 feet in width and said buffer zone shall be landscaped with hedges or closely planted small trees (to be planted at the time of development) as to provide visual screening. No building or portion thereof may be constructed in said buffer zone, and protective covenants shall be provided to insure this restriction. Said buffer zone shall be labeled as such on the subdivision plat. 
Sec. 4-6. - Streets.     The street and road system of any subdivision shall give due consideration to the official thoroughfare plan for the City of Valdosta.     4-6.1. Access: Every lot of every subdivision shall directly abut a public street which shall be maintained by the city. Where the subdivision does not abut a public street, the subdivider shall provide a public street from the subdivision to the nearest public street.     4-6.2. Alignment and Continuation: Streets within the subdivision shall be so arranged as to provide for the alignment and continuation of or projection of existing public streets, where feasible.     4-6.3. Culs-de-sac: Permanent culs-de-sac shall not be longer than 500 feet from the nearest street right-of-way line with which it intersects to the center of its diameter. Culs-de-sac shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a right-of-way of not less than 100 feet. Paving within the turnaround shall have an outside diameter of not less than 80 feet.     4-6.4. Dead-End Streets: Permanent dead-end streets and alleys shall be prohibited.     4-6.5. Intersections: The centerlines of no more than two streets shall intersect at any one point. No street shall intersect another at less than 80 degrees and shall as nearly as possible intersect at 90 degrees. A tangent no less than 100 feet shall be placed between a curved street and the nearest right-of-way line of the street with which it intersects.     4-6.6. Curb Radius: The curb radius at street intersections shall be no less than 20 feet except on major arterial streets where Georgia Highway Department standards shall prevail.     4-6.7. Curved Streets: The inner curb radius may not be less than 350 feet for major arterial streets, and 100 feet for collector and residential streets. Centerline tangents between reverse curves shall be not less than 200 feet for secondary streets and 100 feet for collector and residential streets.     4-6.8. Right-of-Way Extension: Where, in the opinion of the planning commission, it is essential to provide for the extension of a street to adjacent property, such street right-of-way shall be extended by dedication, and improved, to the boundary of such property.     4-6.9. Street Jogs: Street jogs at intersections shall be not less than 150 feet between centerline offsets.     4-6.10. Street Names: The building official, South Georgia Regional Development Center, maintains an up-to-date listing of all city streets. The subdivider will refer to this listing when including the proposed name or number of all streets on the subdivision plat. A name once used should not be repeated elsewhere within the city even with different suffix, i.e., Mary Street - Mary Circle - Mary Way. The names of all new streets within the subdivision shall be subject to the review of the planning commission.     4-6.11. Street Right-of-Way and Pavement Width: Street right-of-way shall be measured between lot lines and shall be prescribed in this section. The pavement width shall be measured from curb lip to curb lip and shall be as prescribed in the development plan as follows: Street ClassificationMinimumRight-of-Way(in Feet)MinimumPavement Width(in Feet)Highways100VariesMajor (with curb and gutter)8064Secondary (with curb and gutter)8044Collector (with curb and gutter)60 36 Residential (with curb and gutter)5026 If the width of pavement is 24 feet, then no parking shall be allowed on the street. If the pavement width is 28 feet, then parking will be allowed on one side of the street. If the pavement width is 32 feet, then parking can be allowed on both sides of the street.     4-6.12. Additional Right-of-Way: If the subdivision boundary lies adjacent to the right-of-way line of an existing platted street of less than minimum right-of-way width, a minimum of one-half the required extra width shall be dedicated.     4-6.13. Provisions for Public Use: In subdividing land, due consideration shall be given to suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other common areas for public use. The acquisition of such land shall rest with the proper authority. 
SECTION 5. - PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT 
Sec. 5-1. - Planned Development. 1.	Residential. A planned residential development consisting of two or more buildings to be constructed on a tract of land not subdivided into customary streets and lots shall be allowed in districts PRD-15, PRD-10, and PRD-6 in accordance with the following requirements: A.	Master Plan. A preliminary master plan for the planned development shall be submitted to the planning commission at the time of the request for rezoning to PRD zoning classification. The preliminary master plan shall be drawn to approximate scale and shall show the overall boundaries of the development, all lots and their location, proposed streets and various uses within the development. Upon approval of the rezoning requests and the preliminary master plan, a final master plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. After the plan is formerly presented to the planning commission, the planning commission shall have a minimum of 30 days to review and finally approve said plan. Each master plan shall be prepared by an architect, landscape architect, engineer or land surveyor, whose state registration is current and valid. His seal or professional initials shall be affixed to the plans submitted. Each master plan shall be drawn to an appropriate scale and in accordance with the approved preliminary master plan and shall show the following: 1)	Name. Name or names of the proposed development. Name or names and addresses of the owners and designers of the site of the master plan and his seal. 2)	Date. Date, appropriate north arrow and scale. 3)	Boundary. The boundary line of the tract to be developed drawn accurately to scale and with accurate lineal and angular dimensions. 4)	Location Map. A map to an appropriate scale showing the location of the development. 5)	Contours. Contours with a minimum vertical interval of one foot referred to sea level datum shall be provided for both existing and proposed topography. 6)	Existing Property Lines. The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, water mains, sewers, culverts, drain pipes, and public utility easements, both on the land to be developed and on that portion of the land immediately adjoining which abuts the land to be developed and any other pertinent characteristics of the land; the name of adjoining subdivision or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land and the zoning of the property. 7)	Proposed Improvements. The name, where appropriate, and locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, and specific use areas, parking, recreational areas and facilities, yards and other open spaces. 8)	Utility and Drainage Plans. Utility and drainage plans shall be provided including all information required by city and county health, public works, water, sewer and sanitation departments to determine the water, sewer and sanitation disposal and storm drainage improvements will be made and located in accordance with City of Valdosta's requirements. 9)	Buffer Areas. Location, dimensions and treatment of all required buffer, landscaped or planted areas, including fences. 10)	Design Plans. The plans, including exact location, design, and floor plans, of all dwellings to be constructed within the development. 11)	Proposed Protective or Restrictive Covenants. A preliminary outline of proposed protective covenants or restrictive covenants including provisions for the organization or financing of a homeowners association where appropriate. 12)	Other Information. Other information required by the planning commission in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. B.	Development Standards. A planned residential development shall conform to the following restrictions and development standards: 1)	Minimum Area. The minimum tract of land eligible for development as a residential planned development shall be one acre. 2)	Density. A planned residential development shall be allowed only in PRD districts with the following maximum density for each district: Development, Five Acres or MoreDevelopment, Less Than Five AcresPRD-15—5 units per acrePRD-15—2.9 units per acrePRD-10—8 units per acrePRD-10—4.3 units per acrePRD-6—10 units per acrePRD-6—7.3 units per acre 3)	Recordation of Plat. The approved plat of said development shall be recorded in accordance with the provisions of the City of Valdosta Subdivision Regulations [this appendix]. 4)	Minimum Floor Area. The minimum gross square feet of heated area in each of PRD district shall be as follows: PRD-15—1,200 square feet PRD-10—1,000 square feet PRD-6—800 square feet 5)	Maximum Area and Dimensions Requirements. All residential buildings and structures shall not consume more than 40 percent of the total site capable of development, including setbacks. Streets and paving including parking lots shall not exceed 30 percent of the total area. Green area, landscaped open space shall be a minimum of 30 percent of the total area. 6)	Location and Restrictions on Parking Lots. All parking in PRD zones shall be rear yard only; no parking shall be allowed in the front or side yard, unless otherwise approved by mayor/council. Where paved parking lots are installed the following requirements shall be complied with in regard to location from structures and public streets: The minimum distance between parking lot and any dwelling structure shall be five feet, exclusive of sidewalks which must be maintained as a green area or landscaped wooded area. Except where abutting a public street, the minimum distance between a paved parking lot and a boundary line of said planned development shall be 12 feet which shall be a green area. 7)	Setbacks. In all PRD districts the following setbacks shall apply to exterior boundary lines and exterior lot lines and be uniformly measured from the center line of the public street or lot lines where applicable: Front yard—Minimum 55 feet. Side yard—Minimum ten feet. Rear yard—Minimum 30 feet. There is no minimum setback for interior lot lines. 8)	Development and Construction Time Limitation. If minimal construction has not been completed within 12 months after approval of the final master plan by the planning commission, approval for the plans is hereby rescinded; after which date all development or plans for development on said property shall be subject to resubmission to the planning commission in accordance with this ordinance or the ordinance in effect at the time of submission. Minimal construction as used herein shall mean installation of water and sewer facilities, paving, building foundation and structure walls of the first phase of the development. 
SECTION 6. - APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISIONS     Subdivisions shall be reviewed and approved in three stages as follows [in this section]. 
Sec. 6-1. - Preliminary Plat.     6-1.1. Purpose: The purpose of the preliminary plat is to safeguard the subdivider from unnecessary loss of time and expense in preparation of a subdivision plat which does not conform with the specifications of the subdivision regulations ordinance [this appendix]. The preliminary plat requires only approximate accuracy of scale and dimension. Public agencies having jurisdiction will review the preliminary plat regarding matters within their jurisdiction. During the review process the subdivider or his agent may be called upon for consultation.     6-1.2. Future Tract Plan: In cases where a subdivision is to be developed in stages with additional plats being filed with the planning commission at a later date(s), the filing of the initial plat will be accompanied by a future tract plan, a reasonably accurate plat in sketch form of the entire tract which will show the future street system for the entire tract.     6-1.3. Filing. Any person desiring to subdivide land shall file with the planning commission five copies of the preliminary plat which will be accompanied by a letter of application. The plat shall be prepared in accordance with these regulations and with applicable county and/or city specifications by a registered engineer, surveyor, and/or architect who is licensed under the laws of the State of Georgia. The preliminary plat shall be deemed filed with the planning commission when it is filed with the director. At the time of filing, a certificate of filing shall be furnished by the director to include the time and date of filing. The director shall have authority to reject the preliminary plat, if after study, he finds that it does not comply with these regulations. If rejected, the director shall provide the subdivider with a written statement specifying all the respects in which the plat fails to comply. The subdivider may appeal to the planning commission from such rejection.     6-1.4. Approval by the Planning Commission: Approval or disapproval of the preliminary or preliminary final plat by the planning commission shall be accomplished within 30 days after the plat is filed with the planning commission. If after 30 days the planning commission has failed to act, the preliminary shall be deemed approved and on demand, a copy shall be signed for transmission to the appropriate governing bodies; provided, that the subdivider may waive in writing this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. If the planning commission disapproves the preliminary plat, the reasons therefore shall be stated in the resolution disapproving the same and the subdivider shall be so informed. 
Sec. 6-2. - Construction Drawings.     6-2.1. No work shall commence prior to approval of the complete set of construction plans. The construction drawings shall consist of the following: a.	Preliminary final plat. The preliminary final plat shall conform to the approved preliminary plat. If desired by the subdivider, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the preliminary plat that he proposes to record at that time provided that such portion conforms with all requirements of these regulations. b.	Plans and profiles and typical road sections for streets.c.	Location, calculations and profiles for all drainage structures.d.	Detailed plans of all intersections showing drainage at intersections at scale one inch equals 50 feet or more detailed. e.	Water and sanitary sewer plans including both on-site and off-site lines that are to be constructed. f.	Site grading and clearing. Plans with soil erosion control structures and devices.g.	Denote any 100-year floodplain or statement that property does not lie within the 100-year floodplain.     6-2.2. The subdivider shall submit two sets of the construction drawings and the supplementary data to the city engineer and allow seven days for study of the plans. The action and/or recommendations shall be noted on the plans and returned to the submitter. After changes are made by the submitter these shall become final. Two sets of construction plans shall be required to be stamped and signed to approve the conditions set before any work begins. Additional sets of plans may be submitted to be stamped for the developer's use. One copy of the approved construction plans must be at the job site whenever work is in progress.     6-2.3. Upon approval of the construction plans by the city engineer, the subdivider shall submit two copies of the plat to each of the other utility companies including the power company, the gas company, the telephone company, and cable television. These companies shall mark their proposed facilities on the plat and return one copy to the subdivider for preparation of a utility drawing.     6-2.4. The following permits shall be taken out before each phase of work commences. These are available at no cost from the office of the city engineer upon submittal of the appropriate bonds as described in section 9. a.	Grading permit (prior to any grading or clearing).b.	Storm drainage, if separate from grading.c.	Sanitary sewer.d.	Water.e.	Curbing and paving.f.	Telephone, power, gas, cable television, etc.
Sec. 6-3. - The Final Plat.     6-3.1. Conformance: The final plat shall conform with the approved preliminary plat. If desired by the subdivider, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the preliminary plat he proposes to record and develop at that time; provided that such portion conforms with all requirements of these regulations.     6-3.2. Filing: Filing of the final plat with the planning commission shall include the following: a.	A letter of application containing the name and address of a person to whom notice of hearing may be sent. b.	A complete list of deviations, if any, from that which appeared on the approved preliminary plat. c.	A certified copy of all private covenants or deed restrictions, maintenance agreements for common areas and other related documents pertaining to land within the subdivision. d.	A copy of the agreement between the subdivider and the city, if any, regarding the arrangements for providing the necessary water and sewer facilities. e.	Two original reproducible mylars and five blackline prints of the final plat.The final plat shall be deemed filed with the planning commission when it is filed with the director. At the time of filing, a certificate of filing shall be furnished the applicant which will include the date of filing. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with these regulations and applicable county and/or city requirements by a registered engineer, surveyor, and/or architect who is licensed under the laws of the State of Georgia. The director shall have the authority to reject the final plat if, after study, he finds that it does not conform with the approved preliminary plat of these regulations. If rejected, the director shall provide the subdivider with a written statement specifying all the respects in which the plat does not conform. Filing the final plat shall be accomplished at least 15 days prior to the regular planning commission meeting at which it is to be considered.     6-3.3. Approval by Individual Agencies: No final plat shall be approved by the planning commission unless it is approved by the commissioner of health, city engineer, and the assignment of parcel numbers by the Lowndes County Board of Tax Assessors. Said agencies shall approve, with or without modification, or disapprove the final plat to the extent to which each has jurisdiction.     6-3.4. Approval by Planning Commission: Approval or disapproval of the final plat by the planning commission shall be accomplished within 30 days after the plat is filed with the planning commission. If after 30 days the planning commission has failed to act, the final plat shall be deemed approved and on demand a copy shall be signed for transmission to the appropriate governing body; provided, that the subdivider may waive in writing this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. If the final plat is disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be stated in the resolution disapproving the same and the subdivider shall be so informed. The approval of a final plat shall not be deemed to constitute an acceptance by the public, the county or the city of any street or other ground shown upon the plat. a.	No plat shall be acted upon by the planning commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the subdivider not less than five days before the date of such hearing. 
Sec. 6-4. - Recording, Revising and Removal of Plats.     6-4.1. Recording: Upon satisfactory compliance with these regulations and after approval by the planning commission, the secretary of the planning commission shall present the final plat to the clerk of superior court, Lowndes County, Georgia, to be recorded and shall distribute copies of the final plat in accordance with the distribution schedule set forth in these regulations. The director shall provide the subdivider with the subdivision map book number and page number in which the subdivision has been recorded. If, however, the subdivider requests the planning commission to delay having the plat recorded, the subdivider shall authorize in writing the planning commission to have the approved final plat recorded within 12 months from the date of the final plat approval otherwise the approval of the final plat shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.     6-4.2. Revision to a Recorded Plat: Proposed revisions which change in any way the street and/or utility layout shall be submitted as a preliminary plat in accordance with section 6-1 of these regulations. Proposed revisions which do not change in any way the street and/or utility layout shall be submitted as a final plat in accordance with section 6-2 of these regulations. In addition, a revision to a recorded plat shall show the name, phase (if any), date of the recorded subdivision plat being revised and the exact citation with regard to the county land records and the book and page number wherein said plat is recorded.     6-4.3. Removal: After a subdivision has been recorded, the subdivider may petition the city council for permission to remove the subdivision plat from the land records of Lowndes County. The city council may permit such removal providing that no lot in the subdivision has been sold. Upon giving its permission for such removal, the city council shall release the bonds and/or cash posted by the subdivider pursuant to the provisions of section 9. 
Sec. 6-5. - Deposit and Reproduction.     Upon approval of the final plat by the planning commission, the subdivider shall deposit with the planning commission an amount equal to the cost of recording the final plat with the clerk of superior court, Lowndes County, Georgia; and an amount equal to the cost of securing the required number of reproducibles and prints (see section 6-6, "Distribution Schedule") or authorize the planning commission to have the reproducibles and prints made at an establishment where the subdivider maintains an account. 
Sec. 6-6. - Distribution Schedule. County RecordsOriginal linen or plastic reproducible and one printCity EngineerThree prints (two file and one building inspector) and one reproducibleCity Tax AssessorOne printCounty Tax AssessorOne printCounty Health DepartmentOne printPolice DepartmentOne printWater and Sewer DepartmentOne printBoard of EducationOne printFire DepartmentOne printPlanning CommissionOne reproducible—Drafting-AddressingOne print—DraftingOne printTotalOne original linen or plastic reproducibleTwo reproducibles13 prints 
Sec. 6-7. - Exempt Plat Process.     Any plat submitted for recording that meets conditions for exempt status per section 2-21 (Subdivision) are required to be certified by the planning director or representative. All plats exempt from the standard review process must be assigned a parcel number by the Lowndes County Board of Tax Assessors if a new parcel is being created. The tax assessors will review and assign a map and parcel number which must be shown on the plat prior to recording. All exempt plats must be submitted on a mylar, plus five prints. The mylar will be retained by the planning director. Resurveys of existing parcels which do not involve a map parcel change must be verified by the planning director and the tax assessor's office. Existing map parcel numbers must be on the plat at recording. Any plat submitted through the normal subdivision process shall be reviewed by the tax assessor's office and assigned a map and parcel number. 
SECTION 7. - THE SUBDIVISION PLAT 
Sec. 7-1. - The Preliminary Plat.     The preliminary plat may be a penciled sketch of approximate accuracy and of a legible scale, made directly on a print of a boundary survey. The plat will include the following information: 7-1.1. Title and Location: The plat will show the name of the proposed subdivision, its location by county and city, the address, name and registration number of the surveyor preparing the plat and the date of the plat. A north arrow will be included with a notation referencing the bearings to magnetic north, astronomical north or grid north. 7-1.2. General Layout: The plat shall show information as to the proposed street layout and widths, layout of lots with a notation as to the minimum size and width of lots and any proposed open space. Any lands to be dedicated will be identified. 7-1.3. Topography: The plat shall show existing contour lines dashed and any proposed contour lines solid, both sets of lines to be at two-foot intervals, mean sea level (M.S.L.). Prominent drainage features such as lakes, depressions, streams, etc., which could affect the design of the subdivision, shall be shown. Engineering data showing the high water elevation and how it was established shall be submitted with the plat. Denote any 100-year floodplain or that property does not lie within the 100-year floodplain. 7-1.4. Existing Features: The plat shall show the locations and names of the existing and platted property lines, streets (and its right-of-way), railroads (and its right-of-way), public and private rights-of-way, sanitary sewer (and size), water mains (and size), bridges, culverts, storm drainage (and size), easements, parks and other public open spaces, land lot and land district lines, city limit lines and names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 7-1.5. Location Map: The preliminary plat shall include a location map of sufficient clarity so that the location of the subdivision can be readily determined. 7-1.6. Completeness: If any of the above facts are omitted or misrepresented, the director may refuse to file the plat for review by the planning commission and shall return the plat to the subdivider to be completed or revised. 
Sec. 7-2. - The Final Plat.     7-2.1. Sheet Design: The final plat shall conform to the items listed under the preliminary plat (subsections 7-1.1, 7-1.4, 7-1.5) and the requirements thereof, as set forth in these regulations and shall be drawn in black India ink on one or more sheets of linen tracing cloth or mylar film measuring 18 inches by 24 inches. The minimum line width shall be 0.013 inch and the minimum letter and/or character height shall be 0.090 inch. When two or more sheets are used, a key map, either in addition to or a modification of section 7-1.5, shall be shown on each sheet. There shall be a two-inch margin on the left end of the plat and a one-half-inch margin on the remaining three sides. A revision to a recorded plat shall be drawn in black India ink on the same type cloth or film as mentioned above. The final plat shall be drawn on the scale (stated and graphical) of one inch equals 100 feet.     7-2.2. Surveyor Certificate: The following certificate shall be entered on the face of the plat as shown in figure 1. Placement of this certificate may vary as necessary: I certify that all measurements are correct and were prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision; the field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in ____________ feet and an angular error of ____________ per angle point, and was adjusted using ____________ rule; the plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in ____________ feet; monument and pin locations are correctly shown by the symbols ____________ and the pins are ____________ (type of metallic material and length). Signed _____ (Seal) Date ____________/____________/____________ __________.Surveyor, Georgia Registration No.     7-2.3. Owner Certificate: The following certificate shall be entered on the face of the plat as shown in figure 1. Placement of this certificate may vary as necessary: We, the undersigned owner(s) and/or mortgagee(s) of the ____________ Subdivision, hereby offer to dedicate and/or reserve for public use the rights-of-way, easements and other ground as shown on this plat. OwnerDateMortgageeDate________________________________________     7-2.4. Approvals: The following spaces shall be provided (as shown in Figure 1) in the form listed below for approval by all agencies having jurisdiction. Placement on plat may vary: Approved by Department of Public Health, Lowndes County, Georgia. Date _____Signed _____Health Department Representative Approved by City Engineer, Valdosta, Georgia Date _____Signed _____City Engineer Approved by the Greater Lowndes County Planning Commission Date _____Signed _____Planning Director     7-2.5. Surveying Data: The final plat shall contain the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line and boundary line whether curved or straight. A note will be made on the plat as to whether curved dimensions are arc or chord distances. Easement lines (and width), land lot and land district lines will be shown. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals to the nearest 1/100 of a foot, and all angles shall be shown to the nearest second. The error of closure shall not exceed one in 10,000.     7-2.6. Monuments: The final plat shall show the accurate location, material and description of all monuments (as stated in section 7-2.2). A permanent master bench mark shall be established (subject to the approval of the city engineer) within or adjacent to the site by transfer of levels, not less than third order accuracy, from the nearest approved bench mark of known mean sea level (M.S.L.) elevation showing its location on the final plat and recording its elevation on the final plat to the nearest 1/100 of a foot.     7-2.7. Easements: In addition to the requirements for the preliminary plat as set forth in section 7-1.4 of these regulations, the final plat will show the location and width of all temporary construction easements (as required by standard engineering practice), public utility easements and drainage easements where required.     7-2.8. Construction Drawings: At such time as the final plat is filed for review with the director, the subdivider shall submit construction drawings to the city engineer for review and approval. Construction drawings shall conform to city specifications. 
SECTION 8. - MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS 
Sec. 8-1. - General.     The subdivider shall provide public improvements as required by these regulations and by applicable city specification and requirements. 8-1.1. The design of all minimum improvements shall be under the direction of an engineer registered in the State of Georgia and all plans shall bear his seal. 8-1.2. A certificate of approval from the county health department shall accompany all water and sewer plans. 
Sec. 8-2. - Curbs and Gutter.     The subdivider shall install curb and gutter and proper drainage on all streets. 
Sec. 8-3. - Monuments/Pins.     The subdivider shall provide, through the licensed surveyor, the setting of all reinforced concrete monuments and pins. The reinforced concrete monuments shall be four inches in diameter or square, 30 inches long with a flat top. The top of each monument shall be set flush with the ground. Said monuments shall be set within each block of the subdivision and shall be located along the longest interior straight away; a minimum of four per block shall be installed as shown on the approved plat. Pins, a minimum of 15 inches long and one-half inch in diameter (metallic material type to be listed on plat per section 7-2.2) shall be placed along the exterior boundary and interior lot intersection except where concrete monuments are to be located, on each street corner, points of curvature in each street at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundary of the subdivision, and where such corners lie within a stream meander (in which case reference pins shall be placed on the bank of the stream). The pin shall be set a minimum of two inches under the ground. The top of the concrete monument shall contain a metal plate or metal rod which shall be scored in such a manner that will properly and accurately identify the location. 
Sec. 8-4. - Water Supply and Sanitary Sewage.     8-4.1. Every lot of a proposed subdivision shall be supplied with adequate water and sanitary facilities which shall require the approval of the commissioner of health. Where existing water and sewer mains are in the street, but no services to the proposed lots, the subdivider shall have the services installed. Where public water and sanitary sewerage is available through extensions, the subdivider shall assure that every lot of the subdivision shall be provided with said public facilities in accordance with applicable city specifications.     8-4.2. Minimum Improvements: Standard fire hydrants of a type specified by the City of Valdosta in the construction specifications shall be installed as a part of the water distribution system within a subdivision (existing or new) for single-family dwellings. A fire hydrant shall be located at each intersection and additional hydrant or hydrants installed where the distance between intersections exceed 500 feet. In no case shall hydrants be spaced greater than 500 feet and shall have a flow of 750 g.p.m. (gallons per minutes). In light commercial, apartments, and multifamily dwelling districts, fire hydrants shall be installed so that the distance from fire hydrants to the driveway entrance nearest the front of the building shall not exceed 250 feet, with a total distance not to exceed 500 feet to the extreme back of the building by way of driveways. Hydrants shall have a flow of not less than 750 g.p.m. (gallons per minute) in the following zoning districts: CC, R-15, R-10, R-6, R-6S, R-P, OP, PRD-15, PRD-10, PRD-6. An option, provided automatic sprinklers are installed according to N.F.P.A. regulations, the spacing of hydrants may be increased to 350 feet to the driveway entrance nearest the front of the building, provided the total distance does not exceed 700 feet to the extreme back of the building by way of driveways. In manufacturing, heavy commercial, industrial and any facility which handles or uses flammable or hazardous materials, hydrants shall be installed within 300 feet to the midpoint of the structure and equally spaced thereafter, not to exceed 300 feet between hydrants and the extreme rear of the building. The distance shall be measured along the line traveled by the fire truck. In the following zoning districts, hydrants shall have a flow capacity of not less than 1,000 g.p.m. (gallons per minutes); CH, M-1, M-2, an option provided automatic sprinklers are installed according to N.F.P.A. requirements, the spacing of hydrants may be increased from 300 feet to 500 feet. Distance between fire hydrants shall be as specified unless fire department operations would otherwise allow increased spacing. Actual location of fire hydrants shall be the responsibility of the fire chief or his representative.     8-4.3. The entire cost of extending water and sewer lines and their associated services within subdivision shall be borne by the developer. 
Sec. 8-5. - Sidewalks. a.	When any parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city abutting existing public streets is developed with new construction, or over half of an existing structure is remodeled or renovated, the owner or developer shall install a four-foot-wide sidewalk along the entire frontage of the said parcel. Said sidewalk to be installed within the city right-of-way in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. Compliance with this section shall not be required for single-family residential lots of record prior to the date of adoption of this section. b.	In new subdivisions where the developer or owner is installing public streets, sidewalks shall be installed at the time of construction of residence dwellings or other structure. Said sidewalks shall be installed within the city right-of-way in accordance with the requirements set forth in subsection (a) hereof. On residential streets, sidewalk installations shall be required only on the northern right-of-way of east-west residential streets and only on the eastern right-of-way of north-south streets. Installation shall be required on both the sides of collector or higher classified roads. c.	No certificate of occupancy shall be granted if the provisions of this section have not been complied with and construction of the sidewalks have not been completed. 
Sec. 8-6. - Streets.     The subdivider shall provide improved rights-of-way in accordance with these regulations and applicable city specifications. 
Sec. 8-7. - Stormwater Drainage.     The subdivider shall provide adequate stormwater drainage in accordance with these regulations and applicable city specifications. All storm drainage will be piped except where calculations show a 42-inch pipe, or larger, is required in which case an open ditch will be permitted. Where drainage conditions dictate, open ditches shall be paved. The subdivider shall also provide for adequate drainage of springs or other ground water drainage. 
Sec. 8-8. - Utilities.     The installation of utilities shall be as follows: 8-8.1. Communication Distribution Systems: All communication distribution systems installed solely for the purpose of extending communications service within a development and within the property limits of such development shall be placed underground except that this requirement may be waived by the planning commission in cases where undergrounding is not economically or technically feasible, see section 8-8.5 below. Incidental communication terminal boxes may be placed above ground. 8-8.2. Electric Power Distribution Systems: All electric distribution systems of 25,000 volts or less installed solely for the purpose of extending electric service to a development and within the property limits of such development shall be placed underground except that this requirement may be waived by the planning commission in cases where undergrounding is not economically or technically feasible, see section 8-8.5 below. 8-8.3. Easements: Developers shall allocate necessary easements with future maintenance access. 8-8.4. Location of Underground Installations: The plans submitted to the city engineer will set forth the anticipated location of all underground installations. 8-8.5. Feasibility Criteria: The following criteria will be used to determine whether or not underground installation is feasible. When installation is determined to be not feasible for either economic or technical reasons, the planning commission will authorize overhead installation. a.	Communications Distribution Systems: Economic Feasibility—Undergrounding of electric facilities shall be deemed to be feasible if the cost to the utility is reasonably competitive to aerial construction. Technical Feasibility—In the absence of a showing that terrain, soil conditions, and other factors prevent proper installation and/or operation of underground facilities, underground facilities, undergrounding shall be deemed technically feasible. b.	Electric Power Distribution Systems: Economic Feasibility—Undergrounding of electric facilities shall be deemed to be feasible if the charge levied by the utility on the developer, pursuant to a uniform policy of the utility or policy established by order of the Georgia Public Service Commission, is equal to or less than 25 percent of the cost borne by the utility in establishing such service. Technical Feasibility—In the absence of a showing that terrain, soil conditions, or other factors preventing proper installation and/or operation of undergrounding shall be deemed technically feasible. 
Sec. 8-9. - Street Lighting.     The general standard of residential street lighting for Valdosta, Georgia, is as follows. 8-9.1. Overhead Electrical Distribution: Residential lighting will be provided at intersections, dead-end streets or courts with a maximum spacing not to exceed 500 feet for straight streets, provided spacing shall be reduced as conditions indicate for curved streets or irregular contours so as to provide adequate lighting. Luminaries are to be 28-foot mounted on existing utility distribution poles and of an approved type mercury unit of approximately 7000 lumen. 8-9.2. Underground Electrical Distribution: Residential lighting will be provided at intersections, dead-ends, or courts with a maximum spacing of 400 feet for straight streets, provided spacing shall be reduced as conditions indicate for curved streets or irregular contours so as to provide adequate lighting. Luminaries shall be top mounted on 16 feet (approximate) ornamental metal poles of an approved type mercury unit of approximately 7000 lumen. 8-9.3. Cost of Installation: In order to partially defray the cost of installation of street lighting, the developer shall be required to pay a lump sum fee to the City of Valdosta for each street light required under the provisions of this ordinance. The fees for streetlights will be as follows: Where underground distribution is used, the cost per light shall be the cost as per the contribution-in-aid-of-construction of the utility company; where overhead distribution is used, there shall be no cost. Before the minimum improvements are accepted by the city, a check payable to the City of Valdosta must be furnished for the total cost of the streetlights as determined above and as described in the streetlight layout plan. 8-9.4. Actions Prior to Construction: In order that the expense outlined herein may be ascertained and understood prior to commencement of construction, the developer or his engineer will confer with the city engineer and mark on the plans the approximate location for each fixture. 8-9.5. Location of Underground Installations: The plans submitted to the city engineer will set forth the exact location of all underground installations. 
Sec. 8-10. - Installation of Improvements.     No final grading, paving, construction of sidewalks or installation of any other utility shall be permitted until the preliminary final plat of the subdivision has been approved by the planning commission. 
Sec. 8-11. - Completion of Improvements.     Within two years from the date of recording of a final plat, all public improvements required by these regulations and other applicable laws and regulations shall be completely constructed and installed within the area covered by the final plat, unless the planning commission shall recommend to the city that an extension of time is required. 
Sec. 8-12. - Building Permit.     No permit for the construction of any building on any lot of a proposed subdivision shall be issued unless the plat of the proposed subdivision has been recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of Lowndes County, Georgia, and unless the minimum site improvements, including all utilities as prescribed in this ordinance, have been made and such improvements have been inspected and approved by the city engineer. 8-12.1. Building permits shall be issued for part of a subdivision prior to the completion of the improvements in the entire subdivision, provided that the city engineer shall approve the improvements in said part if it is determined that it will be completely served by the improvements as if it were a separate subdivision. 
SECTION 9. - BONDING REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 9-1. - Bonding Requirements.     To assure the construction and installation of public sanitary and storm sewers, public water facilities, and street improvements the subdivider shall deliver to the city the following: 9-1.1. Cash in reserve or a corporate bond or bonds in such aggregate amount as is estimated by the city engineer to be the total cost of the construction and the responsibility of the subdivider. When utilities are to be installed by the city, satisfactory evidence of agreement must be furnished. A contractors performance bond made jointly to the city and the subdivider will suffice. Cash in reserve shall be deposited with the city clerk. 
Sec. 9-2. - Conditions Thereof.     9-2.1. Bonds posted or cash deposited pursuant to section 9-1 shall run to the city and provide that the subdivider, his heirs, successors, and assigns, and their agents and servants will comply with all applicable terms, will faithfully perform and complete the work of constructing and installing said facilities or improvements in accordance with these regulations and that the subdivider will save the city from any unnecessary expense incurred through the failure of the subdivider, his heirs, successors or assigns, or their agents or servants, to complete the work of said construction and installation as required by these regulations, and from any damage growing out of negligence in performing or failing to perform said construction and installation.     9-2.2. If a bond is offered, it shall be executed by a surety or guaranty company qualified to transact business in the State of Georgia and shall state that all work will be performed in accordance with the City of Valdosta Subdivision Regulations [this appendix] and applicable city specifications and standards. If cash is offered, it shall be deposited with the city clerk, who shall give an official receipt therefor, receipting the amount and purposes of said deposit and that the deposit has been made in compliance with and subject to the provisions of these regulations. 
Sec. 9-3. - Duration and Release.     Bonds and/or cash posted pursuant to these regulations shall be released or returned, as the case may be, at such time as the facilities guaranteed thereby have been installed and accepted. 
Sec. 9-4. - Default.     If the construction or installation of any improvements of facilities for which a bond or cash is posted or deposited is not completed within three months after substantial completion of any building or structures which said improvements or facilities are designed to serve, or within two years after the date of recording of the final plat, whichever is sooner or if said construction or installation is not in accordance with the applicable specifications and requirements, the city may proceed to construct, install, or modify said improvements or facilities in accordance with the applicable specifications and requirements, and in the case of a corporate bond, the obligors on the bonds shall be liable for the expense incurred thereby, or in the case of a cash deposit, the city shall use as much of said cash as is necessary to so construct or install said improvements or facilities. To the extent that any portion of a cash deposit is not required or used by the city, said excess cash shall be repaid to the person making the deposits upon acceptance of the improvements or facilities. The default provisions of this section 9-4 shall not apply when the governing body acts to permit the subdivider to remove his subdivision from the land records of Lowndes County in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
Sec. 9-5. - Miscellaneous.     9-5.1. One or more bonds or cash deposits of any combination thereof shall be held to be in compliance with this section 9 so long as the total is equal to the total required; provided, however, that no bond shall be released or cash deposit repaid for a lesser or smaller portion of the construction or installation work that is required by these regulations and/or other city specifications and requirements to be installed or constructed as a unit.     9-5.2. If subsequent to the posting of a bond or the deposit of cash under these regulations, it can be established that the amount thereof is more than required because subsequent estimates by the city establish that the work can be constructed or installed for a lesser amount than the amount of the bond posted or cash deposited hereunder, the bond or cash so posted or deposited may be released or repaid proportionately. 
SECTION 10. - ACCEPTANCE AND GUARANTEE OF COMPLETED MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS 
Sec. 10-1. - Completion.     At such time as any or all improvements are completed, the subdivider shall notify the city in writing accurately identifying the improvements covered. 
Sec. 10-2. - Acceptance.     Upon notification of completion of minimum improvements, the city shall within 30 days after such notice accept or reject, in writing the completed improvements stating the deficiencies if any. 10-2.1. Facilities shall not be accepted unless they conform to these regulations and applicable city specifications. 
Sec. 10-3. - Guarantee.     The subdivider shall guarantee to the city, for a period of one year after completion and acceptance of all improvements, all materials and workmanship going into such improvements. The subdivider shall post bond with the city, conditional upon the faithful performance of such guaranty. In lieu of furnishing the subdivider's bond, the subdivider may assign to the city, on approval, contractors' guaranty and bond, effective after all improvements have been accepted by the city or, where certain improvements were done by the subdivider, a certified cashiers check made payable to the city for at least 100 percent of the improvements. The cost of the improvements shall be determined by the city. Developers need to have liability equal to the amount called for on city bonds, including workmen's compensation. 
SECTION 11. - VIOLATION AND PENALTIES 
Sec. 11-1. - Violations.     11-1.1. It shall be unlawful to convey or improve property by the construction of buildings on lots of any land subdivision which has not been approved and recorded as provided in these regulations, except those parcels recorded prior to the effective date of these regulations.     11-1.2. It shall be unlawful to record a subdivision plat, or once recorded, to make any changes thereon whatsoever which have not been approved by the planning commission and the mayor and council in accordance with the provisions of these requirements.     11-1.3. Each Day's Violation a Separate Offense: Each and every day's violation of any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 11-2. - Penalties.     Any person or persons, firm or corporation or association of persons who shall divide and offer for sale any real estate in violation of the terms or provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction therefor in the recorder's court, be punished as provided by section 1-11, chapter I of the city Code. 
SECTION 12. - LEGAL STATUS 
Sec. 12-1. - Effect of Invalidity of Part of Ordinance.     Should any section or provision of this ordinance be decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so decided to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Sec. 12-2. - Conflict With Other Laws.     All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 12-3. - Amendment.     The city council shall have the authority to amend these regulations after a public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Valdosta at least 15 days prior to such meeting. 
Sec. 12-4. - Variances.     In cases of undue hardship under this ordinance, any property owner may petition the planning commission for a variance and where the planning commission concurs it will prepare and send to the city council a recommendation for a variance when considered necessary and equitable. In case the planning commission fails to concur, the property owner may appeal to the mayor and council for relief. All variance requests will require a public hearing in the same manner as an amendment. November 4, 1964Date of Adoption/s/ __________Richard M. Stewart, MayorCity of ValdostaATTEST:/s/ _____City Clerk 
APPENDIX C - AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note—Printed in this appendix is the city's airport zoning ordinance, as adopted by the mayor and council on September 6, 1978. Amendments to the airport zoning ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the ordinance as enacted.Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 42; floods, ch. 50; historical preservation, ch. 58; landscape development, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 86; zoning ordinance, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B.
SECTION I. - ENACTMENT CLAUSE AND SHORT TITLE 
Enactment Clause.     This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Airport Zoning Act, 1946 Ga. Laws, pp. 121—130. It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of the Valdosta Municipal Airport, and property or occupants of land in its vicinity, and also if the obstruction type, in effect reduces the size of the area available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the Valdosta Municipal Airport and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared: 1)	That the creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance and an injury to the region served by the Valdosta Municipal Airport; 2)	That it is necessary in the interest of the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare that the creation or establishment of airport hazards be prevented; and 3)	That the prevention of these hazards should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation.     It is further declared that both the prevention of the creation or establishment of airport hazards and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which political subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land.     The Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta hereby ordains and enacts into law the following sections: 
Short Title.     This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "Valdosta Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning Ordinance." 
SECTION II. - DEFINITIONS     As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires: 1)	Airport. The Valdosta Municipal Airport. 2)	Airport Elevation. The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level, 202 feet above mean sea level. 3)	Hazard to Air Navigation. An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 4)	Structure. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 5)	Tree. Any object of natural growth. 6)	Nonconforming Use. Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance or an amendment thereto. 7)	Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this ordinance and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 8)	Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or governmental entity. It includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative of any of them. 9)	Board of Adjustment. A board consisting of five members appointed by the Mayor and Council of the City of Valdosta as provided in section IX of this ordinance. 10)	Runway. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 11)	Visual Runway. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 12)	Utility Runway. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 13)	Non-Precision Instrument Runway. A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 14)	Precision Instrument Runway. A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan, or any other planning document. 15)	Primary Surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in section III of this ordinance. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 16)	Approach, Transitional, Horizontal, and Conical Zones. These zones are set forth in section III of this ordinance. 17)	Horizontal Surface. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 18)	Transitional Surfaces. These surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
SECTION III. - AIRPORT ZONES     In order to carry out the provisions of this ordinance, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to the Valdosta Municipal Airport. Such zones are shown on the Valdosta Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning Map, prepared by the Valdosta-Lowndes County Planning Commission, and dated September 6, 1978, which is attached to this ordinance and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 1)	Runway Larger than Utility With a Visibility Minimum Greater than Three-Fourths Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 2)	Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 3)	Transitional Zones. The transitional zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces. 4)	Horizontal Zone. The horizontal zone is hereby established by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 5)	Conical Zone. The conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
SECTION IV. - AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS     Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or be maintained in any zone created by this ordinance to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 1)	Runway Larger than Utility With a Visibility Minimum Greater than Three-Fourths Mile Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone. Slopes upward 34 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 2)	Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone. Slopes upward 50 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 3)	Transitional Zones. Slopes upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach zones, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 202.00 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach zones, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically shall be maintained beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as precision instrument runway approach surface, and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 4)	Horizontal Zone. One hundred fifty feet above the airport elevation or a height of 352.00 feet above mean sea level. 5)	Conical Zone. Slope upward and outward 20 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 6)	Expected Height Limitations. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction, or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to 35 feet above the surface of the land. Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
SECTION V. - USE RESTRICTIONS     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this ordinance in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
SECTION VI. - NONCONFORMING USES 1)	Regulations not Retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this ordinance shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this ordinance, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and is diligently prosecuted. 2)	Marking and Lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the airport manager to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the City of Valdosta. 
SECTION VII. - PERMITS 1)	Future Uses. Except as specifically provided in a., b. and c. hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with Section VII, 4. a)	In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. b)	In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. c)	In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this ordinance except as set forth in section IV, 6. 2)	Existing Uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this ordinance or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 3)	Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed. Whenever the zoning administrator determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 4)	Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this ordinance, may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this ordinance. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this ordinance may be considered by the board of adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the airport manager for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the airport manager does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the board of adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny said application. 5)	Obstruction Marking and Lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this ordinance and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the board of adjustment, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the City of Valdosta, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
SECTION VIII. - ENFORCEMENT     It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the zoning administrator upon a form furnished by him. Applications required by this ordinance to be submitted to the zoning administrator shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by him. Application for action by the board of adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the zoning administrator. 
SECTION IX. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[2] 1)	There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers:(1)	To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement of this ordinance; (2)	To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this ordinance upon which such board of adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass; and (3)	To hear and decide specific variances.2)	The board of adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Valdosta and each shall serve for a term of five years and until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of three years, one for a term of four years, and one for a term of five years. Members shall be removable by the appointing authority for cause, upon written charges, after a public hearing. 3)	The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in harmony with the provisions of this ordinance. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question; or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the zoning administrator, and on due cause shown. 4)	The board of adjustment shall make written findings of facts and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this ordinance. 5)	The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or to effect variation in this ordinance. Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-271 et seq.
SECTION X. - APPEALS 1)	Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the zoning administrator made in his administration of this ordinance, may appeal to the board of adjustment. 2)	All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the zoning administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 3)	An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the zoning administrator, and on due cause shown. 4)	The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 5)	The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provision of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
SECTION XI. - JUDICIAL REVIEW     Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment, may appeal to the superior court as provided by law. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the decision is filed in the office of the board of adjustment.     Upon presentation of such petition the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the board of adjustments to review such decision of the board. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the board and on due cause shown, grant a supersedeas.     The board of adjustments shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by the writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other fact as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified.     The court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to affirm, notify, or set aside the decision brought up for review, in whole or in part, and if need be, to order further proceedings by the board of adjustments. The findings of fact by the board, if supported by evidence, shall be accepted by the court as conclusive, and no objection to a decision of the board shall be considered by the court unless such objection shall have been urged before the board, or if it was not so urged, unless there were reasonable grounds for failure to do so. 
SECTION XII. - PENALTIES     Each violation of this ordinance relating to airport zoning, or of any regulations, order, or ruling promulgated or made pursuant thereto, shall constitute a misdemeanor and the offender shall be punished as for a misdemeanor by the Recorder's Court. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
SECTION XIII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
Conflicting Regulations.     Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this ordinance and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
Severability.     If any of the provisions of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. 
Effective Date.     Whereas, the immediate operation of the provisions of this ordinance is necessary for the preservation of the public health, public safety, and general welfare, and [an] emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage by the mayor and council of the City of Valdosta and publication and posting as required by law. Adopted by the ____________ this ____________ day of ____________/____________/____________, 19____________. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1976 CODE This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 1976 CodeSectionSectionthis Code1-1003, 1-10041-6, 1-7 1-10051-5 1-10061-10 1-10081-8 1-1009, 1-10101-1, 1-21-10111-41-10121-31-10131-11 2-10012-35 2-10022-51 2-2001, 2-200238-4, 38-5 2-200438-6 2-3001—2-30042-161—2-164 2-300538-7 2-30112-141 2-3012(a), 2-3012(b)2-191, 2-192 2-40012-231, 2-232 2-5001—2-50042-511—2-514 2-5005, 2-50062-491, 2-492 2-501190-1 2-5018, 2-501990-2, 90-3 2-5031—2-50362-541—2-546 2-6011, 2-601278-2, 78-3 2-700178-1 2-8001—2-80042-291—2-294 2-8061—2-80642-331—2-334 2-8070—2-80772-391—2-398 3-1001—3-100766-31—66-37 3-2001—3-200446-41—46-44 3-2005—3-200746-2—46-4 3-202446-1 3-3001(a), (b)30-31 3-3001(c)—3-3001(f)30-32—30-35 3-3001(g), (h)30-36 3-300266-1 3-4001—3-400718-121—18-127 4-1004(a), 4-1004(b)86-41, 86-42 4-1005(a)86-43 4-1005(b)—4-1005(d)86-81—86-83 4-1006, 4-100786-1, 86-2 4-1008(a)—4-1008(c)86-121—86-123 4-2001—4-200882-31—82-38 4-4001—4-400382-81—82-83 5-1001—5-100898-31—98-38 5-1021—5-102898-61—98-68 5-1041, 5-104298-91, 98-92 5-1043(a)—5-1043(f)98-93—98-98 5-1044—5-104898-99—98-103 5-104898-104 5-1050, 5-105198-105, 98-106 5-200198-141—98-144 5-2002, 5-200398-145, 98-146 5-2011—5-201598-181—98-185 5-2031—5-203798-211—98-217 5-2051—5-206198-241—98-251 5-206198-271 5-2072—5-207598-272—98-275 5-207698-277 5-207898-278, 98-279 5-2080—5-208498-280—98-284 5-208698-285 5-2088, 5-208998-286, 98-287 5-2101—5-210398-311—98-313 5-210698-314 5-2121, 5-212298-341, 98-342 5-2124—5-212698-343—98-345 5-216198-147 5-2171—5-217398-148—98-150 5-219198-151 5-219398-152 5-2211, 5-221298-153, 98-154 5-301298-582 5-302198-631 5-3024, 5-302598-633, 98-634 5-3041—5-304398-651—98-653 6-1001(1)—6-1001(11)74-1—74-11 6-1003, 6-100474-12, 74-13 6-200126-1 6-2002, 6-200326-41, 26-42 6-2004—6-200626-2—26-4 6-200726-4 6-201126-91 6-201226-4 6-2013—6-201826-92—26-97 6-201926-111 6-202026-4 6-2021—6-202626-112—26-117 6-3001(a)—6-3001(c)74-51—74-53 7-1001—7-101490-41—90-54 7-1016—7-102690-55—90-65 7-110222-151 7-1104, 7-110522-152, 22-153 7-111222-194 22-197, 22-198 22-200 7-111322-195, 22-196 7-1122—7-112422-251—22-253 7-1131—7-113622-361—22-366 7-1138, 7-113922-367, 22-368 7-1177—7-1188102-111—102-122 7-1191—7-120722-291—22-307 7-1218—7-122322-111—22-116 7-1234, 7-123522-31, 22-32 7-2001—7-200686-3—86-8 7-2011—7-202086-161—86-170 7-2031—7-203486-201—86-204 8-100194-1 8-101194-3 8-101294-121 8-1014—8-101694-43—94-45 9-100118-41 18-46 9-100418-2 18-44 9-1007—9-100918-81—18-83 9-1010(a)18-84 9-4001, 9-400262-1, 62-2 9-4003(A), 9-4003(B)62-31, 62-32 9-4004(A)—9-4004(F)62-62—62-67 9-4005(A)—9-4005(C)62-91—62-93 9-4006(B)—9-4006(D)62-122—62-124 9-4006(F), (G)62-125 9-4006(intro. ¶)62-121 9-400762-4 9-4008, 9-400962-6, 62-7 9-401062-33 9-401162-8 9-600150-31—50-43 50-71—50-7450-101—50-1059-800158-31—58-36 58-61—58-69 58-91—58-94 58-121—58-127 10-100134-1 10-100334-11 34-16 10-101134-15 10-102134-53 10-102334-54, 34-55 10-103334-58 11-100122-197 11-100370-4 11-100470-92 11-1004(1)70-91 11-1004(2), 11-1004(3)70-93, 70-94 11-1005(a)70-52 11-1005(a)(1)—(3), (b)70-51 11-1005(c), 11-1005(d)70-53, 70-54 11-100670-55 11-100770-2 11-1010—11-101270-5—70-7 11-1014—11-101770-8—70-11 11-200142-111, 42-112 11-200442-114 11-200542-111 11-200742-43 11-2008, 11-200942-35 11-201042-34 11-201270-12 11-201342-171 11-201442-173—42-175 11-2015—11-201742-175—42-177 11-201842-172 11-4001—11-400442-82 11-400554-32 11-500122-1 11-500210-111-500870-13 11-5009(a)—11-5009(e)22-71—22-75 11-6001—11-600514-1—14-5 11-600714-7 11-6011—11-602414-41—14-54 11-6025, 11-602614-8, 14-9  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1976 Code that are included herein. OrdinanceNumber DateSection Sectionthis Code76-7 3-10-197612-141 76-8 3-10-19761—378-2 76-18 5- 5-197612-51 76-19 5- 5-1976138-7 76-23 8- 4-1976186-43 76-24 8- 4-1976186-1 76-2910- 6-197686-204 77-1 1-27-19771—42-192 77-2 1-27-19771—42-192 77-23 7- 6-197778-2 77-31 8-10-197778-1 77-32 8-10-1977170-92 77-4312-14-197774-52, 74-53 79-8 3- 9-197898-38 78-3010- 4-197826-42 78-3110- 4-197826-4 78-3210- 4-197826-4 79-5 2- 7-19792-192 79-8 3- 7-197998-31—98-37 98-61—98-67 98-99—98-104 98-147—98-154 98-181—98-185 98-211—98-217 98-241—98-251 98-271 98-273 98-275 98-311—98-314 98-342—98-345 79-9 3- 7-197978-2 79-38 8- 8-197986-8 79-39 8- 8-19792-192 79-40 8- 8-19792-192 79-5611- 7-197978-1 79-6012- 5-1979170-10 80-4 1- 9-1980170-9 80-9 3- 5-198014-7 80-10 3-19-19802-35 80-22 5-21-198098-32 98-34 98-37 80-26 5-21-198098-102 80-27 6- 4-198098-102 80-38 9-10-198098-99 80-5212-10-19802-35 80-5512-10-19801—1722-291—22-307 80-5612-10-198098-99 81-4 1- 8-198178-1 81-8 2-19-198126-4 81-9 2-19-198114-8, 14-9 14-54 81-33 7-23-19812-192 81-41 8- 6-198178-1 81-6212-10-198194-44 82-15 3-25-198278-1 82-18 4- 8-19822-512 82-26 5- 6-1982186-2 82-5711-11-198294-121 82-2312- 9-1982(Res.)2-293 83-7 4- 7-198394-43 83-22 7- 7-198394-45 83-29 9- 8-198398-141 98-147, 98-148 98-151 98-153 98-181 98-211 98-241 98-271 98-311 98-341 83-5011-10-19831—622-111—22-116 83-5111-10-19831, 222-31, 22-32 82-4 1- 7-19841—378-2 84-14 5- 4-1984186-121—86-123 84-23 7-19-19841—322-111—22-113 84-25 8- 9-19841—42-331—2-334 84-26 8-23-198426-4 84-27 8-23-198426-4 84-4011- 8-19841(A)—(E)58-31 2(B)—(E)58-32 3(A), 3(B)58-61, 58-62 3(C), (D)58-63 3(E)—3(I)58-64—58-68 4(A)—4(D)58-91—58-94 5—1058-121—58-126 11(B)58-127 13, 1458-34, 58-35 1558-69 16 58-36 85-5 2-13-19852-392 85-6 2-21-198578-2 85-10 3-21-198578-2 85-22 5- 9-198598-651—98-653 85-41 8-22-198570-93, 70-94 85-6912-10-198578-1 86-4  1- 9-198678-1 86-19 3-20-19862-192 86-20 3-20-198670-93, 70-94 86-22 4-10-19862-332 86-28 5-22-198670-93, 70-94 86-42  8- 7-198642-171—42-177 86-43  8- 7-198678-1 86-5611- 6-1986158-33 87-5 1-22-198714-41 87-18 3-19-198714-41 87-8 5-20-19871, 22-451, 2-452 87-38 6-25-198778-1 87-45 7- 9-1987art. 1, § A—50-31—50-34 art. 1, § Dart. 250-35art. 3, § A—50-36—50-43art. 3, § Hart. 4, § A—50-71—50-74art. 4, § Dart. 5, § A—50-101—50-105art. 5, § E87-46 7- 9-19871—398-1 88-33 7- 7-198870-11 88-35 7-26-19882-492 88-4810- 6-198878-1 88-5110- 6-198898-31 98-61 98-91 98-581 98-631 98-651 88-5512-22-198814-50 89-29 8-24-198926-4 89-4211- 9-198998-275 89-4311- 9-198998-311 90-12 2-22-199078-1 90-13 2-22-19902-35 90-21 3-22-19902-35 90-23 4- 5-199086-81—86-83 90-42  7- 5-199022-368 90-49  9- 6-199070-51—70-54 90-50  9- 6-199078-1 91-2 2- 7-199178-1 91-16 5- 9-199178-2 91-7 6-30-199118-81—18-84 91-32 8-22-199178-1 91-3810- 3-19912-35 91-4512-17-19912-35 92-7 1-23-199218-121 18-127 92-8 2-20-199222-71—22-75 92-16 4-23-19924-2009, 4-2009(a)82-39 4-2009(b)(i)—4-2009(b)(k)82-40—82-424-2009(c)82-444-2009(d), (e)82-4592-21 5- 7-199226-4 92-28 7-23-19922-547 92-30 8- 6-19922-191, 2-192 93-12 3-11-199378-1 93-38 9- 9-19935-100998-39 93-4110-21-199398-275 93-4210-21-199398-341 94-6 3-24-199462-1 94-16 7- 7-19942-191, 2-192 95-2 2-23-199586-164 95-11 6- 8-199522-366 95-22 8-10-199522-366 95-27 8-24-19954-3001—4-300642-301—42-306 95-29 9-21-199562-2 62-67 62-123 95-30 9-21-19952—1558-161—58-174 17, 18 58-175, 58-176 95-3711- 9-199574-1—74-13 95-3811- 9-199582-33 95-4912-21-19957-1001—7-100990-41—90-49 7-1011—7-101490-51—90-54 7-1016—7-102690-55—90-65 96-5 1-25-199654-32 96-11 3-21-19963-202746-5 96-12 3-21-19963-2030—3-203446-81—46-85 96-18 4-11-1996II—XII78-42—78-52 96-34 7-25-199686-163—86-165 86-167 96-42 9- 5-199682-81—82-83 96-5211- 7-19965-300198-581 5-301398-583 96-5612- 5-19962—72-361—2-366 97-11 4-10-19972-191, 2-192 97-12 4-10-1997I—VII2-421—2-427 97-13 4-10-19977-101090-50 97-14 4-10-199742-111, 42-112 97-16 4-10-199711-600614-6 97-20 4-24-199778-1 97-21 4-24-19972-491, 2-492 2-512—2-514 97-36 6- 5-19977-107118-161 7-1083—7-108718-162—18-166 7-108918-167 7-1090, 7-109118-169, 18-170 7-109318-171 97-39 7-10-1997198-651—98-653 97-41 7-24-19977-101090-50 77-4312-14-199774-51 98-33  9-24-199818-168 99-5 2-11-19994-2001, 4-200282-31, 82-32 2000-29 4-20-2000170-56 270-51 2000-37 5-11-2000art. I18-262 art. II18-261 art. III18-263 art. IV(400)—18-267—18-269 art. IV(402)art. IV(403)—(406)18-270 art. IV(407)—18-271—18-278 art. IV(414)art. V,18-265, 18-266 art. VIart. VII18-279 art. VIII18-264 2000-43 7- 6-20009-4001, 9-400262-1, 62-2 9-400362-5 9-400462-31 9-400562-62 62-121 9-4005(A), (B)62-32 9-4005(B)62-63—62-67 62-122—62-126 9-4005(C)62-91—62-93 9-4005(D)62-3 9-400662-4 9-400762-6 9-400862-8 9-400962-7 9-401062-33 2000-63 9- 7-20002-571 1.02-572 2.02-574 3.02-575 4.02-576 5.02-577 6.02-578 7.02-579 8.02-580 9.02-581 10.02-582 11.02-583 12.02-584 13.02-585 14.02-586 15.02-587 16.02-588 17.02-589 18.02-573 2000-64 9- 7-2000I2-611 II2-613—2-615 III—XIII2-616—2-626 XIV2-612 2-627 2000-65 9- 7-20002-651—2-658 2001-8 3- 8-20011—42-191 2001-9 3-22-200162-31 2001-15 4- 5-200194-123 2001-17 4-19-20011(7-1083)18-162 2001-21 5-24-2001194-4 2001-22 5-24-20011(11-1018)70-14 2001-29 8-23-2001VI78-46 2002-26 6-25-2002118-43 6.1—6.11 18-191—18-201 2002-25 6-27-20021—318-41 2003-46 8- 7-200310.1—10.718-221—18-227 2003-1611-20-2003(Res.)2-471 2003-6812-18-20031—1142-341—42-351 1342-353 2003-7412-18-200366-38 2004-2(1) 2-19-2004242-346 342-343 42-347 2004-23 6-10-20045-300198-581 5-3010, 5-301198-611, 98-612 5-3012, 5-301398-582, 98-583 5-302198-631 5-302298-632 2004-27 6-24-2004142-343 242-347 342-346 442-352 2004-28 6-24-20049-5001—9-500342-211—42-213 9-5004-1—9-5004-342-231—42-233 9-5005, 9-500642-261, 42-262 9-5007—9-501142-214—42-218 2004-35 8-19-20047-1031—7-10396-1—6-97-1040—7-10506-41—6-51 7-1051—7-10576-71—6-772004-4310-21-20047-10346-42005-1 1- 6-200582-1 2005-15 2-10-200518-41 2005-17 3-10-200566-38 2005-51 8-11-200578-2 2005-63 9- 8-200570-3 2005-7211-21-200542-31 2006-1 1-19-200642-213 2006-2 1-19-200682-33 2006-18 3- 9-20065-5001, 5-500297-1, 97-25-500397-45-500497-35-5005—5-501497-5—97-142006-19 3- 9-20066-42006-23 4-20-200682-31 82-33 2006-45 8-10-20066-32006-46 8-10-200642-113 2006-47 8-10-200678-2 2006-49 8-24-200682-32 2006-57 9-21-20061—44-1—4-454-41 6—94-5—4-8104-79 11—264-42—4-57 27, 284-9, 4-10 29—314-58—4-60 324-11 2006-58 9-21-20061—960-19—60-27 2006-6911-20-20067-10336-37-1044     Added6-3.17-10546-742006-7112- 7-20061—10     Added42-401—42-410 2007-11(Res.) 3-22-2007     Added82-2 2007-12 4- 5-200762-122(h) 2007-42 9- 6-20071App. A, § 8-2 2App. A, § 8-4.5(b), (c)3App. A, § 8-4.94     Dltd.App. A, § 8-5.2(a)5App. A, § 8-5.32007-43 9- 6-20077-1241—7-1252     Added90-101—90-112 2007-44 9- 6-2007142-343 2     Added42-347(a)(7) 2007-45 9- 6-200711-101382-1(b) 2008-72-7-2008170-3(18) 2008-82-7-20082-191(3) 2008-92-21-2008     Rpld14-41—14-54      Added14-41—14-60 2008-215-22-200878-2 2008-307-10-20086-4(d)2008-317-10-200870-2 2008-327-10-2008178-1 2008-347-24-200822-197 2008-357-24-2008App. A, § 8-4.2(n)2008-409-11-20081     Rpld50-31—50-105      Added50-31—50-181 2008-4310-23-20081, 2     Added98-711—98-746 2009-205-21-20091     Added66-38(b), (c) 2009-295-7-20092-491, 2-492      Dltd2-511—2-514      Added2-511—2-515 2009-317-9-2009     Added22-391—22-415 2009-338-6-20091     Dltd94-121—94-123      Added94-121—94-128 2009-409-24-2009     AddedCh. 37, §§37-31—37-37 2009-4310-8-200994-122(a)(1), (2) 94-123 94-125 94-127 2009-5412-10-20092—6     Added98-121—98-124 2010-92-25-20101     Added2-476—2-484 2010-102-25-20101     Added82-34(d) 2010-134-8-20106-45 2010-144-8-20102-191(3)d. 2010-175-20-2010198-145 298-285 2010-185-20-2010     Added98-684(5) 2010-236-10-2010     Added98-771—98-777 2010-246-10-2010278-2 2010-309-23-201042-112 2011-11-20-20111—3     Added62-127 2011-93-24-201112-191(3) 2011-13 5- 5-20111—6     Dltd22-111—22-116      Added22-111—22-116 2011-23 6-23-2011     Added10-22011-25 7- 7-20112-191(3) 2011-31 9-22-20111     Rpld70-7 2     Rpld70-13 2011-3711-10-201142-112—42-114      Added42-117 2011-3811-10-2011     Added18-311—18-318 2011-4112- 8-2011     Rpld6-1—6-77     Added6-1—6-1842012-9 4- 5-201278-2 2012-16 7- 5-20121     Rpld98-582      Rpld98-611, 98-612      Added98-611 2     Rpld98-631—98-633      Added98-631 3     Rpld98-581      Added98-581 2013-6 4-11-20131—9     Added37-61—37-69 2013-7 4-25-201390-63 2013-17 8-22-201378-2 2013-2210-10-201378-2 2013-2912- 5-2013190-101—90-105 2013-3012- 5-2013     Rpld82-31—82-45      Added82-31—82-39 2014-1 1-10-20141     Added22-431—22-433 2014-12 7-24-201442-31 2014-13 7-24-2014I—X     Rpld78-41—78-52      Added78-41—78-50 2014-14 7-24-2014     Dltd42-341—42-353      Added42-341—42-354 2014-17 8- 7-20141     Added46-45 2014-18 8- 7-20141     Added46-46 2014-2811- 6-20141—7     AddedAdopt. Ord.2014-2911- 6-20146-35 2014-3112-11-2014190-50 2015-2 1-22-2015     Dltd102-31—102-76      Added102-31—102-76 2015-4 2- 5-201516-12     Added6-35(b)      Rnbd6-35(b)      as6-35(c) 2015-14 6-11-20151—1042-401—42-410 2015-16 6-25-2015178-1 2015-20 9-24-20151     Added2-701—2-710 2015-21 9-24-2015     Added2-681—2-686 2015-2610-22-2015178-2 2015-2911-19-2015     Added34-17  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE This table shows the location within this Charter, Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. O.C.G.A.SectionSection this Code1-1-31-41-1-71-31-3-1—1-3-31-21-3-342-213 62-127 1-3-5.262-127 1-4-11-22-10-10590-56 3-1-1 et seq.Ch. 6 3-3-2(a)Ch. 6, Art. II 3-3-2(b)(1)Ch. 6, Art. II 3-3-216-37 3-3-236-13-3-23(e)6-112 3-3-24(b)6-112 3-3-266-35 3-4-49Ch. 6 tit. 3, ch. 116-85 3-11-36-85 tit. 4, ch. 314-48 4-3-214-48 4-8-6Ch. 14, Art. II 4-8-20 et seq.Ch. 14, Art. II 14-43 4-11-1 et seq.Ch. 14 4-11-5.114-43 14-45 14-53 4-12-214-45 5-4-150-151 tit. 8, ch. 218-312 8-2-1 et seq.Ch. 18, Art. II,Ch. 18, Art. III 18-41 8-2-3Ch. 18, Art. III 8-2-25Ch. 18, Art. II 18-41 8-2-25(a)Ch. 46 8-2-26Ch. 18, Art. II 8-2-26(d)18-1 8-2-110App. B, § 2-1 8-2-160App. B, § 6-6 8-2-164App. B, § 6-6 8-2-200Ch. 46 8-2-200 et seq.Ch. 58 10-5-1 et seq.RL Art. IV, § 1312-2-842-233 12-3-50.2Ch. 58 12-4-20 et seq.42-262 12-4-7242-213 12-4-120 et seq.Ch. 22, Art. VII 12-5-1 et seq.Ch. 98, Art. II 12-5-20 et seq.42-212 42-218 42-233 12-5-23(5)(a)42-261 12-5-30(f)42-212 42-232 12-5-120 et seq.Ch. 98, Art. II 12-5-440 et seq.42-212 12-7-1 et seq.Ch. 42, Art. IV 42-218 42-233 42-261 12-7-3(16)42-402 12-7-642-213 12-7-6(b)42-212 42-232, 42-233 42-261 12-7-7(e)42-214 12-7-7.142-213 12-7-8(a)42-212 42-214 42-261 12-7-1742-262 12-7-17(9)42-261 12-7-17(10)42-261 12-7-1942-212 12-7-2042-216 42-261 12-8-20 et seq.42-303 12-8-2482-34 12-8-40.1Ch. 42, Art. V 12-8-40.2Ch. 82, Art. III 13-10-20(a)37-37 13-10-21(b)37-37 14-13-790-44 15-6-67(d)App. B15-7-80 et seq.Ch. 34 15-10-6354-33 15-21-731-11 15-21-931-11 15-21-1001-11 15-21-1121-11 16-1-1 et seq.Ch. 70 16-5-71Ch. 22, Art. X 22-391 16-5-71.1Ch. 22. Art. X 22-391 16-6-24Ch. 70, Art. II 16-7-20 et seq.Ch. 26 16-7-40 et seq.82-1 16-7-4382-1 16-7-51(6)82-1 16-10-2770-92 16-10-5470-4 16-11-34Ch. 94 16-11-3970-3 16-11-103,16-11-10470-6 16-11-12786-165 16-11-127.186-165 16-12-5Ch. 22, Art. X 22-391 16-12-37Ch. 14, Art. II 16-13-218-312 tit. 17 22-305 17-6-111-11 17-6-70 et seq.1-11 17-10-31-11 17-10-3(e)1-11 20-2-54.1RL Art. VII, § 220-2-55RL Art. VII, § 220-2-69070-14 20-2-690(b)6-37 20-2-690.170-14 20-2-69270-14 20-2-699,20-2-70070-14 tit. 21, ch. 2Char. §§ 3.11, 3.12 Char. §§ 3.15, 3.16 21-1-1 et seq.Char. § 2.2 Char. § 3.11 Ch. 38 21-2-1 et seq.Ch. 38 38-1 38-4 21-2-26538-3 tit. 22Char. § 1.2 tit. 25, ch. 218-312 25-2-12(a)(7)18-200 25-2-13Ch. 58 25-2-13(b)(3)58-162 25-3-1 et seq.Ch. 46, Art. II 25-3-4Ch. 46, Art. II tit. 25, ch. 5 14-43 tit 31. ch. 40Ch. 22, Art. X 22-391 22-395 31-1-1 et seq.Ch. 54 31-3-5.118-48 Ch. 54 31-5Ch. 22, Art. X 22-391 31-7-1(2)42-343 31-7-70 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. V,Div. 231-7-72Ch. 2, Art. V,Div. 231-9-514-43 31-19-6Ch. 14, Art. II 31-21-20 et seq.Ch. 26 31-40-1—31-40-10Ch. 22, Art. X 22-391 32-4-1 et seq.Ch. 86 32-4-92Ch. 86 32-6-1 et seq.Ch. 86 32-6-19022-361 32-6-20222-362 33-3-522-111 33-3-5(1)22-114 33-8-422-113, 22-114 33-8-8 et seq.90-56 33-8-8.1Ch. 22, Art. IV 22-113 33-8-8.2Ch. 22, Art. IV 22-114 tit. 35, ch. 882-1 35-8-1 et seq.Ch. 66, Art. II tit. 36, art. 3,ch. 82 Char. § 4.32 36-1-1 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. II36-1-20(a)50-31 36-3-1 et seq.Ch. 236-18-142-213 36-30-2Ch. 2, Art. VI36-30-3Ch. 2, Art. II,Div. 336-30-9Ch. 66, Art. II 36-31-1 et seq.Ch. 236-32-1 et seq.Ch. 34 36-33-4Ch. 2, Art. III36-34-1 et seq.Ch. 236-34-2Ch. 236-34-2(2)Ch. 2, Art. IIICh. 78 36-34-2(4)78-2 36-34-3Ch. 74 Ch. 86 36-34-5Ch. 98 36-35-3Ch. 2, Art. II,Div. 336-35-42-51 78-2 36-35-4.1(a)Char. § 3.1 36-35-6(a)(2)Ch. 70 36-39-1 et seq.Ch. 86 36-39-7Ch. 98 36-40-1Ch. 58 36-40-1 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. VI36-60-1 et seq.Ch. 236-61-2(20)37-61 36-61-11Ch. 18 36-62-1 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. V36-64-1 et seq.Ch. 74 36-66-1 et seq.App. AApp. B, § 12-2 36-67A-1 et seq.App. A36-69-1 et seq.Ch. 30 36-71-2(8)90-42 36-72-1 et seq.Ch. 26 36-80-1 et seq.Ch. 236-80-24(b)2-704 36-80-24(c)2-703 36-81-3Ch. 2, Art. VI36-81-4—36-81-6Ch. 2, Art. VI,Div. 336-82-60 et seq.RL Art. IV, § 1136-83-42-572 2-580 36-88-337-65 36-88-437-65 36-88-637-61 36-88-737-66 36-88-937-66 38-3-1 et seq.Ch. 30 38-3-330-37 38-3-70 et seq.Ch. 30 40-2-95Ch. 102 40-6-1 et seq.Ch. 94 40-6-1—40-6-39594-1 40-6-14Ch. 42, Art. II 42-31 40-6-24982-1 40-6-276Ch. 102, Art. III 40-6-37094-1 40-6-371Ch. 94 94-3 40-6-371(a)(1)Ch. 94, Art. IV 40-6-37294-1 40-6-395Ch. 66 40-8-71(c)Ch. 42, Art. II 40-11-142-171 40-11-1 et seq.Ch. 42, Art. III,Div. 4 40-11-242-175 41-1-142-81 41-1-1 et seq.Ch. 42, Art. III tit. 41, ch. 218-311 41-2-542-85 41-2-7—41-2-1718-276, 18-277 18-312 18-315, 18-316 41-2-8—41-2-1718-279 41-2-9 et seq.Ch. 18 41-2-9(b)(1)18-317 41-2-1218-317 41-2-1318-316 tit. 4390-53 43-14-1 et seq.Ch. 18, Art. V 18-168 43-32-1 et seq.Ch. 22, Art. VI 43-32-6Ch. 22, Art. VI tit. 43, ch. 34 22-393 22-395 43-37-1 et seq.Ch. 22, Art. VII tit. 43, ch. 39A18-315 43-46-1 et seq.Ch. 22, Art. VI 22-197 44-3-1 et seq.App. B44-3-70 et seq.App. B44-3-114App. B44-3-130 et seq.Ch. 26 44-3-13426-93 44-5-60App. A44-10-1 et seq.2-393 Ch. 58 58-64 44-10-20 et seq.Ch. 58 58-162 58-173 44-10-24Ch. 58, Art. II,Div. 2 44-10-26Ch. 58, Art. III 44-10-28Ch. 58, Art. II,Div. 4 44-12-130 et seq.Ch. 22, Art. V 45-2-5Ch. 2, Art. IIICh. 78 45-8-1 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. VI45-10-1Ch. 78, Art. II 45-10-3Ch. 78, Art. II 45-11-11-10 tit. 46, ch. 3 90-56 46-7-1590-56 47-5-1 et seq.78-2 47-17-60 et seq.1-11 47-18-1 et seq.78-2 47-20-1 et seq.78-2 48-3-918-312 tit. 48, ch. 418-318 48-4-318-318 48-4-7818-318 48-5-1 et seq.Ch. 90 48-5-7.3Ch. 58, Art. III 48-5-350 et seq.Ch. 90 90-3 48-5-355,48-5-35690-56 48-5-35886-1 48-5-35990-3 48-5-38090-108 48-5-440 et seq.Ch. 90 48-6-93Ch. 22, Art. II 22-31 90-56 48-6-93(d)22-32 48-8-80 et seq.Ch. 90 48-13-1 et seq.Ch. 22 48-13-5—48-13-2690-41 48-13-790-41 90-44 48-13-9Ch. 22, Art. X 22-391 90-43 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18)90-48 48-13-31Ch. 18, Art. V 48-13-51(b)(1)—(6)90-101, 90-102 48-13-51(b)(5), (6)90-104 48-13-5590-56 48-17-1 et seq.Ch. 4Ch. 10 49-3-13426-93 50-8-7.3Ch. 82 50-14-1Ch. 2, Art. II,Div. 250-14-1 et seq.2-34 50-14-1(d)Ch. 2, Art. II,Div. 1,Ch. 2, Art. II,Div. 250-14-22-38 50-14-3Ch. 2, Art. II,Div. 22-38 58-2-200 et seq.58-173 ch. 66 App. B, § 12-2  