CODE OF BRYAN COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

BRYAN COUNTY OFFICIALS 
Carter Infinger (Chairman) 
Noah Covington 
Wade Price 
Steve Myers 
Brad Brookshire 
Rick Gardner 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Ben Taylor 
County Administrator 
____________ 
Lea Holliday 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Donna Waters 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Bryan County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1996 Code, as supplemented through April 11, 2016, and ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1996Code, as supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Ramona Connors, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Lea Holliday, County Attorney, Mr. Ben Taylor, County Administrator, and Ms. Donna Waters for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Bryan County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Bryan County, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Bryan County, Georgia. 2018. 
ORDINANCE NO. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR BRYAN COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. ;b0; BE IT ORDAINED by the Bryan County Commission: ;b0; Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Bryan County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 113, each inclusive, is adopted. ;b0; Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 12, 2016, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. ;b0; Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. ;b0; Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof. Except as otherwise provided: (i) As to violations that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues constitutes a separate offense; and (ii) As to other violations, each act of violation shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. ;b0; Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. ;b0; Section 6. Ordinances adopted after April 12, 2016 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. ;b0; Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption. ;b0; SO ORDAINED, this 10th day of April , 2018. ;b6; BRYAN COUNTY, GEORGIA 
(S E A L) 
By: ____________  Carter Infinger, Chairman 
Attest: ____________  Clerk, Donna Waters 
1st reading: 3/13/18 ____________ 
2nd reading: 4/10/18 ____________ 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - LOCAL ACTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This part consists of local acts believed to be valid. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20, the term "of roads and revenues" have been removed from the name of the county's governing body. Pursuant to Ga. Const. (1976), art. VI, § VI, ¶ IV, the term "ordinary has been changed to "judge of the probate court." 

ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS GENERALLY[2] 
An Act to create a Board of Commissioners for the County of Bryan; to define their powers and duties; to provide for the method of selection of members, and to prescribe their qualifications; and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 252), page 765. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets, except that catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Created. 
That from and after the first day of April, 1941, and after the qualification of the members hereinafter named, there is created a Board of Commissioners of Bryan County, which Board shall consist of five members, namely: J. O. Strickland from the 19th G. M. District, who shall serve as Commissioner of said Board until the first day of January, 1945, at which time his term of office shall expire; B. B. Brewton, from the 1380th G. M. District, who shall serve until the first day of January 1945; J. H. McCallar, from the 20th G. M. District, who shall serve until the first day of January 1945; J. T. Stubbs from the County at large, who shall serve as Chairman of said Board of Commissioners until the first day of January, 1945; and I. G. Lanier from the County at large, who shall serve until the first day of January, 1945; and W. R. Deal who shall serve as Clerk of said Board, but in the deliberations of said Board he, the said Clerk, shall have no vote. 
Sec. 2. - Districts. 
The County of Bryan shall be divided into three (3) commissioner districts, to be designated as one (1), two (2) and three (3), and each of said commissioner districts shall be entitled to one (1) commissioner residing in the jurisdiction of the district as its representative on said board. District No. 1 shall embrace the 19th G. M. District, District No. 2 shall embrace the 1380th G. M. District and District No. 3 shall embrace the 20th G. M. District. In addition, there shall be two members of the board elected from the County at large. These two [(2)] positions shall be designated as the "chairman post" and "vice chairman post," and candidates for these positions shall designate the post for which they are offering as a candidate. 
(1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 191), page 3024, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Terms of office; manner of election. 
The terms of office of the successors of the members of the Board of Commissioners of Bryan County shall be for four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. An election shall be had every four (4) years at the same time and places and under the same regulations as the election of county officers for Bryan County is held, except that in all primaries, candidates seeking the nomination and election to membership on said Board shall be voted for in the following manner, to wit: candidates seeking the nomination as District Commissioner No. 1 shall be voted for only by the qualified voters of the 19th G. M. District of Bryan County; candidates seeking the nomination as District Commissioner from District No. 2 shall be voted for only by the qualified voters of the 1380th G. M. District of Bryan County; candidates seeking the nomination as District Commissioner from District No. 3 shall be voted for only by the qualified voters of the 20th G. M. District; candidates seeking the nomination as Chairman of the Board of Commissioners and candidates seeking the nomination as Vice Chairman of the Board of Commissioners shall be voted on by the qualified voters of Bryan County in its entirety. As said terms of office of said members of the board expire, they shall be elected for the succeeding term of four (4) years at the same time and places and under the same regulations as the election of county officers for Bryan County is held, except as hereinbefore otherwise provided. Elections of members of the Board of County Commissioners shall be held in accordance with the Georgia Election Code. The Chairman and Vice Chairman provided for herein shall be elected in the general election in 1976 and their terms of office and the terms of the other members shall commence on January 1, 1977, and continue for four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 191), page 3024, § 2) 
Sec. 4. - Bond. 
That said Commissioners, together with the Clerk of said Board, shall each, before entering upon their duties, be commissioned by the Governor, make a good and sufficient surety bond in the sum of $1,000.00 each, with some solvent surety company authorized to operate under the laws of Georgia, and the premium or premiums required therefor shall be paid for by the County Treasurer of Bryan County on warrants drawn on the proper and legal funds for this purpose; and they shall take and subscribe an oath to faithfully perform the duties of their office and account for all moneys coming into their hands as such Commissioners, said bond to be payable to the Judge of the Probate Court and his successors in office, and the oath subscribed before him or some other officer duly authorized to administer oaths, and recorded in the office of said Judge of the Probate Court. 
Sec. 5. - Chairman to preside. 
The Chairman of the Board of Commissioners shall preside over all meetings, except in his absence the Vice Chairman shall preside. The Chairman of said Board shall have no vote in the deliberations of said Board except in the event of a tie vote, in which case the said Chairman shall be permitted to vote to decide the particular motion under deliberation. 
(1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 191), page 3024, § 1) 
Sec. 6. - Clerk. 
That W. R. Deal be and he is hereby named Clerk of said Board of Commissioners of Bryan County, for the term ending January 1, 1945, at a monthly salary of $50.00 per month, to be paid monthly by the County Treasurer of Bryan County on warrants drawn on the proper and legal funds for this purpose. The duties of said Clerk shall be to keep a permanent minute book and properly record all acts, motions and official duties of said Board, including an accurate account of all moneys expended for any and all purposes; the minutes of each meeting of said Board to be read and adopted by a majority vote of said Board at the next meeting thereof; said Clerk shall issue warrants for all legal and lawful purposes as directed by a majority vote of said Board, which said warrants shall be signed jointly by the Chairman and Clerk of said Board; the amount of each warrant, to whom payable, and for what purpose issued, shall be entered in the minutes of each monthly meeting of said Board by the Clerk thereof. Said Clerk shall have no voice or vote in the deliberations of said Board. Any and all warrants issued upon the approval of a majority vote of said Board and signed by the Chairman and Clerk thereof shall be the authority of the County Treasurer to pay said warrants with the proper and legal funds of Bryan County for such purposes. However, said Clerk may be removed from office by a majority vote of said Board at any time said Board deems such removal wise and proper for the best interests of the County. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Clerk of said Board, his successor shall be elected by a majority vote of the membership of said Board, whose salary shall be fixed by said Board, and whose term of office shall expire at the pleasure of said Board. 
Sec. 7. - Commissioner qualifications. 
That no one shall be eligible or qualified for election as a Commissioner for the County of Bryan who is a freeholder; nor shall anyone be elected who holds funds belonging to the County or who is indebted to the County, other than for taxes due; and the said Commissioners shall be subject to impeachment for incompetency or malfeasance in office, in the same manner as county officers are subject to impeachment. 
Sec. 8. - Meeting; compensation of members. 
(a)  The board shall prescribe by resolution, from time to time, the time, place, and dates of regular meetings. The board shall call meetings and special sessions in compliance with all existing statutes and ordinances. The Clerk of the Board shall record the acts and deeds of the Board at all such meetings, and the records of the Board shall at all times be open and subject to inspection by the public. 
(b)  (1)  The Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Bryan County shall be compensated in the amount of $250.00 per month. The Vice Chairman and each of the remaining members of the board shall be compensated in the amount of $125.00 per month. All such compensation shall be paid from the funds of Bryan County. 
(2)  In addition to the compensation provided for in paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Chairman shall receive the amount of $250.00 per month and the Vice Chairman and each of the other members of the Board shall receive the amount of $125.00 per month as an expense allowance for travel and other expenses incurred in the performance of duties within the County. 
(3)  The Chairman, Vice Chairman, and members of the Board of Commissioners referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection mean the Chairman, Vice Chairman, and members of the Board of Commissioners who are elected pursuant to the provisions of an Act providing for the election of members of the Board of Commissioners of Bryan County, approved April 12, 1982 (Ga. L. 1982, p. 4270). 
(1971 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 157), page 2337, § 1; 1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 314), page 4860, § 1; 2010 Ga. Laws (Act No. 511), page 3605, § 1) 
Sec. 9. - Disbursements. 
That said Board shall exercise all authority prescribed in Code Sections 694 to 704, inclusive, of the Code of 1910 and amendments thereto; that all disbursements thereunder or any other funds of the County, shall be by warrant drawn against the fund from which said debt shall be paid, if funds are available, otherwise to be paid from general funds; and all warrants shall be signed by the Chairman and the Clerk, and no warrant shall be issued and signed until audited and approved by the majority members of said Board. 
Sec. 10. - General powers. 
That said Board of Commissioners shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction over the following subject matters, to-wit: In directing and controlling all property of said County of Bryan, as they may deem expedient, wise and proper, according to law, including the county jail and court house, district justice court houses, county public works camps, in levying a general tax for general purposes and a special tax for special purposes, according to law, and over all roads as aforesaid; in establishing and changing election precincts and militia districts; in examining and allowing, according to law, all claims that may arise against the county; in examining and auditing, or the hiring of an examiner or auditor for, the accounts and records of all officers having the care, management, keeping, collecting or disbursing moneys belonging to the county or appropriated for its benefit or use, and bringing them to a settlement; in making rules and regulations according to law, for the support of the poor of the County for the promotion of health and agriculture, as are granted by law; also to do all and singular other acts devolving upon the office, said Board of Commissioners having full and complete charge of county affairs, and to exercise all power over roads, bridges and revenues under the laws of this State as given to judges of the probate court in counties where there are no Commissioners. 
Sec. 11. - Purchases. 
That said Commissioners shall be held strictly in conformity to Sections 393 and 394 of the Civil Code of 1910, and amendments thereto, and that no purchases shall be made from such persons therein described except upon a statement of all goods and merchandise duly itemized, and prices charged, which shall be spread upon the minutes of said Commissioners. 
Sec. 12. - Annual financial statement. 
That the said Commissioners shall publish a statement twice a year in a newspaper published in said County of Bryan, showing the financial condition of said county, which said statement shall be duly attested by the Clerk and Chairman of the Board as the correct condition of the county at the time said statement is issued. 
Sec. 13. - Vacancies. 
That in case of a vacancy on said Board by death, resignation or otherwise, the Judge of the Superior Court of Bryan County, upon official notification of such vacancy, shall immediately thereafter appoint a successor, who shall and must possess the qualifications for holding said office hereinbefore stated, and who shall qualify by taking the oath and giving the bond as hereinbefore provided, and who shall hold office until the next election, at which election the successor of the member causing the vacancy shall be elected. 
Sec. 14. - Public works and prisoners. 
That said Board of Commissioners shall closely examine the work done by the warden of the public works camp, and shall appoint and supervise guards under him and shall fix the salary of such warden, guards, etc., and shall see that the county physician, whom said Board shall name, shall perform his duties, and shall fix and pay the salaries of each in accordance with the laws and under the rules of the State Prison Commission. 
Sec. 15. - Tax relief. 
That said Board of Commissioners shall have the right and power to relieve double taxes according to law, and the authority to change or alter any mistake of facts that may appear from the records of the Tax Commissioner as to amount of taxes returned so that same may confirm to the truth, but not the authority to arbitrarily change any returns or pay back any amount paid. 
Sec. 16. - Selection of Chairman; functions. 
That on and after the first day of January, 1945, the members of the Board shall elect a Chairman of said Board from among their members, which said Chairman shall preside over all of the regular and special meetings of said Board, and that in the event the present Chairman named herein, J. T. Stubbs, fails or refuses for any reason to accept said Chairmanship, the remaining members shall name a Chairman of said Board from among the remaining members. 
Sec. 17. - Legal counsel. 
That said Board of Commissioners shall have and are hereby vested with the authority to employ counsel and to pay for such service out of the proper fund of the County, a sum not to exceed $300.00 per annum for such services, and the person so employed as counsel shall have had a minimum of two years' practical experience as a practicing attorney and shall have been a resident of Bryan County for twelve (12) months preceding said appointment. 
Sec. 18. - Auditor. 
That the Judge of the Superior Court of Bryan County shall approve the selection of an auditor for the purpose of auditing the records of said Board, before said Board will be authorized to employ such auditor. 
Sec. 19. - Competitive bids. 
That all purchases made by said Board on behalf of Bryan County shall be based upon competitive bids from reliable persons, firms or individuals, and any and all persons interested shall be supplied with an accurate list of the supplies and/or materials to be purchased, which said list shall include the quantity, grade or quality of each article; said list to be provided upon request at least five (5) days before the contemplated purchase or purchases are to be made by said Board. 
Sec. 20. - Revenue. 
That from and after the passage of this Act, all moneys and funds received by or coming into the hands and possession of said Board, or a member thereof, or the Clerk thereof, for and on account of said County of Bryan, shall be by them promptly paid over to the County Treasurer of said County and his receipt taken therefor, which receipt shall be filed away with the other records of said Board and shall be kept open and subject to public inspection; and said moneys and funds shall be paid out and disbursed by said Board only upon county warrants, drawn by the Chairman and Clerk of said Board, after the issuance of such warrants has been authorized and directed by a majority vote of said Board; said warrants to be drawn upon the County Treasurer of Bryan County. 
Sec. 21. - Repealer. 
That all laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMISSIONER DISTRICTS AND ELECTIONS[3] 
An Act to provide for the election of members of the Board of Commissioners of Bryan County; to provide for commissioner districts and posts; to provide for initial and regular terms of office; to provide for filling vacancies; to provide for practices and procedures; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to provide for a referendum; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1056), page 4270. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets, except that catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Board of Commissioners reconstituted. 
(a)  The five-member Board of Commissioners of Bryan County which existed on December 31, 2001, is continued in existence but shall be constituted as provided in this Act. Those members of the Board of Commissioners of Bryan County who were serving as such on December 31, 2001, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the expiration of the respective terms to which they were elected and until the election and qualification of their respective successors, unless otherwise removed from office as provided by the Constitution or laws of this state. The Board of Commissioners of Bryan County so continued and constituted, sometimes referred to in this Act as the "board," shall continue to have the powers, duties, rights, obligations, and liabilities of that board as they existed immediately prior to January 1, 2002. On and after January 1, 2003, the Board of Commissioners of Bryan County shall consist of six members who shall be elected in the manner described in this section. 
(b)  For purposes of electing members of the Board of Commissioners, other than the chairperson, Bryan County is divided into five commissioner districts. One member of the board shall be elected from each such district. The five commissioner districts shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as "Plan: bryanccsb-2011rel Plan Type: Local User: bak." 
(c)  (1)  When used in such attachment, the term "VTD" shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(2)  The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Bryan County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)  Any part of Bryan County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(d)  In order to be elected as a member of the board from a commissioner district, a person must receive the number of votes cast as required by general law for that office in that district only. Only electors who are residents of that commissioner district may vote for a member of the board for that district. At the time of qualifying for election as a member of the board from a commissioner district, each candidate for such office shall specify the commissioner district for which that person is a candidate. A person elected or appointed as a member of the board from a commissioner district must continue to reside in that district during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
(e)  In addition to the commissioner districts as specified in this section, there shall be one commissioner post on the board, to be designated as Commissioner Post 1. The member elected to Commissioner Post 1 shall be the chairperson of the board, may reside anywhere within Bryan County, and, if elected, must receive the number of votes cast for that office as required by general law in the entire county. The chairperson must continue to reside within the county during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
(f)  Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4, as they exist on December 31, 2001, shall continue to be designated as Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and on and after January 1, 2003, such members of the board serving from those former commissioner districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this section. The members serving from Commissioner Districts 2 and 4 on December 31, 2001, shall serve the remainder of their respective terms which shall expire December 31, 2002, and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. The members serving from Commissioner Post 1 and Commissioner Districts 1 and 3 on December 31, 2001, shall serve the remainder of their respective terms which shall expire December 31, 2004, and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. The new sixth member to be elected from Commissioner District 5 shall be elected at the November general election of 2002 for a term of four years and until such member's successor is duly elected and qualified. Thereafter, all members shall be elected in the November general election immediately preceding the expiration of their respective terms of office and shall take office on the first day of January following their election for a term of office of four years each and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. All members of the board who are elected thereto shall be nominated and elected in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the Georgia Election Code [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.]. 
(g)  Vacancies which occur on the board during the first year and nine months of a term of office shall be filled by the remaining members of the board electing a successor to serve until the next general election. In any such event, a successor shall be elected in a special election to be held at the same time as such general election and the person so elected shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. Vacancies occurring during the last two years and three months of a term of office shall be filled by the remaining members of the board electing a successor to serve out the unexpired term of office. 
(h)  The Board of Commissioners of Bryan County provided for by this Act shall be the governing authority of Bryan County and shall exercise all powers vested in the Board of Commissioners of Bryan County by local or general law or by the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(i)  At a regular January meeting of the board in each year, the board shall name a vice chairperson from among the members of the board. The vice chairperson shall carry out the duties of said vice chairperson as provided by law from the date of his or her appointment until the next January or until his or her successor is appointed. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 612), page 4592, § 1; 2001 (ex sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 1EX1), page 298; 2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 371), page 4199, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Election. 
After the date of the approval of this Act by the Governor, or after it otherwise becomes law, it shall be the duty of the election superintendent of Bryan County to issue the call for an election for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of Bryan County for approval or rejection. The superintendent shall set the date of such election for a day not less than 40 nor more than 30 days from the date of the scheduled general election for the county during the year in which this Act becomes law. The superintendent shall set the date of such election for a day to coincide with the date of the general election in the county during 1982. The election superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Bryan County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"( ) YES 
 ( ) NO" 
Shall the Act providing for the election of a five-member Board of Commissioners for Bryan County be approved?" 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, it shall become of full force and effect as provided in Section 3 of this Act, but otherwise it shall be void and of no force and effect. 
The expense of such election shall be borne by Bryan County. It shall be the duty of the superintendent to hold and conduct such election. It shall be his further duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
If this Act is approved by the voters of Bryan County as provided in Section 2 of this Act, then the provisions of this Act relating to and necessary for the election of the members of the Board of Commissioners of Bryan County at the 1984 general election shall be effective only for such purposes upon the certification of the results of the election provided for in Section 2 of this Act; and this Act shall be effective for all purposes on January 1, 1985. 
Sec. 4. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE III. - TREASURER[4] 
An Act to repeal an Act approved July 29th, 1925, entitled an Act to create a County Depository in and for the County of Bryan and prescribe the qualifications of the depository, and for other purposes; and to provide for the creation of the office of county treasurer for Bryan County, and prescribe his qualifications, duties, compensation; also to provide for the submission of a referendum to the qualified voters of Bryan County to determine whether or not the office of treasurer is to be continued, or whether the County Depository shall be substituted for the office of County Treasurer in said Bryan County, and for other purposes. 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 103), page 511. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets, except that catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Specific repealer. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that from and after the passage of this Act the County Depository in and for Bryan County, created by the Act of July 28th, 1925, be and the same is hereby abolished. 
Sec. 2. - Compensation. 
Be it further enacted, that the treasurer of Bryan County shall receive, as full salary and compensation as such treasurer, the sum of $1,500.00 per year, payable monthly, which sum shall be paid by the county treasurer each month after such treasurer enters upon his duties as such. 
(1937 Ga. Laws (Act No. 323), page 1259, § 1; 1959 Ga. Laws (Act No. 105), page 2716, § 1; 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 175), page 2601, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Duties and liabilities. 
Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the treasurer hereby selected, and his successors in office, shall perform all and singular the duties incident to the office hereby created, and shall also be subject to all the liabilities thereof. 
Sec. 4. - Referendum. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the election authorities of said Bryan County be and they are hereby directed to submit to the qualified voters of said county, at the next general primary election in the year 1928, the question as to whether the depository plan of handling the county's finances or whether the office of treasurer is preferred by the people of said county. All those voting in said election in favor of the county depository plan shall have written or printed on their ballots the words: "For the County Depository," while all those voting against said plan shall have written or printed on their ballots the words "For County Treasurer." And the result of said balloting shall be tabulated and the result declared in the same manner and by the same authorities as in the case of elections for county officers. 
Sec. 5. - Repealer. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all laws and parts of law in conflict with the provisions of this Act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAX COMMISSIONER[5] 
An Act to abolish the offices of tax-receiver and tax-collector of Bryan County, Georgia; to create the office of tax commissioner of Bryan County; defining the qualifications and duties and fixing the compensation and term of office of said tax commissioner; to provide that the laws of force as to tax-receiver and tax-collector, when the provisions of this Act become effective, shall be of full force and effect, as to the tax commissioner of Bryan County, in so far as the same are applicable and not herein and hereby abolished; to provide that tax fi. fas. issued by the tax-collector, and remaining unpaid when this Act takes effect, shall continue of full force and be collected by the said tax commissioner, as could otherwise have been collected by the tax-collector; to provide that all fees, commissions, and other costs and compensations formerly paid to or collected by either the tax-receiver or the tax-collector shall, after this Act becomes effective, be collected by said tax commissioner of Bryan County, Georgia, and by such officer paid into the county treasury of said county; to provide for the payment of the necessary expense of said office of said tax commissioner; to provide for the election of said tax commissioner and the method filling vacancies in said office; to provide for the character and amount of the bond required and the taking of the oath of office by said tax commissioner; to provide that said tax commissioner shall, as often as called upon to do so, furnish an itemized statement under oath of all fees, commissions, costs, or other money received and collected for and on account of said County of Bryan, to the Board of Commissioners of said County, and, even though unrequested to do so, said tax commissioner shall furnish said Board of Commissioners one such statement during each calendar year; and to do and perform all other such acts and things as may be necessary for putting into effect the provisions of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, as contained in article eleven (11), section three (3), paragraph one (1) of said Constitution; and to authorize and provide for the levy and collection of a tax to pay said tax commissioner a salary of $1,500.00 per annum, payable in monthly instalments of $125.00 per month, and for the stationery, stamps, and other office supplies, equipment, and requirements incident to said office; and to repeal all laws and parts of laws in conflict with the provisions of this Act; and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 205), page 592. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets, except that catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Office created. 
That in accordance with, and pursuant to, the authority contained and provided in an amendment to the Constitution of the State of Georgia, approved August 18th, 1924, and ratified as a constitutional amendment, in article eleven (11), section three (3) and paragraph one (1) of said Constitution the offices of tax-receiver and tax-collector of Bryan County be and the same are hereby abolished, the duties of said offices are hereby consolidated into one office, which shall be filled and placed under the control of one official, whose office shall be designated and known as that of tax commissioner of Bryan County, which office is hereby created and established in lieu of the abolished offices of tax-receiver and tax-collector, and the rights, powers, duties, responsibilities and liabilities of said tax commissioner shall be the same as are now, or may hereafter, become inherent to said offices of tax-receiver and tax-collector in so far as the same apply to the office of said tax commissioner and not specifically hereinafter otherwise provided and excepted. 
Sec. 2. - Effective date. 
That the provisions of this Act shall not become effective until the end of the current terms of office of the present tax-receiver and tax-collector of said County of Bryan. 
Sec. 3. - Election. 
That said tax commissioner of Bryan County shall be voted for and elected at the same time, and under the same general provisions of law, as other county officers are now elected, at the next general election in the year of 1936, and that said tax commissioner shall enter upon a discharge of the duties of said office on January 1st, 1937, and the term of office shall be for a period of four (4) years. And in the event of a vacancy occurring in said office, for any cause, such vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as vacancies are now filled with respect to other county offices in the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 4. - Oath and bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of said tax commissioner of Bryan County, Georgia, said officer shall take and subscribe the oath now prescribed by law for tax-receivers and tax-collectors in Georgia, and shall give bond, with some reputable indemnity bonding company, with an office and agent, and doing business in the State of Georgia, in an amount to be fixed and approved by the Board of Commissioners of said County of Bryan; but that in no event shall the amount of said bond be for an amount less than ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars; the costs and premiums of which shall be paid by the said Board of Commissioners of said county from general funds for such purposes, and in any and all events said bond shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia, and made payable to the Governor of Georgia or his successors in office. 
Sec. 5. - Compensation. 
The tax commissioner shall receive an annual base salary of 145 percent of those amounts set as a minimum salary for tax commissioners of counties with similar populations by paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of Code Section 48-5-183 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183(b)(1)]. In addition to said annual base salary, the tax commissioner shall also be entitled to and receive all cost-of-living raises provided in paragraph (2) of subsection (b) [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183(b)(2)] and all longevity increases provided in subsection (d) of Code Section 48-5-183 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183(d)], as now or hereafter amended. Further, the tax commissioner shall be entitled to any other additional salary due him or her under Code Section 48-5-137 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-137], as now or hereafter amended. For the purpose of computing the tax commissioner's salary, all cost-of-living raises and longevity increases shall be computed by adding the appropriate amounts to or applying the appropriate multipliers to the annual base salary and any additional salary provided for in this section. 
(1951 Ga. Laws (Act No. 75), page 2277, § 1; 1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), page 2910, § 1; 1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 822), page 2549, § 1; 1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1293), page 3358, § 1; 1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1164), page 3216, § 1; 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 252), page 3874, § 1; 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 347), page 3874, § 1; 1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 537), page 3540, § 1; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 114), page 3798, § 1) 
Sec. 6. - Funding. 
The Board of Commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia, be and they are hereby authorized and empowered to levy and collect a tax sufficient to pay the salary of said tax commissioner, provide him with an adequate office in said county, provide him with fuel, stationery, stamps, and lights, and to provide any and all other reasonable equipment, fixtures, and office supplies incident to a proper conduct of the affairs of said office of tax commissioner. 
Sec. 7. - Prior taxes. 
All taxes due and payable at the time the provisions of this Act shall become effective, and that all tax fi. fas. theretofore issued by the tax-collector of Bryan County, shall have full force and effect and shall be collectible as issued. 
Sec. 8. - Fees, commissions, etc. 
All fees, commissions, costs, and all other compensations allowed to the tax-receiver and tax-collector of Bryan County, Georgia, at the time this Act becomes effective, or that might legally be allowed to such officers thereafter were it not for the provisions of this Act, shall be collected by such tax commissioner and by such officer paid into the treasury of Bryan County, Georgia. 
Sec. 9. - Duties. 
Said tax commissioner shall perform each, every, and all the duties now required of the offices of tax-receiver and tax-collector of Bryan County, Georgia, in the manner prescribed by law, shall be subject to all the requirements, pains, and penalties, and have all the rights, powers, and privileges of said two offices and officers, except as to compensation, as herein provided. 
Sec. 10. - Qualifications. 
Said tax commissioner shall be and he is required hereby to be a citizen and qualified voter of said County of Bryan. 
Sec. 11. - Reports. 
Said tax commissioner of Bryan County be and is hereby required to make such reports to the State of Georgia, or the authorities thereof, as are now required or may hereafter be required of tax-receivers and tax-collectors of this State. 
Sec. 12. - Other duties. 
Said tax commissioner shall perform all the duties and be subject to all of the penalties heretofore applicable to tax-collectors and tax-receivers of Bryan County, Georgia, and shall have the authority to transact any and all business heretofore transacted by either or both of such officers in regard to closing matters left unfinished at the expiration of the present terms of office of the tax-receiver and the tax-collector of Bryan County, Georgia, except that said tax-collector of Bryan County, Georgia, at the time of this Act becomes effective, shall have one year within which to collect such tax fi. fas., issued by him, as may be uncollected, and said tax-collector shall receive all costs, fees, commissions, and other compensation due on such uncollected tax fi. fas. if collected within said year; and if not collected within said year, all of said costs, fees, commissions, and other compensation due on said uncollected fi. fas. shall be collected by the tax commissioner of Bryan County, Georgia, and turned over to the county treasurer of Bryan County, Georgia. 
Sec. 13. - Severability. 
If, for any reason, any portion or part of this Act shall be held by the court of last resort in this State to be unconstitutional, the whole of this Act shall not thereby become void, but only so much of the same as may be held to be unconstitutional; the purpose of this section of this Act being to put into effect in Bryan County, Georgia, the provisions of the Constitution of this State, as contained in article eleven (11), section three (3), and paragraph one (1) thereof, and to preserve and maintain, intact, as valid and of legal and binding effect, all such portions and parts of this Act as are unaffected and unmolested by the decisions of said court of last resort in this State. 
Sec. 14. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with the provisions and intent of this Act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE V. - CLERK OF SUPERIOR COURT AND SHERIFF[6] 
An Act to change the compensation of the sheriff, the deputy sheriff of the 20th GMD, the deputy sheriff of the 19th and 1380th GMD, and the clerk of the superior court of Bryan County from the fee system to the salary system; to provide the procedure in connection therewith; to provide for the disposing of fees; to provide an effective date; to repeal all conflicting laws; and for other purposes 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1959 Ga. Laws (Act No. 216), page 2616. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets, except that catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Fee system abolished. 
The compensation of the sheriff, the deputy sheriff of the 20th GMD, the deputy sheriff of the 19th and 1380th GMD, and the clerk of the superior court of Bryan County, which is now based on a fee system is hereby abolished and the officers herein named shall thereafter be paid salaries as herein provided. All fees, costs, percentages, forfeitures, penalties and allowances, and all perquisites of whatever kind as are now or may hereafter be allowed by law to be received or collected as compensation for service by an officer named, shall be received and diligently collected by said officer for the sole use of Bryan County and shall be held as public funds belonging to Bryan County and accounted for and paid over to the county treasurer of Bryan County on the first Tuesday in each month at which time a detailed, itemized statement shall be made by the officer to show such collection and sources from which collected and the county treasurer of Bryan County shall keep a separate account showing such collections and the source from which they are paid. 
Sec. 2. - Compensation of Sheriff; compensation of deputy sheriff's; maximum number of deputy sheriffs. 
The sheriff shall receive an annual base salary of 105 percent of those amounts set as a minimum salary for sheriffs of counties with similar populations by paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of Code Section 15-16-20 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended [O.C.G.A. § 15-16-20(a)(1)]. In addition to said annual base salary, the sheriff shall also be entitled to and receive all cost of living raises provided in paragraph (2) of subsection (a) and all longevity increases provided in subsection (b) of Code Section 15-16-20 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended [O.C.G.A. § 15-16-20(a)(2)]. For the purpose of computing the sheriff's salary, all cost of living raises and longevity increases shall be computed by adding the appropriate amounts to or applying the appropriate multipliers to the annual base salary provided for in this section. Further, the sheriff shall be entitled to any other additional salary due to him under Code Section 15-16-20.1 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended [O.C.G.A. § 15-16-20.1]. Each deputy sheriff shall be compensated in such amount as shall be fixed by the governing authority of Bryan County. All salaries payable under this Act shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Bryan County. There shall be not more than six deputy sheriffs for Bryan County, unless the employment of additional deputies shall be approved by the governing authority of Bryan County. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 880), page 2862, § 1; 1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 158), page 2406, § 1; 1973 Ga. Laws (Act No. 660), page 3527, § 1; 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 346), page 3871, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 219), page 3755, § 1; 1991 Ga. Laws (Act No. 141), page 4110, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective on January 1, 1961. 
Sec. 3A. - Expenses of sheriff's office. 
The necessary operating expenses of the sheriff's office, expressly including the compensation of all personnel and employees, shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture and utilities as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority of Bryan County, except as otherwise provided by section 2 of this Act 
(1975 Ga. Laws. (Act No. 346), page 3871, § 2) 
Sec. 4. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE VI. - COMPENSATION OF JUDGE OF THE PROBATE COURT[7] 
An Act to abolish the present mode of compensating the Judge of the Probate Court of Bryan County, known as the fee system; to provide in lieu thereof an annual salary; to provide that all fees, costs or other emoluments of said officer shall become the property of the county; to provide for the collection of all such fees, costs, and emoluments; to provide for periodic statements; to provide for the payment of the operating expenses of said office; to provide an effective date; to repeal a specific Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia: 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1163), page 321. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets, except that catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Fee system abolished. 
The present mode of compensating the Judge of the Probate Court of Bryan County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, an annual salary for such officer is prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 2. - Salary. 
The judge of the probate court shall receive an annual base salary in the amount of the minimum salary provided for clerks of the superior courts of counties with similar populations as provided in subsection (a) of Code Section 15-6-88 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended [O.C.G.A. § 15-6-88(a)] . In addition to said annual base salary, the judge of the probate court shall also be entitled to and shall receive all cost-of-living raises provided in paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of Code Section 15-9-63 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended [O.C.G.A. § 15-9-63(a)], and longevity increases provided in Code Section 15-9-65 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended [O.C.G.A. § 15-9-65]. For the purpose of computing the salary of the judge of the probate court under this section, all cost-of-living raises and longevity increases shall be computed by adding the appropriate amounts to or applying the appropriate multipliers to the annual base salary provided for in this section. Further, if the judge of the probate court also serves as the elections superintendent, the judge shall receive a monthly supplement of $400.00. All salaries payable under this Act shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Bryan County. 
(1991 Ga. Laws (Act No. 143), page 4116, § 1; 1998 Ga. Laws (Act No. 929), page 4514, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Fees, fines, etc. 
After the effective date of this Act, said officer shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed him as compensation for services in any capacity, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the 15th day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, the Judge of the Probate Court shall furnish the governing authority of the county a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. 
Sec. 4. - Office expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of the Judge of the Probate Court's office, expressly including the compensation of all personnel and employees, shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture and utilities as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority of Bryan County. 
Sec. 5. - Specific repealer. 
An Act supplementing the compensation received by the Judge of the Probate Court of Bryan County, approved February 19, 1953 (Ga. L. 1953, Jan.-Feb. Sess., p. 2436), as amended, is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 6. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective on the first day of the month following the month in which it is approved by the Governor or in which it becomes law without his approval. 
Sec. 7. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE VII. - COUNTY SURVEYOR[8] 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED AN ACT 
To abolish the office of elected county surveyor of Bryan County pursuant to Code Section 36-7-2.1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-7-2.1]; to provide for related matters; to provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia: 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 284), page 4131. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets, except that catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Office abolished. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code Section 36-7-2.1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-7-2.1], the office of elected county surveyor of Bryan County is abolished. 
(b)  The governing authority of Bryan County shall appoint a qualified person to hold the office of county surveyor for a term of four years from the date of appointment. Successors shall also be appointed for terms of four years. Any person appointed county surveyor shall possess the qualifications specified by paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of Code Section 36-7-2 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-7-2(b)(1)]. 
Sec. 2. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 3. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATION[9] 
AN ACT To create a board of elections and registration for Bryan County; to provide for definitions; to provide for the board's powers and duties; to provide for the composition of the board and the selection and appointment of members; to provide for the qualifications, terms, and removal of members; to provide for oaths and privileges; to provide for meetings, procedures, and vacancies; to relieve certain officers of powers and duties and to provide for the transfer of functions to the newly created board; to provide for expenditures of public funds; to provide for compensation of members of the board; to provide for the board's performance of certain functions and duties for certain municipalities; to provide for related matters; to provide effective dates; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia: 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 2014 Ga. Laws (Act No. 438), page 4075. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets, except that catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Board" means the Board of Elections and Registration of Bryan County. 
(2)  "Commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of Bryan County. 
(3)  "County" means Bryan County. 
(4)  "Election," "elector," "political party," "primary," and "public office" shall have the same meanings as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code," unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act. 
Sec. 2. - Created. 
Pursuant to subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40(b)], there is created the Board of Elections and Registration of Bryan County. The board shall have the powers and duties of the former superintendent of elections of Bryan County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," relating to the conduct of primaries and elections, and the former board of registrars of Bryan County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," relating to the registration of electors and absentee voting. 
Sec. 3. - Composition. 
(a)  The board shall be composed of three members, each of whom shall meet the applicable eligibility requirements under Article 1 of Chapter 2 of Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 et seq.], Code Section 21-2-75 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-65], and other general law. 
(b)  Members of the board shall be qualified and selected in the following manner: 
(1)  All members of the board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Bryan County; 
(2)  The initial terms of office of two members, as designated by their appointment, shall begin on the first day of the month in which this Act is approved by the Governor or in which it becomes law without such approval and shall expire on December 31, 2018, and upon the appointment and qualification of their respective successors. The initial term of the remaining member of the board shall begin on the first day of the month following the month in which this Act is approved by the Governor or in which it becomes law without such approval and shall expire on December 31, 2016, and upon appointment and qualification of his or her successor, provided that: 
(A)  The initial appointments to the board shall be made no later than July 1, 2014; and 
(B)  At the first meeting of each calendar year the members of the board shall select one of their members to serve as chairperson and one of their members to serve as secretary; 
(3)  Successors to the members of the board whose terms expire shall be appointed to take office on the first day of January immediately following the expiration of such terms of office and shall serve for terms of four years each and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. The board shall take no official action until all members have been certified to the clerk of the Superior Court of Bryan County; 
(4)  Each member of the board shall serve for a term of four years and until a successor is appointed and qualified, except that initial terms of office shall be as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection; and 
(5)  No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member of the board during the term of such elective public office, and the position of membership of any member shall be deemed vacant upon such member qualifying as a candidate for an elective public office. 
Sec. 4. - Certification of appointment, effect of failure to certify. 
The commissioners shall certify the appointment of each member of the board by filing an affidavit with the clerk of Superior Court of Bryan County no later than 15 days preceding the date upon which such members are to take office, stating the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifying such member has been duly appointed as provided by this Act. The clerk shall record each of such certifications in the minutes of the court and shall certify the name of each such appointed member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members within the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for registrars. If any appointing authority does not, in conformity with this Act, certify an appointment to the board within 30 days after the beginning of a term of office or within 30 days after the creation of a vacancy in that office, a vacancy shall be deemed to have been thereby created and the judge of the probate court of Bryan County shall fill that vacancy by making the appointment thereto and shall certify it as provided in this section. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve out the unexpired term of office. 
Sec. 5. - Members; eligibility for multiple terms of office, resignation or removal. 
Each member of the board shall be eligible to serve successive terms without limitation and shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of such resignation to the commissioners and to the clerk of the Superior Court of Bryan County. Each member shall be subject to removal from the board at any time, for cause, after notice and hearing, by the Chief Judge of the Superior Court of the Atlantic Judicial Circuit in the same manner and by the same authority as provided for the removal of registrars. 
Sec. 6. - Members; filling of vacancies. 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any board member before the expiration of his or her term, by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the commissioners for that position on the board. The clerk of the Superior Court of Bryan County shall be notified of such interim appointment and record and certify such appointment in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. 
Sec. 7. - Members; oath and privileges from arrest. 
Before entering the member's duties each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
Sec. 8. - Organization and meetings. 
(a)  The board shall be authorized to organize itself, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate to the management of the affairs committed to its supervision; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with state law. Action and decision by the board shall be by a majority of members of the board. The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in primaries and elections and such workers shall be appointed, insofar as practicable, from lists provided to the board by the county executive committee of each political party. 
(b)  The board shall fix and establish by appropriate resolution entered in its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall hold regular meetings each month and more often if needed in the opinion of the members. The time of such meetings shall be set by the board. Any specially called meeting shall be called by the chairperson or any three members of the board. The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions amended to include additions or deletions. Such written records shall be made available for the public to review. 
Sec. 9. - Members; compensation. 
Members of the board shall receive $60.00 per day for each day of service on the board. On primary and election days and during the period of advance voting pursuant to subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-380 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-380(b)], the chairperson and members of the board shall be compensated at the rate of $10.00 per hour. The hours of service shall be certified to the commissioners by the chairperson of the board. 
Sec. 10. - Contracts with municipalities. 
The board shall have the authority to contract with any municipality located within Bryan County for holding by the board of any primary or election to be conducted within such municipality. 
Sec. 11. - Elections supervisor. 
(a)  An elections supervisor shall be employed by the governing authority of Bryan County who shall generally supervise, direct, and control the administration of the affairs of the board pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board. The elections supervisor shall not be a member of the board. The elections supervisor shall be considered an employee of Bryan County and shall be entitled to the same benefits as other employees of Bryan County. The elections supervisor shall be subject to all personnel and policy procedures of Bryan County. The elections supervisor shall maintain regular office hours as directed by the governing authority of Bryan County. 
(b)  The elections supervisor shall not be an active member of any political party or body. 
(c)  Upon indictment of any felony involving election fraud or moral turpitude, the elections supervisor shall be terminated from the position as a matter of law. Such vacancy shall be filled within ten business days following the occurrence of such vacancy. 
(d)  The board is authorized, with approval of the commissioners, to employ additional assistants as needed to carry out the duties and functions of the board. All such clerical assistants shall be considered employees of Bryan County and shall be entitled to the same benefits as other employees of Bryan County. Any clerical assistants shall be subject to all personnel and policy procedures of Bryan County. Upon indictment of any felony involving election fraud or moral turpitude, a clerical assistant shall resign or be terminated from his or her position. 
Sec. 12. - Fixing of compensation for members, election supervisor, clerical assistants and other employees. 
Compensation for the members of the board, the elections supervisor, clerical assistants, and other employees shall be fixed by the commissioners in accordance with the provisions of this Act. Such compensation shall be paid wholly from county funds. 
Sec. 13. - Offices and supplies; audits. 
(a)  The Board of Commissioners of Bryan County shall provide the board with such proper and suitable offices, equipment, materials, and supplies and with such clerical assistance and other employees as the Board of Commissioners of Bryan County deems appropriate. 
(b)  The commissioners shall also cause periodic audits to be made of the board and its offices. 
Sec. 14. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval for purposes of making initial appointments to the board only. This Act shall become fully effective July 1, 2014. Upon this Act becoming fully effective, the superintendent of elections of Bryan County and the board of registrars of Bryan County shall be relieved of all powers and duties to which the board succeeds by the provisions of this Act and shall deliver to the board all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities pertaining to such powers and duties. 
Sec. 15. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE IX. - WATER AND SEWER AUTHORITY[10] 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED AN ACT 
To create the Bryan County Water and Sewer Authority; to provide a short title; to provide for definitions; to provide for the appointment of members of the board; to provide for organization and rules; to provide for powers and duties; to provide for financing of projects; to provide for revenue bonds; to provide for trust indentures and sinking funds; to provide for jurisdiction, venue, and remedies; to provide for validation; to provide for certain trust funds; to provide for audits; to provide for immunity; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for construction; to provide for supplemental powers; to provide for other related matters; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia: 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 586), page 4788. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Bryan County Water and Sewer Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Creation of the authority; membership. 
(a)  There is created a body corporate and politic, to be known as the Bryan County Water and Sewer Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority or the trustee acting under any trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by its officers, agents, or employees. 
(b)  The authority shall consist of six members. The board of commissioners of Bryan County shall appoint the members of the authority, each of whom shall reside in Bryan County. Two of the six members shall be incumbent members of the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners of Bryan County shall appoint two of the initial members for initial terms of three years, appoint two of the initial members for initial terms of two years, and appoint two of the initial members for initial terms of one year. Subsequent appointments shall be made for terms of office of three years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term by the board of commissioners of Bryan County. 
(c)  The authority shall elect from its members a chairperson, a vice chairperson, a secretary, and a treasurer or a secretary-treasurer. All officers shall be voting members. The members of the authority shall serve without compensation; however, they shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(d)  Any authority member who is convicted of a felony shall be removed from the authority upon the date of conviction, regardless of the status of any appeal. 
(e)  A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, and any action may be taken by the authority upon the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the members. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and perform all of the duties of the authority. The authority shall be subject to all the provisions of Chapters 14 and 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., the open meetings and open records laws of the State of Georgia [O.C.G.A. §§ 5-14-1 et seq., and 5-18-1 et seq.]. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Authority" means the Bryan County Water and Sewer Authority created by Section 2 of this Act. 
(b)  "Cost of the project" means the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction; cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal, and legal expenses and of plans and specifications and of any other expenses necessary or incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expenses and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized by this Act; the cost of the construction of any project, the placing of the same in operation, and the condemnation of property necessary for each construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(c)  "Project" means the acquisition, construction, and equipping of water facilities for obtaining one or more sources of water supply, small watershed projects, works of improvements for watersheds, projects for watershed protection and flood control and prevention, recreational facilities developed in connection therewith, the treatment of water, and the distribution and sale of water to users and consumers, including, but not limited to, the State of Georgia and counties and municipalities for the purpose of resale inside and outside the territorial boundaries of Bryan County. The term "project" shall also include additions to, improvements to, extensions of, and the operation and maintenance of the same so as to assure an adequate water system, watershed protection and improvement, and flood control and prevention; the acquisition, construction, and equipping of sewerage facilities useful and necessary for the gathering of waste matter, and the treatment of sewage of any and every type, including, but not limited to, the acquisition and construction of treatment plants, ponds, and lagoons inside and outside the territorial boundaries of Bryan County; and additions and improvements to and extensions of such facilities and the operation and maintenance of the same so as to assure an adequate sewerage system. Said water facilities, small watershed projects, projects for watershed protection and flood control and prevention, recreational facilities developed in connection therewith, and sewerage facilities, at the discretion of the authority, may be combined at any time as one revenue-producing undertaking and operated and maintained as such. 
(d)  "Revenue bonds," "bonds," or "obligations" mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], the "Revenue Bond Law." Such bonds and obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under the "Revenue Bond Law" and any amendments thereto. Such terms shall also mean obligations of the authority the issuance of which are specifically provided for in this Act. 
(e)  "Self-liquidating" means that the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all properties used, leased, and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued for the cost of such project or projects. 
Sec. 4. - Powers. 
The authority shall have the following powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(b)  To acquire by purchase, lease, gift, or otherwise, and to hold, operate, lease, maintain, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes; to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue; and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority. No property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money is deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance. If the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any lands the title to which shall then be in Bryan County or in any municipality incorporated in said county, the governing authority or body of said county or of any of said municipalities, if such governing authority consents thereto, is authorized to convey title to such lands to the authority upon payment for the credit of the general funds of said county or municipalities the reasonable value of such lands; 
(d)  To enter into an agreement with the governing authority of Bryan County and any municipalities therein, with respect to acquiring a source of water supply; providing sewerage service; preparing engineering data, plans, and specifications for a water and sewerage system; extending water mains; apportioning the costs of constructing, extending, and maintaining a water or sewerage system, or both; providing for the testing and inspection of facilities constructed; providing for rates to be charged for water and sewerage services, and keeping of permanent records; apportioning or designating the responsibility for any functions normally maintained by a water and sewerage system; providing for the ownership of the various facilities constructed or acquired; and providing for such other matters or contingencies as might be necessary or desirable in order to secure for Bryan County a satisfactory and reliable water and sewerage system at the most reasonable cost possible; 
(e)  To appoint, select, and employ such officers, agents, and employees as necessary in the judgment of the authority to accomplish the purposes of the authority. Such officers, agents, and employees may include engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys, and the authority has the power to fix their respective compensation. The authority may require bond of any person handling funds of the authority; 
(f)  To make and execute contracts, leases, and instruments, which shall be necessary or convenient, including contracts for acquisition and construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be constructed or acquired. Any and all persons, firms, and corporations and any and all consolidated governments, political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing provisions of this subsection, authorization is specifically granted to consolidated governments, municipal corporations, and counties and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of water or sewerage service and facilities, or both, by the authority to such consolidated governments, municipal corporations, and counties for a term not exceeding 50 years. As to any consolidated government, political subdivision, department, institution, or agency of this state which shall enter into an agreement under the provisions of this subsection or in subsection (d) of this section, the obligation to perform and fulfill such agreement shall constitute a general obligation of such entity for which its full faith and credit shall be pledged; 
(g)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage its water and sewerage systems; with the cost of such systems to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from such proceeds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(h)  To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(i)  To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the States of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may impose; 
(j)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute notes or other evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same; 
(k)  To issue negotiable revenue bonds, payable solely from funds pledged for the purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for rights of the holders thereof; 
(l)  The authority and any trustee acting under any trust indenture are specifically authorized to sell, lease, grant, exchange, or otherwise dispose of any such surplus property, both real and personal, or interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the authority was created, except as such right and power might be limited as provided elsewhere in this Act; 
(m)  Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the authority may exercise any of its powers or provide any of its services inside the service delivery boundaries of any local government within Bryan County only when authorized by contract with the governing authority thereof; 
(n)  To make and enforce rules and regulations for the management and operation of its publicly owned water and sewerage systems which now exist and as hereafter added to, extended, or improved by any project or projects constructed after the provisions of this Act; 
(o)  To prescribe, fix, and collect rates, fees, tolls, or charges of the authority and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls or charges for the services, facilities, or commodities furnished; and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, to issue revenue bonds as provided in this Act to finance in whole or in part the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of its water and sewerage systems, a small watershed project, a project for watershed protection or flood control and prevention, or recreational facilities developed in connection therewith; and to pledge to the punctual payment of the bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto; and to classify and differentiate such rates, fees, tolls, or charges in any reasonable manner, including, but not limited to, small, intermediate, and large consumers and industrial, commercial, and residential consumers and, with respect to sewer rates, according to the amount of suspended solids and the biological oxygen demand of sewerage users. Additionally, and not in limitation of any of the foregoing, the authority, in fixing water or sewerage rates, or both, shall be fully authorized and empowered to comply with any state or federal Acts and any lawful regulations adopted pursuant to any such Act. As a limitation of the power of the authority, however, if at any time there are issued and outstanding revenue bonds for the payment of which the revenues of the authority are pledged, the authority shall make no decrease in rates for water and sewer service which will in any way impair the obligations contained in the revenue bonds; 
(p)  To adopt rules and regulations providing for the suspension of service to delinquent customers. The authority, through its executive director, or such other employees as the authority designates, shall have the right and power to issue executions for any past due charges, which executions shall be a lien upon and against the land and other properties of the assessed party which lien shall be of equal priority, rank, and dignity having the same attributes, rights, and powers as to collection and foreclosure thereof as an execution for unpaid ad valorem taxes of the State of Georgia or the County of Bryan; provided, however, that no such lien shall exist as to third parties until execution therefor shall have been issued by the Superior Court of Bryan County. In the event that sewerage service is discontinued pursuant to this section, the appropriate health authorities shall be immediately notified; 
(q)  To acquire insurance for its property, its authority members, and its officers and employees, including, but not limited to, fire, wind, storm, extended coverage insurance, and vehicular liability insurance; all other types of liability insurance; casualty insurance, fidelity insurance, comprehensive insurance, public officials' liability insurance, general public liability insurance covering all hazards, group life insurance, group accident insurance, group health insurance, group hospitalization insurance, group medical insurance, or any combination thereof; together with any and all other types of insurance on its property, officers, authority members, and employees as the authority in its judgment and discretion deems meet and proper in the conduct of its business; and on such terms and conditions and in such amounts as the authority deems appropriate in its judgment and discretion; and with the payment of premiums and charges therefor; together with any other costs incident thereto, to be paid in whole or in part by the authority and out of the general funds of the authority as the authority may determine; 
(r)  To purchase, install, construct, repair, and replace fire hydrants on public property, together with all needful and necessary accessories and adjuncts thereto, in connection with existing or new water lines or mains of the authority and to defray and pay for any part or all of the cost and expense thereof, labor, material, and otherwise, utilizing any available funds of the authority therefor; 
(s)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to incur short-term debt and to approve, execute, and deliver appropriate evidence of any such indebtedness, provided that such power is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; and 
(t)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Sec. 5. - Financing powers. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created in this Act, shall have power and is authorized to borrow money for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of the project, as defined in this Act, of any one or more projects and to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds for that purpose. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided in this section for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates not to exceed the maximum bond limit prescribed in Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law," as now or hereafter amended, shall be payable semiannually, and shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. 
Sec. 6. - Revenue bonds; form; denominations; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
Sec. 7. - Revenue bonds; signatures; seal. 
All such bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairperson of the authority and the attesting manual or facsimile signature of the secretary of the authority, and the official seal of the authority or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed thereto and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairperson and the secretary of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the authority by such person as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such person may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if such officer had remained in office until such delivery. 
Sec. 8. - Revenue bonds; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of this state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and said bonds and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
Sec. 9. - Revenue bonds; sale; price. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interests of the authority. 
Sec. 10. - Revenue bonds; proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the costs of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit which, unless otherwise provided for in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into the fund provided for in this Act to be used for paying the principal of and the interest on such bonds. 
Sec. 11. - Revenue bonds; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definite bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 12. - Revenue bonds; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 13. - Revenue bonds; conditions precedent to issue; object of issue. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolutions may be passed at any regular, special, or adjourned meeting of the authority by most the quorum as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 14. - Revenue bonds; credit not pledged; special power of contract. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Bryan County or a pledge of the faith and credit of the county, but the bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this Act, and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section; provided, however, that the governing authority of Bryan County is authorized to contract with the authority for any of the undertakings authorized in this Act. Such county may in connection therewith, jointly or severally, use any funds from any lawful source or from the proceeds of the issue and sale of bonds for such purpose. 
Sec. 15. - Revenue bonds; trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company inside or outside this state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of the revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property; the construction of the project; the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of the project; and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Sec. 16. - Revenue bonds; to whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in any trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person or any agency, bank, or trust company acting as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes provided for in this Act, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Sec. 17. - Revenue bonds; sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, charges, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, tolls, charges, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide. Such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund, which sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)  The interest upon the revenue bond as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal of the revenue bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)  Any premium upon the revenue bonds acquired by redemption, payment, or otherwise; 
(4)  The necessary charges of the paying agent or agents for paying principal and interest; and 
(5)  Any investment fees or charges. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, any surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not be reissued, printed, and delivered. 
Sec. 18. - Revenue bonds; remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or of any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given by this Act, may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted by this Act or under such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, fines, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 19. - Revenue bonds; refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with the accrued interest thereon and the premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Sec. 20. - Revenue bonds; jurisdiction and venue. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Bryan County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 21. - Revenue bonds, validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], the "Revenue Bond Law." The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated. The state or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof shall not be inquired into the court, and validity of the terms thereof shall be determined and the contract [or] contracts shall be adjudicated as a part of the basis for the security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and the interest thereon and against the authority issuing the same, the state, and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality thereof, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the authority. 
Sec. 22. - Revenue bonds; interest of bondholders protected. 
(a)  While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said authority or its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. No other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the authority. 
(b)  The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Act, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Sec. 23. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenue, income, fees, and earnings shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 24. - Tort immunity. 
To the extent permitted by law, the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as Bryan County, and the officers, agents, and employees of the authority when in the performance of the work of the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agent, and employees of Bryan County when in performance of their public duties or work of the county. 
Sec. 25. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects acquired or constructed under the provisions of this Act, including the basis on which water service and facilities, sewerage service and facilities, or both, shall be furnished. 
Sec. 26. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized by this Act and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. This Act does not in any way take from Bryan County, any municipality located therein, any other adjoining county, or any private individual or corporation the authority to own, operate, add to, extend, improve, or maintain any water system, small watershed project, project for watershed protection and flood control and prevention, recreational facilities developed in connection therewith, sewerage system, or its service area combined water and sewerage system; nor does it in any way take from any of said political subdivisions of the state the authority to issue revenue bonds as provided by Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], the "Revenue Bond Law." 
Sec. 27. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes thereof. 
Sec. 28. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE X. - SCHOOL TAX HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR THE ELDERLY[11] 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED AN ACT 
To provide a homestead exemption from Bryan County school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes in the amount of $50,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for residents of that school district who are 65 years of age or older; to provide for definitions; to specify the terms and conditions of the exemption and the procedures relating thereto; to provide for applicability; to provide for a referendum, effective dates, and automatic repeal; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia: 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 776), page 4105. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Granted. 
(a)  As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for educational purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the Bryan County school district, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire county school district bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40]. 
(3)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 65 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under this Act is made. 
(b)  Each resident of the Bryan County school district who is a senior citizen is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Bryan County school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes in the amount of $50,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the tax commissioner of Bryan County giving the person's age and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1], as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year, and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act to notify the tax commissioner of Bryan County in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect any state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes, or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption applicable to Bryan County school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2007. 
Sec. 2. - Referendum. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of Bryan County shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of the Bryan County school district for approval or rejection. The election superintendent shall conduct that election on the date of the November, 2006, state-wide general election and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Bryan County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"( ) YES 
( ) NO 
Shall the Act be approved which provides a homestead exemption from Bryan County school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes in the amount of $50,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for residents of that school district who are 65 years of age or over?" 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and all persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, Section 1 of this Act shall become of full force and effect on January 1, 2007. If the Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, Section 1 of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. The expense of such election shall be borne by Bryan County. It shall be the election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 4. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE XI. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR COUNTY TAXES[12] 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED AN ACT 
To provide a homestead exemption from Bryan County ad valorem taxes for county purposes in the amount of $30,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for residents of that county; to provide for definitions; to specify the terms and conditions of the exemption and the procedures relating thereto; to provide for applicability; to provide for a referendum, effective dates, and automatic repeal; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia: 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 792), page 4181. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Granted. 
(a)  As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for county purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for county purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of Bryan County, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire county bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40]. 
(b)  Each resident of Bryan County is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Bryan County ad valorem taxes for county purposes in the amount of $30,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the tax commissioner of Bryan County giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable tax commissioner to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A., as amended [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1]. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year, and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the tax commissioner of Bryan County in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect any state ad valorem taxes, county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes, or municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. The homestead exemption granted by this Act shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption applicable to Bryan County ad valorem taxes for county purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2007. 
Sec. 2. - Referendum. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of Bryan County shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section [for] the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of Bryan County for approval or rejection. The election superintendent shall conduct that election on the date of the November, 2006, state-wide general election and shall issue the call and conduct that election provided by general law. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Bryan County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"( ) YES 
 ( ) NO" 
Shall the Act be approved which provides a homestead exemption from Bryan County ad valorem taxes for county purposes in the amount of $30,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for residents of that county?" 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and all persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, Section 1 of this Act shall become of full force and effect on January 1, 2007. If the Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, Section 1 of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. The expense of such election shall be borne by Bryan County. It shall be the election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 4. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE XII. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FROM COUNTY TAXES FOR ELDERLY PERSONS[13] 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED AN ACT 
To provide a homestead exemption from Bryan County ad valorem taxes for county purposes in the amount of $50,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for residents of that county who are 65 years of age or over; to provide for definitions; to specify the terms and conditions of the exemption and the procedures relating thereto; to provide for applicability; to provide for a referendum, effective dates, and automatic repeal; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 7993), page 4184. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Granted. 
(a)  As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for county purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for county purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the Bryan County, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire county bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40]. 
(3)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 65 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under this Act is made. 
(b)  Each resident of Bryan County who is a senior citizen is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Bryan County ad valorem taxes for county purposes in the amount of $50,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The value of that property excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the tax commissioner of Bryan County giving the person's age and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A., as amended [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1]. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year, and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the tax commissioner of Bryan County in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect any state ad valorem taxes, county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes, or municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. The homestead exemption granted by this Act shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption applicable to Bryan County ad valorem taxes for county purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2007. 
Sec. 2. - Referendum. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of Bryan County shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of Bryan County for approval or rejection. The election superintendent shall conduct that election on the date of the November, 2006, state-wide general election and shall issue the call and conduct that election provided by general law. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Bryan County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"( ) YES 
 ( ) NO" 
Shall the Act be approved which provides a homestead exemption from Bryan County ad valorem taxes for county purposes in the amount of $50,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for residents of that county who are 65 of age or over?" 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and all persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, Section 1 of this Act shall become of full force and effect on January 1, 2007. If the Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, Section 1 of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. The expense of such election shall be borne by Bryan County. It shall be the election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 4. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the local acts in part I. 

 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code is designated and cited. 
The provisions in this and the following chapter shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Bryan County, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code consists of subparts A and B. 
(Code 1996, § 2-101) 
State Law reference— Ordinance codification, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
Unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners, the following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code: 
Generally. 
(1)  The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
(2)  In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the commission, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(3)  All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the commission may be fully carried out. 
(4)  In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(5)  Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
(6)  The specific controls over the general. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Board of commissioners, board, commission, county commission, governing authority. The term "board of commissioners," "board," "commission," "county commission," or "governing authority" means the board of commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Bryan County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Bryan County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a county officer or county employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Fees, charges and rates. Provisions to the effect that a fee, charge or rate is as established by the board means that such fee, charge or rate is as established from time to time by the board of commissioners or the lawful designee thereof. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number includes the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the county officials, county employees, county boards, county commissions or other county agencies. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property, except real property. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street and road. The terms "street" and "road" include any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the county, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," as applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1996, § 2-102, 2-103) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, cross references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1996, § 2-104) 
Sec. 1-4. - Territorial applicability. 
The provisions of this Code, unless otherwise clearly specified, shall apply only in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 2-108) 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In any case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the ease of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such action taken on subsequent ordinances until such time as the Code and subsequent ordinances omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of the Code of Bryan County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Bryan County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or subsection, division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:…." The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be, or by setting them out at length in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 1996, § 2-105) 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the unified government. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a county officer or county employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  All county officers and employees may issue citations for violations of ordinances that they are authorized to enforce. 
(Code 1996, § 2-107) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain legislation not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any of the following ordinances or resolutions or portions of ordinances or resolutions, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(6)  Adopting or amending a comprehensive plan. 
(7)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(8)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(9)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision or regulating the subdivision or platting of land. 
(10)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes. 
(11)  Pertaining to zoning. 
(12)  That are temporary, although general in effect. 
(13)  That are special, although permanent in effect. 
(14)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Counties generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-19. - Rules of order and procedures. 
The following provisions apply to meetings of the board of commissioners: 
(1)  Quorum. A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the board. A quorum is a majority of all of the members of the board then in office. It is the duty of the chairman to enforce this rule. Any commissioner may raise a point of order directed to the chairman if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a commissioner leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the chairman with the approval of the commissioners present. 
(2)  Voting, majority. Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of commissioners present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in these procedures, a majority shall mean at least one-half of the commissioners present, excluding abstentions. 
(3)  Abstentions. A commissioner shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest which would prevent him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
(4)  Chairman. The chairman of the board of commissioners is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chairman must enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the board of commissioners. The chairman shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The chairman may not introduce motions or second a motion, except that the chairman may introduce or second a motion to go into executive session as authorized by subsection (16) of this section. 
(5)  Vice-chairman. The board shall select a vice-chairman from the board members at the beginning of each calendar year. The vice-chairman shall fulfill the duties of the chairman if the chairman is not in attendance. If the chairman and the vice-chairman are absent and a quorum is present, the remaining commissioners shall select a commissioner to serve as temporary chairman of the meeting until either the chairman or vice-chairman is present at the meeting. 
(6)  Agenda. The county administrator, with the advice of the chairman and the commissioners, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. An agenda work session shall be held by the county administrator to finalize the agenda. The chairman and all commissioners may participate in the work session. Whenever a quorum of the board is present for an agenda work session, the meeting shall be open to the public and all notice and recordkeeping requirements applicable to an open meeting must be met. The agenda shall be made available to the commissioners at least one business day before every board meeting. Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. To be considered, this request must be submitted in writing to the county administrator and received at least five business days before the meeting. The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the board. A new subject that requires attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a two-thirds vote of the board. A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of any meeting. 
(7)  Consent agenda. A consent agenda may be prepared by the county administrator for the board to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and where no debate is expected may be placed on a consent agenda. At the appropriate time of the meeting, the chairman shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a commissioner objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the chairman shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the chairman will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent. 
(8)  Minutes. The clerk of the board shall promptly record the minutes for each board meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the board meeting. More detailed information than that required by law may be included in the minutes at the request of the board. The board must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the board. A copy of the minutes from the previous regularly scheduled meeting shall be distributed to the commissioners at least one business day before the following regularly scheduled meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the board at the beginning of each regularly scheduled meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chairman and attested to by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(9)  Order of business. All regular board meetings should follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 

 
  
(10)  Decorum. All commissioners must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chairman and not to individual commissioners, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A commissioner may not speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the chairman. All comments made by a commissioner shall address the motion that is being discussed. The chairman shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a commissioner believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairman can rule on the question or he can allow the board to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
(11)  Public participation. Public participation in meetings of the board of commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. 
a.  Public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members of the public who wish to address the board must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the county administrator at least five business days before the board meeting. These individuals will be allotted five minutes to make their comments and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the board. 
b.  Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the board may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the board. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may only speak once. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the board. Anyone wishing to speak at any board meeting must be recognized by the chairman before addressing the board. 
c.  Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a board meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for commissioners. Individuals who violate any rules of the board may be ruled out of order by the chairman or on a point of order made by a commissioner. A majority vote of the board will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairman. 
d.  Public hearings. The board may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the board. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the board or at such other places and times as the board may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. 
(12)  Parliamentarian. The county attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for board meetings. 
(13)  Amendments to rules. Any amendments to the rules of order must be submitted by a commissioner in writing to the county administrator five business days before a regular meeting of the board. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all board members. All amendments require a two-thirds vote of the board to be adopted. 
(14)  Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held at 1:30 p.m. on the first Tuesday of each month. All regular meetings shall be held in the county site in the commissioner meeting room of the county courthouse. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the board. 
(15)  Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the county site by the chairman for any reason. Other special meetings may be scheduled by the chairman or at the request of two commissioners. 
(16)  Executive sessions. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board of commissioners taken in a public meeting. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the board may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(17)  Suspending the rules of order. Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable and requires a two-thirds vote of the board. Rules governing quorum (subsection (1) of this section), voting methods and requirements (subsections (2) and (3) of this section), the notification to commissioners of meetings (subsection (15) of this section) and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
(18)  Committees. The chairman, with the concurrence of the board, may create committees of members of the board to study any issue before the board. Any such committees may make recommendations to the board of commissioners but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to board members, committees may include other county officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any limitation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the chairman with the concurrence of the board. The chairman shall serve as an ex officio member of all committees. 
(Code 1996, § 1-101) 
State Law reference— Open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-20. - Chairman; powers and duties. 
The chairman shall be the chief executive of the county and the presiding officer of the board of commissioners. In addition to the chairman's duties as presiding officer, the chairman shall have the power and it shall be the duty of said officer to: 
(1)  Be the official spokesman for the county government and the chief advocate of policy as established by the board of commissioners; 
(2)  Serve in all respects as a member of the board. The chairman may not vote except to break a tie vote; 
(3)  Sign ordinances and resolutions on their final passage and sign deeds, bonds, contracts, and other instruments and documents in any case in which the general laws of this state or any ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners so require or authorize; 
(4)  Be recognized as the official head of the board of commissioners by the courts for the purpose of receiving service or civil process, by the governor for the purpose of the military law, and for all ceremonial purposes; 
(5)  Call special meetings of the board of commissioners as provided herein; 
(6)  Represent the board of commissioners in matters involving the relationship of the county government with elected county officers and in intergovernmental relations, particularly where questions of public policy are at issue; 
(7)  Conduct all meetings of the board of commissioners in accordance with section 2-19; 
(8)  Perform such additional duties as may be required by law or ordinances or resolutions of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1996, § 1-105) 
Secs. 2-21—2-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 

Sec. 2-44. - Generally. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing. 
(b)  No ordinance or resolution shall be adopted until it has been read or presented in written form at a regularly scheduled or special meeting of the board of commissioners. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the board of commissioners shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance or resolution. The passage of all ordinances or resolutions shall require the recording of the "ayes" and "nays" and the names of the members of the board of commissioners voting for and against each proposed ordinance or resolution or amendment there to shall be entered upon the journal of the proceedings of the board. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance or resolution. 
(d)  Introduction and adoption of ordinances, resolutions, and other matters. 
(1)  Except for emergency ordinances under subsection (d)(2) of this section, no ordinance shall be adopted until it has been read or presented in written form at two meetings of the board of commissioners held not less than one week apart. 
(2)  To meet a public emergency threatening life, health, property, or public peace, the board of commissioners may adopt emergency ordinances or resolutions, but such ordinances or resolutions may not be enacted to levy taxes, or to grant, renew or extend a franchise, or to regulate the rate charged for any public utility or service, or to authorize the borrowing of money. An emergency ordinance or resolution shall be in the form prescribed for ordinances or resolutions generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance or resolution and shall contain a declaration stating the emergency exists. An emergency ordinance or resolution may be adopted with or without amendment or may be rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the board of commissioners present at such meeting shall be required for it adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance or resolution shall automatically stand repealed on the 30th day following the date in which it was adopted but, if the emergency still exists, the automatic repeal of the ordinance or resolution shall not prevent its re-enactment in the manner specified in this subsection. An emergency ordinance or resolution may also be repealed in the same manner specified in this subsection for adoption of emergency ordinances or resolutions. 
(Code 1996, § 1-103; Ord. of 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 2-45. - Signing, authentication, and recording. 
Every ordinance or resolution adopted by the board of commissioners shall be submitted to the county clerk as promptly as practicable following its adoption. The county clerk shall authenticate by signature and record in full all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the board in a properly indexed book kept for such purposes, which shall be a public record and open to the public inspection. The board of commissioners shall further provide for the periodic updating, revision, codification, and printing of all ordinances or resolutions of a general and permanent nature, together with such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the board may require. 
(Code 1996, § 1-104) 
Secs. 2-46—2-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. title 45. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-64. - Exercise of governmental authority. 
The corporate governmental powers of the county shall be exercised by the board of commissioners in the manner provided by this article. 
(Code 1996, § 3-101) 
Sec. 2-65. - Administrative policy and procedures. 
(a)  Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law and this Code, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the county. 
(b)  Department heads. All department heads shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the county administrator for the effective administration of daily activities of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the board of commissioners, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the county and to the public; 
(3)  Submit monthly reports of the activities within their department to the board of commissioners and county administrator; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the monthly reports required by the board of commissioners and county administrator; 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the county administrator, to appoint and remove (subject to personnel regulations) all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance and accountability of all county property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
(c)  Department. Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the county administrator, to any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, facilities permitting. 
(d)  Records. All county records, except those which by order of a state court or by law are prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by any citizen of the state during the hours of operation of the administrative service herein prescribed. 
(e)  Operation of administrative service. All units in the administrative service shall: 
(1)  Office hours. Be open Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. with the exception of legal holidays. 
(2)  Daily deposit. Make a daily deposit of any monies received directly from the public. 
(3)  Payment of monies. Pay out monies belonging to the county only in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Code 1996, § 3-102) 
Sec. 2-66. - Oaths. 
All county officials and police officials required by law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths: 
I, ____________ , do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Ordinances of the County of Bryan; and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of ____________ during my continuance therein, so help me God. 
(Code 1996, § 3-103) 
Sec. 2-67. - Commissioners authority relative to employees. 
Except for the purpose of inquiry and information, individual commissioners shall deal with county employees solely through the county administrator and shall not give orders or directions to any such employees, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. The above restriction shall not apply to the chairman of the commission, or in his absence, the vice-chairman of the commission, either of who shall have the right to deal with or give orders or directions to county employees on the behalf of the entire commission, provided that such dealings, orders or directions are within the lawful power of the commission as set forth in the ordinances of the county, and state law. 
(Code 1996, § 1-110) 
Sec. 2-68. - County administrator; appointment, qualifications. 
(a)  There shall be a county administrator who shall be elected by a majority vote of the total membership of the board of commissioners. The county administrator shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications and need not be a resident of the county or of the state at the time of selection. The county administrator shall be nominated and selected as provided in this subsection. The county administrator shall not engage in any other business or occupation. 
(b)  The county administrator may be permanently removed or suspended from duty by a two-thirds vote of the total membership of the board of commissioners. If permanently removed from duty, the county administrator shall be paid forthwith the salary and accumulated annual leave due and the county administrator's salary for the next three calendar months following adoption of a resolution for removal. If the county administrator is removed from malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in the office, the salary of the county administrator for the next three months shall not be paid. 
(c)  The county administrator shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  The county administrator shall be responsible to the board of commissioners for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the county government and shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To serve as the chief administrative officer and head of the administrative branch of the county government; 
(2)  To recommend to the board of commissioners the creation, reorganization, or abolishment of certain offices, departments, divisions, or bureaus; 
(3)  To appoint or remove certain employees as authorized by the board; 
(4)  To direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the county government except as otherwise provided by ordinance, or resolution of the board of commissioners; 
(5)  To see that the ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the board of commissioners and laws of the state, subject to enforcement by the county administrator or by officers subject to said officer's supervision and control, are faithfully executed and enforced; 
(6)  To attend all meetings of the board of commissioners unless excused and, upon the request of the board of commissioners to take part in the discussion; but the county administrator may not vote on any question before the board of commissioners; 
(7)  To establish the schedules and procedure to be followed by all county departments, offices, and agencies in connection with the budget and supervise and administer all phases of the budgetary process and provide a balanced budget for the board of commissioners review; 
(8)  To submit to the board of commissioners and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the county government at the end of each fiscal year and at such times as the board of commissioners may direct; 
(9)  To prepare and make such other reports concerning the operations of departments, offices, and agencies of the county government as may be required by the board of commissioners; 
(10)  To keep the board of commissioners advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the county government and to make recommendations to the board of commissioners concerning the affairs of the county government; 
(11)  To negotiate leases, contracts, and other agreements, including consultant services, for the county, subject to policies of the board, and make recommendations concerning the nature and location of county improvements; 
(12)  To exercise and perform such other or additional duties and assignments as may be required by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1996, § 1-106) 
Sec. 2-69. - County attorney. 
(a)  Appointment, removal, and qualifications. There shall be a county attorney who shall be selected by the board of commissioners and elected by a majority vote of the total membership of the board. The county attorney may be removed by the same majority vote of the total membership of the board. The county attorney shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing with at least five years of experience in the practice of law. 
(b)  Compensation and disclosure. The county attorney shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Powers; duties; requests for opinions; and conflicts. 
(1)  The county attorney shall: 
a.  Provide legal advice to and represent the county. In doing so, the county attorney's duties include advising and representing the governing authority, sheriff, tax commissioner, clerk of superior court, probate court judge, officials and employees of the county; 
b.  Advise the governing authority and other county officers and employees on their power and duties under the law, the prepared ordinances and legal documents, and to represent the county and its officers in legal proceedings; 
c.  Prepare or supervise the preparation of all contracts, bonds, and other instruments in writing in which the county government is concerned and endorse on each instrument said officer's approval of the form and correctness thereof; 
d.  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, ordinance, or resolution of the board of commissioner. 
(2)  Legal opinions may be requested by any member of the board of commissioners but other requests for legal opinions shall be made through the chairman of the board of commissioners or through the county administrator. 
(3)  The county attorney may not represent any county official or employee if the representation of the county official or employee conflicts with the interests of the county government. In such cases, the board of commissioners shall determine if the county government is obligated to provide representation for such county official or employee. The county attorney should clearly communicate with the governing authority and any affected county officers concerning the nature of representation. 
(4)  The county attorney should communicate with the governing authority and any affected county officers particularly regarding settlements and discussions of proposed terms of settlements. 
(5)  The county attorney should counsel the governing authority and affected county officers and employees on the value of cooperation as a means towards the productive resolution of disputes. 
(Code 1996, §§ 1-107—1-109) 
Sec. 2-70. - County clerk. 
If permanently removed from duty, the county clerk shall be paid forthwith the salary and accumulated annual leave due and the county clerk's salary for the next three calendar months following adoption of a resolution for removal. If the county clerk is removed from malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office, the salary of the county clerk shall not be paid. In the event of a vacancy in the office of the clerk of said board, his successor shall be elected by a majority vote of the membership of said board. 
(Code 1996, § 1-102) 
Secs. 2-71—2-98. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ETHICS CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Codes of ethics and conflicts of interest, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-99. - Short title. 
This division will be known as and may be referred and cited as the "Ethics Code of Bryan County" ("ethics code"). 
(Code 1996, § 2-201) 
Sec. 2-100. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of the county believes that public service is a public trust. Maintaining that public trust requires the county to protect against improper influence or the appearance of improper influence. The purpose should be to ensure that public officials will be impartial and use independent judgement in carrying out their duties. To help ensure this quality, the board of commissioners finds and declares the need to establish appropriate ethical standards for conduct. 
(b)  The board of commissioners of the county does not intend that this division impede the desire for those who want to seek and serve in public office. To this end, public officials should not, except as otherwise provided by law, be denied the opportunity available to all other citizens. Public service should not restrict the ability to acquire and maintain private, economic and other interests. Only in those cases in which a conflict of the public's trust and interest would result should a restriction be applied. 
(c)  This division follows the precedent of earlier federal, state and local codes. Related local code chapters can be found in the personnel code. It makes clear those standards of ethical conduct that will apply to public officials in the discharge of their official duties; implements the objective of protecting the integrity of the government; and prescribes only such essential restrictions against conflicts of interest so as not to impose unnecessary barriers against public service. 
(Code 1996, § 2-202) 
Sec. 2-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agency means any entity which the board of commissioners determines is subject to the legislative authority of the county with respect to the division. 
Business/business entity means any entity, regardless of forms, whether or not operated for profit, including, but not limited to, any corporation, general or limited partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venue, association, firm, institution, trust, person or foundation. 
Censure means any expression of severe criticism or reproach. 
Employee or public employee means any person, employed full- or part-time by the county government. The county administrator, department heads and other employees exempt under the personnel policy manual shall be considered employees for the purpose of this division. The board of commissioners of the county and appointed and elected officials shall not be considered employees but are defined in this division. 
Employer means any person paying or agreeing to pay compensation to another person for services rendered. 
Financial interest means: 
(1)  Any source of income, direct or indirect, from which a person has received, within the past 12 months, or is presently receiving, more than $500.00 per year; 
(2)  Ownership, legal or equitable, of more than ten percent of a business entity; or 
(3)  Ownership of any interest having a fair market value of more than $20,000.00. 
Gift means the transfer of anything of economic value, regardless of form, without adequate and lawful consideration. The term "gift" does not include the solicitation, acceptance, receipt, or regulation of political campaign contributions. The term "gift" shall be further defined as a subscription, membership, loan, forgiveness of debt, advance or deposit of money or anything of value, conveyed or transferred. 
Immediate relative/relatives means spouse, children, step-children, siblings, parents, grandparents, grandchildren, and spouses of such persons. 
Interests means any legal or equitable economic interest, whether or not subject to an encumbrance or a condition, which was owned or held, in whole or in part, jointly or severally, directly or indirectly. 
Person includes any individual, employee or entity. 
Personnel code means the county personnel policy manual that governs personnel. 
Public officer or officer or officials means the members of the board of commissioners of the county and other elected or appointed officials. 
(Code 1996, § 2-203) 
Sec. 2-102. - Compliance with applicable law. 
No officer shall engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law, now existing or hereafter enacted, which is applicable to him by virtue of their office. Other provisions of law or regulations relating to this division shall apply when any provisions of this division shall conflict with the laws of the state or the Unites States of America. The laws of the state or the United States of America shall apply when this division is silent. 
(Code 1996, § 2-204) 
Sec. 2-103. - Impartiality. 
(a)  Officers must not take part in any personal, business, or professional activity or receive or retain any direct or indirect financial interest that places them in a position of conflict between their private interest and public interest that relate to their responsibilities and duties as officers. 
(b)  Officers must not use their positions to induce, coerce, or influence a person or employee (including subordinates) in a way that would provide any benefits, financial or otherwise, to themselves or others or any organization of which they are a member thereof. 
(c)  No officer shall: 
(1)  Use public office for private gain. 
(2)  Give preferential treatment to any person. 
(3)  Impede government efficiency and economy. 
(Code 1996, § 2-205) 
Sec. 2-104. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this code of ethics for any officer to participate directly or indirectly through decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation or in any other manner upon the following: 
(1)  Any proceeding, application, vote, request for ruling, claim, controversy, contract or any other matter involving an immediate relative or any interest of an immediate relative of the officer. 
(2)  Any matter in which the officer has a financial interest, a fiduciary interest, a corporate interest, or an employment interest. 
(3)  No officer should invest or hold any investment directly or indirectly in any financial, business, commercial or other private transaction, which creates a conflict with and/or adversely effects such official duties of the officer. However, should the same exist, such officer shall either: 
a.  Abstain. 
b.  In the event abstention is not required, disclose such interest prior to taking any action on the matter by duly noting such conflict for recording in the minutes of the meeting. 
(b)  It is hereby declared that it is not the intent of this division to prohibit an immediate relative of an officer from being engaged in gainful employment in the county. The county shall not be prohibited from doing business with an entity which employs an immediate relative of an officer provided: 
(1)  That such business relationship does not violate this division; 
(2)  That such business relationship is fully disclosed in writing; 
(3)  That, where applicable, the affected business entity shall be required to use the bid system when conducting business with the county. 
(Code 1996, § 2-206) 
Sec. 2-105. - Financial disclosure. 
Financial disclosures shall be governed by federal and state law, and this code of ethics shall not require any additional reports to be filed. 
(Code 1996, § 2-207) 
Sec. 2-106. - Interest and contracts involving officers. 
(a)  While an official matter is pending, or an application is likely, no officer shall acquire or own an interest in any contract or transaction at a time if a reasonable basis exists that such an interest will be affected directly by his official act or action or by official acts or actions of the county. 
(b)  The county shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with an officer, or with a business in which the officer has an interest. Provided that such is disclosed to all parties involved, the prohibitions of this section shall not apply in case of: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for county funds. 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers competitive rates for such loans. 
(3)  Contracts entered into with a business which employs a consultant, provided that such employment is not incompatible with this division. 
(4)  Contracts for services entered into with a business which is the only available source for such goods or services. 
(5)  Contracts entered into under circumstances which would constitute an emergency situation, provided that such emergency is documented and submitted to the board of commissioner to be kept on file. 
(Code 1996, § 2-208) 
Sec. 2-107. - Use of prestige of office; harassment; improper influence. 
(a)  An official shall not intentionally use the prestige of his office or official title or position for his own personal gain or that of another. The performance of usual and customary constituent services, without additional compensation, does not constitute the use of prestige of office prohibited by this section. 
(b)  No official shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, discriminate against, or give the appearance of, or attempt to intimidate, threaten, coerce or discriminate against any employee for the purpose of interfering with that person's freedom of choice in the regular discharge of his official duties. 
(c)  No official shall improperly influence any public official to violate the standards of ethical conduct set forth in this division. 
(Code 1996, § 2-209) 
Sec. 2-108. - Solicitation or acceptance of gifts. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, no official, either for himself, or any member of the immediate family of such official, or for any other person, may knowingly solicit, receive benefit from, accept, or agree to accept any gratuity, gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself, and other person or any member of the immediate family of such official. In addition, it shall also be a violation of division for any such gift as defined in this division to be received by any such person as specified herein if: 
(1)  It tends to influence him in the discharge of official duties or gives a reasonable basis for the impression of improper influence over him in the discharge of official duties. 
(2)  The official has financial interest which may be substantially and materially affected, by performance or non-performance of his official duties. 
(b)  Unless impartiality and independence of judgement of the official would be compromised this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Meals and beverages given in the normal course of entertaining. 
(2)  An occasional, nonpecuniary gift from a single source of $50.00 or less. 
(3)  Ceremonial gifts or awards. 
(4)  Gifts of advertising value only. 
(5)  Awards presented in recognition of public service. 
(6)  Reasonable expenses of food, travel, lodging and scheduled entertainment of the official for a meeting which is given in return for participation in a panel or speaking engagement at the meeting. 
(7)  Courtesy tickets or free admission extended to an elected official for an event as a courtesy or for ceremonial purposes. 
(8)  Gifts from relatives or members of his household. 
(9)  Honorariums or awards for professional achievement. 
(10)  Courtesy tickets or free admission to an elected official to educational seminars, educational or informational conventions or other similar events. 
(Code 1996, § 2-210) 
Sec. 2-109. - Disclosure of confidential information. 
No officer shall use or disclose confidential information concerning the property, governing operations, policies or affairs of the county, unless such information is generally available to the public; nor shall any officer use such information to advance the financial or personal interest of the officer or any other person. 
(Code 1996, § 2-211) 
Sec. 2-110. - Abstention. 
An officer who has an interest that he has reason to believe either violates this code of ethics or may affect his official acts or actions shall abstain from participating in any official acts or actions related to it. 
(Code 1996, § 2-212) 
Sec. 2-111. - Disciplinary action. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedy provided by law, a person who is subject to the provisions of this division and who is found by the board of commissioners to have violated its provisions may, in the case of a public official, be subject to censure or reprimand. 
(b)  Upon direction of the board of commissioners, a petition may be filed for injunctive relief, or any other appropriate relief, in the superior court of the county, or in any other court having proper venue and jurisdiction, for the purpose of requiring compliance with the provisions of this division. In addition, the court may issue an order to cease and desist from the violation of this division. The court also may void an official action taken by an official which action was prohibited by this division, provided that the legal action to void the matter was brought within 30 days of the occurrence of the official action, if the court deems voiding the action to be in the best interest of the public. The court, after hearing and considering all the circumstances in the case, may grant all or part of the relief sought. However, the court may not void any official action appropriating public funds, levying taxes or providing for the issuances of bonds, notes or other evidences of public obligation. 
(Code 1996, § 2-213) 
Sec. 2-112. - Civil recovery. 
The value of anything received by any person for violations of this division, as determined by the board of commissioners, shall be recoverable from such person by the county by appropriate legal action or proceedings or by a taxpayer of the county acting on behalf of the county after a written demand to the county to bring such action, and failure of the county to initiate the action within 60 days after receipt of the demand. 
(Code 1996, § 2-214) 
Sec. 2-113. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board of commissioners with regard to this division may appeal to the superior court of the county, except, however, that said appeal must be filed within 30 days of the decision being appealed. Said appeal shall be based upon the record. No party shall be entitled to a de novo appeal. Upon failure to file said appeal within 30 days of the decision being appealed, the decision shall be binding and final upon all parties. 
(Code 1996, § 2-215) 
Sec. 2-114. - Official liability. 
No member of the board of commissioners or any person acting on behalf of the board of commissioners shall be liable to any person for any damages arising out of the enforcement or operation of the ethics code of the county, except in the case of willful or malicious negligence. This limitation of liability shall apply to the county, the members of the board, the employees of the board and any person acting under direction of the board. 
(Code 1996, § 2-216) 
Secs. 2-115—2-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AUTHORITIES AND AGENCIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-142. - Attendance at meetings of board appointees. 
(a)  As used in this article, the term "appointee" means any person who has been appointed by the board to serve on a committee, board, authority, or any group so designated by the county board of commissioners. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall have the right to remove any appointee who, in the sole judgement of a majority of the board of commissioners, has failed to attend two consecutive regular meetings or four meetings in a quarter of the committee, board, authority or group on which such appointee serves without an excuse acceptable to the board of commissioners in its sole judgement. 
(Code 1996, § 2-109) 
Secs. 2-143—2-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Development authorities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-62-1 et seq., 36-62A-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-167. - Board of directors. 
The development authority shall consist of a board of nine directors. 
(Code 1996, § 4-303; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 2-168. - Geographical area. 
The geographical area of the development authority of the county shall be the entirety of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 4-302; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 2-169. - Liability. 
No director or other person executing certificates or other obligations on behalf of the authority shall be personally liable thereon. 
(Code 1996, § 4-306; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 2-170. - Property. 
Should the authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all its property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to the county subject to any mortgages, liens, eases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
(Code 1996, § 4-310; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Secs. 2-171—2-193. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECEIVER OF CHILD SUPPORT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Child support receivers, O.C.G.A. § 15-15-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-194. - Statutory authorization. 
Under authority of O.C.G.A. § 15-15-2, the county creates and establishes, jointly with Evans, Liberty, Long, McIntosh, and Tattnall counties, a circuit wide office of receiver of child support and appoints the director of enforcement, child support recovery unit, office of the district attorney of the Atlantic Judicial Circuit as director of the office of the receiver of child support. 
(Code 1996, § 4-501) 
Sec. 2-195. - Director. 
Said director shall receive no salary for serving in this capacity. 
(Code 1996, § 4-502) 
Sec. 2-196. - Budget and fees. 
Liberty County is designated to administer the budget of this office and to receive the fees provided for in O.C.G.A. § 15-15-5. 
(Code 1996, § 4-503) 
Sec. 2-197. - Salaries and expenses. 
Salaries and expenses of this office shall be paid from and not exceed the fees collected under O.C.G.A. § 15-15-5. 
(Code 1996, § 4-504) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. title 3; general powers relative to alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Title. 
The title of this chapter shall be "The Bryan County Alcoholic Beverage Code." 
(Code 1996, § 8-101) 
Sec. 4-2. - General terms. 
When the terms "person," "retail consumption dealer," "wholesale dealer," or "wholesaler," "alcoholic beverage," "distilled spirits," "malt beverage" and "wine" are used in this chapter, they shall be used and applied as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
(Code 1996, § 8-102) 
Sec. 4-3. - Prosecution and penalty for violations. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8; and further, upon the conviction of any holder of any alcoholic beverage license of a violation of this chapter, the commissioners shall be authorized to revoke the license of the violator. For the purpose of prosecution of violators of the chapter, each and every violation of every separate section hereof shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1996, § 8-115) 
Secs. 4-4—4-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverage licensing, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-2, 3-3-40 et seq., 3-4-110, 3-5-40 et seq., 3-6-40. 

Sec. 4-25. - General provision. 
Every person, firm or corporation who shall become eligible for any of the categories in section 4-27 after January 1, 1985, shall, before commencing business, apply to the office of the clerk of the county commissioners, or their representative(s), for the appropriate license(s). 
(Code 1996, § 8-119) 
Sec. 4-26. - Business must apply for license. 
From and after the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, every person engaged in either a retail or wholesale alcoholic beverage business shall file an application for and obtain a license to conduct such business with the county commissioners, to be approved by the county commissioners before engaging in or continuing said business. 
(Code 1996, § 8-104) 
Sec. 4-27. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual license fees are hereby fixed and assessed on an annual basis or on a prorated basis as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. Fees shall be as established by the board and shall be paid annually to the county commissioners. The following classification of each business is hereby established: 
(1)  Retail beer dealer. 
(2)  Wholesale beer dealer. This license shall include the right to sell only to wholesalers or retailers holding licenses to sell beer. 
(3)  Retail liquor dealer selling liquor by the package only. 
(4)  Retail establishment selling liquor by the drink (pouring). 
(5)  Wholesale liquor dealer. This license shall include the right to sell only to wholesalers or retailers holding licenses to sell liquor. 
(6)  Distiller or manufacturer of alcoholic beverages. 
(7)  Retail wine dealer. 
(8)  Wholesale wine dealer. This license shall include the right to sell only to wholesalers and retailers holding licenses to sell wine. 
(b)  Every person engaged in any of the businesses provided for in this section and in this article shall pay the aforesaid license fees for every separate place in which he transacts or engages in said business. In the event that an application for a license shall be filed later than January 1 of any year, there shall be no pro-ration of the license fees. 
(c)  There shall be no transfer of any alcoholic beverage license from one person or entity to another; if a business is sold or otherwise transferred during the calendar year, the new owner shall apply for a new license in his name. 
(d)  Applications for a new alcoholic or malt beverage license must be accompanied by an application fee as established by the board. 
(Code 1996, § 8-106; Ord. of 10-13-2009) 
State Law reference— Authorized license fees, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-50, 3-5-41. 
Sec. 4-28. - Expiration date. 
Licenses shall expire at the end of each calendar year, and may be renewed only in the manner and form as provided in this article for the original granting of licenses. Failure to renew a business license by January 31 of each year shall incur the following penalty charges: 
(1)  An execution of 50 percent of the regularly required fees. 
(2)  A subpoena to the magistrate court of the county for violation of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 8-105) 
Sec. 4-29. - Granting the license. 
(a)  The commissioners of the county shall grant a license hereunder when the same is found to be in the public interest and general welfare. 
(b)  The commissioners of the county, in determining whether or not any license or permit applied for hereunder shall be granted, shall consider the following standards: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character, and mental and physical capacity to conduct a business engaged in the sale of wine, beer, and/or alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(3)  The number of licenses previously granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
(4)  The proximity of the location of said establishment to schools, churches, libraries, and other public buildings in the surrounding area as provided for in section 4-77. 
(5)  Whether the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell wine, beer and/or alcoholic beverages, and whether the applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(6)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell wine, beer, and/or alcoholic beverages, whether unusual police observation and inspection were required, including the number and frequency of complaints filed by citizens objecting to the manner of conducting business at said location. 
(7)  No licenses shall be granted to any applicant who is an illegal alien, and if the applicant is a partnership or corporation, then at least one of the active partners, or the principal stockholder, must not be an illegal alien. 
(8)  No license shall be issued to any applicant if any individual applicant or any individual having an interest as either an owner, partner or principal stockholder, whether such interest is direct or indirect, or such individual's spouse shall have been convicted of or had accepted plea of nolo contendere to any felony or misdemeanor either in the state, or any other state or possession of the United States within the past ten years, or of any municipal ordinance except traffic violations. The term "conviction," as used herein, shall include the forfeiture of an appearance bond. 
(Code 1996, § 8-110) 
Sec. 4-30. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  In addition to any criminal penalty that may be imposed by section 4-3, the commissioners of the county shall have the right to deny, suspend or cancel any license if: 
(1)  The license application is not filed in good faith or is filed by some person as a subterfuge for any other person. 
(2)  Any applicant for a license or any licensee under this article willfully fails to comply with any provisions of this article. 
(3)  Any person to whom a license has been issued is no longer engaged in the dealing of alcoholic beverages or no longer qualifies as a licensee under this article. 
(b)  Before any denial, suspension or cancellation of a license granted under this article, the applicant or licenses shall be afforded notice and hearing as follows: 
(1)  The notice shall be served personally or by certified mail not less than 20 days before the hearing. The notice shall include: 
a.  A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing; 
b.  A statement of the legal authority under which the hearing is to be held; 
c.  A reference to the section of ordinances and statutes involved; 
d.  A short and plain statement of the matters asserted; 
e.  A statement as to the right of any party to representation by legal counsel at the hearing, the right of any party to present evidence on all issues, and the right of any party to subpoena witnesses and documentary evidence. 
(2)  At the hearing, all parties may be represented by legal counsel, and may respond to and present evidence on all issues involved. 
(3)  The commissioners of the county, as the hearing agency, shall have the right to exercise the powers provided in O.C.G.A. § 50-13-13, to promulgate such other rules for the orderly disposition of the hearing as they deem appropriate. 
(Code 1996, § 8-116) 
Secs. 4-31—4-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local alcoholic beverage taxes, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-80, 3-4-131 et seq., 3-5-80 et seq., 3-6-60 et seq. 

Sec. 4-49. - Tax on wholesalers. 
Each wholesale dealer in malt beverages, spirituous liquors, or wines shall pay, in addition to the regular license provided by this chapter, a tax on beverages sold to retailers located within the unincorporated area of the county, in accordance with the following schedule. Rates are established by this article in accordance with law. 
(1)  Malt beverages. 
a.  $1.20 per case of 48 bottles or cans when each bottle or can contains six ounces. 
b.  $1.40 per case of 48 bottles or cans when each bottle or can contains seven ounces. 
c.  $1.20 per case of 36 bottles or cans when each bottle or can contains eight ounces. 
d.  $1.00 per case of 24 bottles or cans when each bottle or can contains ten ounces. 
e.  $1.20 per case of 24 bottles or cans when each bottle or can contains 12 ounces. 
f.  $1.40 per case of 24 bottles or cans when each bottle or can contains 14 ounces. 
g.  $1.60 per case of 24 bottles or cans when each bottle or can contains 16 ounces. 
h.  $1.60 per case of 12 bottles or cans when each bottle or can contains 32 ounces. 
i.  $0.44 per barrel, keg, or drum with a capacity of 1.125 gallons. 
j.  $0.87 per barrel, keg, or drum with a capacity of 2.25 gallons. 
k.  $1.50 per barrel, keg, or drum with a capacity of 3.875 gallons (one-eighth barrel). 
l.  $3.00 per barrel, keg, or drum with a capacity of 7.75 gallons (one-fourth barrel). 
m.  $6.00 per barrel, keg, or drum with a capacity of 15.5 gallons (one-half barrel). 
n.  $12.00 per barrel, keg, or drum with a capacity of 31 gallons (one barrel). 
(2)  Distilled spirits. For liquor sold to retailers located within the unincorporated area of the county for sale either by the package or by the drink, the tax shall be $0.22 cents per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(3)  Wines. For wine sold to retailers located within the unincorporated area of the county, an excise tax shall be paid at the rate of $0.22 per liter. The tax on wine sold in other than one gallon containers shall be computed proportionately. 
(Code 1996, § 8-107) 
State Law reference— Wholesale taxes, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-80, 3-4-131, 3-5-80 et seq., 3-6-60. 
Sec. 4-50. - Sale prohibited if taxes are not paid. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or for consumption any malt beverages, wines or spirituous liquors on which the taxes provided for in this article have not been paid to the wholesale dealer or distributor for the county. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any wholesale dealer or other person to deliver any malt beverages, wines or distilled spirits to any retail dealer in the county without first collecting the taxes as provided in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 8-108) 
Sec. 4-51. - Possession by retailers prohibited unless taxes are paid. 
It shall be unlawful for any retail dealer to have in his possession any alcoholic beverage unless the tax required by the county has been paid to the wholesaler, distributor or other source delivering or causing the beverages to be delivered to the retail dealer. Whenever any such beverages are found in the possession of a retail dealer and the records of the payment of the taxes do not appear upon the records of the wholesaler, it will be presumed that the tax has not been paid and the burden shall be upon the retailer or seller to prove such fact. All aforesaid beverages found in the possession of any retail dealer on which the tax has not been paid shall be subject to confiscation by county authorities and shall be sold by county authorities and the receipts thereof paid into the county treasury. 
(Code 1996, § 8-109) 
Secs. 4-52—4-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-76. - Possession and reading of this chapter. 
It shall be the duty of the management of all premises licensed hereunder to maintain a copy of this chapter on such premises and to instruct all employees on the terms thereof, and no license shall be issued to any applicant until such applicant shall have read the entire text of this chapter and certify in writing such reading and knowledge thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 8-118) 
Sec. 4-77. - Rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations are hereby established and shall govern the conduct and operation of every such place of business and of every person owning and operating such place of business: 
(1)  All establishments duly licensed hereunder must fully comply with all sanitary requirements promulgated by the county health department. 
(2)  All musical units or amusement machines installed in any establishment licensed hereunder must be properly registered with the office of the county commissioners. 
(3)  Illegal gambling conducted on the premises of any establishment licensed hereunder shall be cause for revocation of such license. 
(4)  Disorderly conduct in any place of business or other place where the beverages provided for in the chapter are permitted to be sold is expressly forbidden by this article, and every person owning and/or operating a place of business for which a license has been granted, and for which the license fee has been paid, shall be subject to license revocation, in the manner provided for in this chapter, for permitting any disorderly conduct in such places of business. 
(5)  Retail establishments shall not sell alcoholic beverages before 8:00 a.m. or after 12:00 midnight, except on Thanksgiving and Christmas Day when the sale of alcoholic beverages are not permitted. 
(6)  No person shall serve, sell or give away distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages on Sunday unless expressly permitted below. 
a.  The sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in: 
1.  Any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served; or 
2.  Any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
b.  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off premises is permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. by any licensed retail dealer. 
c.  A violation of subsection (6)a or b of this section will be grounds for immediate suspension of the establishment's license to sell alcohol. 
(7)  Retail dealers shall keep their place of business sufficiently lighted to protect the health and safety of patrons and persons lawfully on the premises. 
(8)  Retail grocery establishments selling malt beverages and/or wine shall permit sales only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on every day except Sundays, when such hours shall be between 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m., and on Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day, when the sale of alcoholic beverages are not permitted. 
(9)  No person shall sell, serve or give any alcoholic beverage to any person who is a minor, or who is physically or mentally incapacitated, or who is intoxicated, or to any person who is procuring such alcoholic beverages for such persons. 
(10)  In all establishments serving alcoholic beverages by the drink, or permitting consumption on the premises, entertainment may be provided, but entertainment which is immoral, indecent or lewd and is considered obscene according to legal standards is forbidden, and all entertainers in such establishments shall be fully clothed at all times. 
(11)  The county reserves the right to promulgate additional regulations or ordinances pertaining to the conduct of the business of selling alcoholic beverages and any person licensed hereunder shall be subject to such additional regulations that may be promulgated from time to time by the commissioners of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 8-111; Ord. of 10-7-2008; Ord. of 8-3-2010; Ord. of 1-13-2015) 
Sec. 4-78. - Bar cards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any holder of wine, beer, or alcoholic beverages licenses as aforementioned to permit himself or any other person(s) to work or to serve in or about his place of business, in which said wine, beer and alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, unless said person has a registration card issued by the county commissioners, setting forth therein the name of the employer, employee and the location of the place of employment. 
(b)  The registration card, or bar card, shall be issued annually and shall not be transferable from one bar owner to another, nor from one location to another. Each person holding a registration card, or bar card, shall annually, likewise, get a health certificate from the county health department. 
(c)  The fee shall be as established by the board for each registration card, or bar card, and shall be paid by the bar owner. 
(Code 1996, § 8-112) 
Sec. 4-79. - Sunday sales. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to allow for the regulated, retail package sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off premises, and to permit those full service restaurants that serve the public to sell alcoholic beverages with meals on Sunday. It is not the intent of this section to encourage local taverns and bars to serve alcoholic beverages on Sunday via the mechanism of serving incidental meals on Sunday. Therefore, there shall be no Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages in the unincorporated areas of the county, except as provided in section 4-77(6), and in compliance with the following. 
(b)  In order to be eligible to pour or serve alcohol for consumption on the premises, the licensed establishment must satisfy each of the following requirements: 
(1)  Food service establishments shall: 
a.  Be licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine; 
b.  Derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, as demonstrated by the establishment's gross receipts, all records and reports of which shall be made available for inspection and audit as needed upon reasonable demand by such officers designated by the county for the enforcement of this section; 
c.  Have an area specifically designed, set aside, set up and operating to serve meals and food on the premises and shall have a fully-equipped commercial kitchen to include an appropriate stove, refrigerator, food preparation area, sink, and other items required by the county health department and inspections department for the preparation of foods; 
d.  Have a printed or posted menu from which selections of prepared meals can be made; and 
e.  Have a valid county health department food service permit and any other applicable local, state or federal permits, licenses, etc., required for food service establishments. 
(2)  Lodging establishments shall: 
a.  Be licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine; and 
b.  Derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging as demonstrated by the establishment's gross receipts, all records and reports of which shall be made available for inspection upon reasonable demand by such officers designated by the county for the enforcement of this section. 
(3)  Establishments shall annually certify that they meet the requirements set forth above by submission of the annual affidavit of Sunday sales to the board of commission. 
(4)  The sale of alcohol in violation of this section will be grounds for immediate suspension of the establishment's license to sell alcohol. 
(Code 1996, § 8-113; Ord. of 1-13-2015) 
State Law reference— Sales on Sunday, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-7, 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-80. - Public facilities. 
It shall be unlawful to sell, possess or consume any alcoholic beverages at the Hendrix Park or Richmond Hill Park or any other public facility during any public gathering. It shall be unlawful to consume any alcoholic beverages or controlled substances in any of the neighborhood parks, grounds, boat ramps, public facilities, or areas which are owned and/or operated under the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 8-114) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any non-human living creature, domestic or wild. 
Animal control officer means any person or persons hired by the county to carry out this chapter. 
At large means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner, a member of his immediate family, or some other person, either by leash, cord, or other holding device (except cats). 
Cat means all felines of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not vaccinated. 
Dangerous animal means any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition, or any domestic animal which, because of said animal's size, vicious nature or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life, other domesticated animals, or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or secure quarters. 
Dog means a domesticated or undomesticated carnivorous mammal or canine of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not vaccinated. 
Enclosure means any uncovered, enclosed parcel of land where animals or fowl are kept. 
Farm animals, large, means horses, cows, goats, sheep, hogs, or other animals commonly considered as livestock. 
Farm animals, small, means any animal not defined as a large farm animal, and raised or bred for commercial purposes or fowl, which shall mean chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons, and similar fowl. 
Health officer means the environmental health specialist for the county. 
Housing means any building, shed, cage, pen or similar structure used for the housing of animals and fowl. 
Nuisances means whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render soil, air, water, or food, impure or unwholesome. 
Rabies certificate means a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian who administered the rabies vaccination. A certificate shall be issued for each dog or cat vaccinated and must bear a license number, owner name, address, breed, color, and sex of such dog or cat. The date of last vaccination of such dog or cat shall be clearly stated on such certificate and a copy of such certificate is to be sent by the veterinarian to the animal control office. 
Secure enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous animal while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dangerous animal from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and if the dangerous animal is enclosed within a fence, all sides to the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dangerous animal's escape either from over or under the fence. 
Vaccination and license tag means a metal tag issued by authority of the county commissioners and also a license or serial number showing that such dog or cat has been vaccinated as required by this chapter. 
Vaccinate or inoculate means the injection into the body of a dog or cat of an approved anti-rabies vaccine prescribed by the state, such vaccine having a U.S. Government license number approval stamped on the label of the vaccine container and which vaccine has been approved by the county health department ("health department"). Vaccines used for vaccination of dogs or cats against rabies shall have been refrigerated and kept under proper conditions showing no signs of spoilage and otherwise being unfit for producing immunity against rabies. 
Veterinarian means a person who has received a doctor's degree in veterinary medicine from a school of veterinary medicine and holds a license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine in the state. The number of the aforesaid veterinary license shall be the same as that recorded by the state board of veterinary examiners. 
(Code 1996, § 9-101; Ord. of 5-4-1999) 
Sec. 6-2. - Penalty. 
Whenever in this chapter or in any county ordinance, including violation of conditions and safe-guards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such ordinances, the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the person violating such ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 9-124) 
Sec. 6-3. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall be effective and applicable in the county within and outside the corporate limits of municipalities. 
(Code 1996, § 9-127; Ord. of 2-12-2002) 
Sec. 6-4. - No effect on state law. 
This chapter shall not be deemed or construed to affect or limit the enforcement of any state law. 
(Code 1996, § 9-130) 
Sec. 6-5. - Duty of animal control officer. 
Upon the failure of a person to comply within 24 hours of any given notice as provided under this chapter, or should the person in charge of the premises upon which an unlicensed dog or cat is found disclaim ownership of such dog or cat by himself or any member of his household, the animal control officer shall go upon any such premises and impound the dog or cat. 
(Code 1996, § 9-115) 
Sec. 6-6. - Euthanasia. 
When any animal, whose owner is unknown or incapable of being located, is impounded subject to the provisions of this chapter and such animal is injured or otherwise in a state of suffering, it shall thereupon be the duty of the animal control officer to obtain the opinion of a licensed practicing veterinarian as to the extent of such suffering or injury to such animal. When such opinion is that euthanasia should be performed, it shall then become the duty of the animal control officer to conduct the euthanasia when certified to do so, otherwise the animal shall be taken to a veterinarian for said procedure. 
(Code 1996, § 9-125) 
Sec. 6-7. - Nuisances. 
(a)  The owner of animals and fowl shall be responsible for correcting or abating any nuisance that may arise from the keeping thereof. 
(b)  It is a violation of this chapter for a person to own, possess or harbor a barking dog or animal or fowl which howls, barks, or emits audible sounds that are unreasonably loud or disturbing and which are of such character, intensity, and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. For the purpose of this chapter, a "barking dog" is defined as follows: a dog that barks, bays, cries, or howls or makes any other noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of ten consecutive minutes or barks intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of the day or night regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed a "barking dog" for the purpose of this chapter if, at the time the dog is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the dog is situated or for any other legitimate cause which teased or provoked the dog. 
(Code 1996, § 9-123) 
Sec. 6-8. - Restrictions on animals running at large. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any dog, large farm animal or small farm animal to be on the streets, lanes, highways, roads or premises other than the premises of its owner (unless the owner of such premises consents to the presence thereon of such animal) within R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-30 zoning districts in the unincorporated areas of the county, unless such animal is firmly under the control of its owner or other responsible person, by leash, chain or otherwise; provided, however, dogs which meet the requirements of section 6-75 are exempt from the provision of this section. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any dog owner to keep or have within the unincorporated area of the county, a dog which bites, snaps at, attacks pedestrians, bike riders or conducts itself so as to be a public nuisance when said dog is not on the owner's premises. Such animals must be retained on the owner's premises or the animal control officer shall impound the animal, and place it in the county kennel for proper disposal. To effect the impounding of such a dog, the animal control officer shall have the right to muzzle or employ such other methods as the animal control officer may deem reasonably necessary to impound such dog. 
(Code 1996, § 9-112; Ord. of 5-4-1999) 
Sec. 6-9. - Enclosures for animals/restraint of dangerous animals. 
(a)  Any housing or enclosure used for keeping of animals shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors and otherwise kept clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health officer and any state or federal agency having jurisdiction over such housing or enclosure. 
(b)  Dangerous animals shall be kept in a secure enclosure while on the owner's premises. 
(Code 1996, § 9-120; Ord. of 5-4-1999) 
Sec. 6-10. - Bird sanctuary. 
(a)  Geographical scope. The residential areas embraced within the community limits of Fort Mcallister Estates, Hardwick Estates, Strathy Hall Estates, Tivoli River Estates, and Cranston Bluff Estates are hereby designated as bird sanctuaries. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests within a bird sanctuary; provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the health department, then in such event the representatives of the health department shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society or as many group(s) as are found to exist in the county, after having given at least three days of actual notice of the time and place of the meeting to the representatives of the group(s). If as a result of the meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then said birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health department under supervision of the sheriff of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 9-121) 
Sec. 6-11. - Distances of large and small farm animals and animal enclosures from property lines. 
(a)  Any large or small farm animals, or housing or enclosures used for the keeping of animals or fowl shall be kept at the following minimum distances from all property lines: 

 
  
(b)  Dog pens and houses shall meet the minimum set back requirements for all zoning districts within the county. 
(Code 1996, § 9-122) 
Secs. 6-12—6-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 6-41. - Rabies cases and animal bites to be reported. 
(a)  All animals, such as dogs, cats, horses, cattle, mules, goats, foxes, swine, raccoons, and other animals of like species, showing symptoms of, or having rabies within the county, shall be immediately reported to the county health department or county animal control (653-3816/653-2034) by the owner or the person having custody or any citizen having knowledge of these facts. All animal bites should be report to animal control to determine if specific measures are necessary concerning the animal inflicting the bite. It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of suspected rabid animals or animal bites to make an immediate report. 
(b)  When dogs, cats, or any animals are being held under quarantine by the owner or by a veterinary hospital, boarding or breeding kennel, or any other person at any other place, such owner, veterinarian or person shall immediately report the existence of rabies or its symptoms to the health department or county animal control with a history of the case and information regarding name and address of such owner, veterinarian, or person. It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of the facts to see that the report required by this subsection is made. 
(Code 1996, § 9-109) 
Sec. 6-42. - Quarantine. 
(a)  Where rabies has been found to exist in any warm-blooded animal, or where its existence is suspected, the health department may designate an area within which quarantine shall be maintained as provided by the terms of this section. Every such animal shall thereupon be immediately confined to the premises designated by the health department, whether or not the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. 
(b)  No animal shall be removed from a quarantined area and no animal shall be brought into a quarantined area without written permission of the health department. The application for such permission shall be in writing, filed with the health department, giving the reason for movement and the location at which the animal will be confined after movement. 
(c)  When quarantine is ordered by the health department it shall be maintained for a period of 90 days, with the right of the health department to increase or diminish the period at its discretion. 
(d)  Where an animal has been suspected of having rabies or has rabies symptoms, the area or premises where such animals are kept shall be posted by the health department with signs to read as follows: "Rabies Suspected" or "Rabies, keep away from animals." Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises, printed with type that is easily legible and shall remain on the premises for the duration of the quarantine. 
(e)  Persons living within a quarantine area having in their possession an animal subject to rabies or to the terms of this article shall be given written notice of the quarantine, and an order to confine their animals to the premises of the owner, together with any other requirements specified by the health department. Such notice shall be signed by a duly authorized agent of the health department. 
(f)  The violation by any person of any quarantine order issued by the health officer shall be violation of this section and the person so violating shall be subject to all the penalties prescribed by law for a violation. 
(Code 1996, § 9-110) 
Sec. 6-43. - Examination of heads. 
The heads of all domestic animals and of all wild animals suspected of having rabies before their death or having rabies at time of death, shall be submitted to the health department which shall be responsible for delivery to the state laboratory for examination. Either human or animal exposure to these animals shall constitute sufficient reason for laboratory examination. 
(Code 1996, § 9-111) 
Secs. 6-44—6-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-75. - Hunters/hunt clubs exemption. 
(a)  To qualify for the exemption under this section, an owner of a dog must establish that: 
(1)  Such dog is a breed of dog used for hunting or field trials; and 
(2)  Such dog is participating in hunting or field trials. 
(b)  Each dog must wear a collar that identifies the owner, owner's telephone number and name of hunt club if applicable. 
(c)  Owners must provide proof that each dog is registered and have proof of rabies inoculation. If deemed necessary by the hunters, the registration tags can be kept in the owner's vehicle. 
(d)  Dogs meeting the requirements of subsections (a) through (c) of this section are exempt from section 6-8(a). 
(e)  Hunt clubs must construct a holding pen where the county can deposit hunt club dogs when they are picked up. The hunt clubs must notify the animal control office of the holding pen locations and make provisions to ensure food and water are available at said sites. All holding pens must be located on a county maintained road. 
(f)  There are provisions within the county ordinances to allow camp grounds as a conditional use in certain zoning districts. The hunt clubs must go through this same process and ensure that proper facilities are established that provide, as a minimum, sewage disposal (septic tanks), or port-a-lets, and potentially water and electricity, if necessary. 
(Code 1996, § 9-126) 
State Law reference— Hunting with dogs, O.C.G.A. § 27-3-16 et seq. 
Secs. 6-76—6-93. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING AND VACCINATION 

Sec. 6-94. - Vaccination and licensing required. 
It is a violation of this division for any person to own, keep, maintain, or harbor any dog(s) or cat(s) four months of age or older without first having the dog(s) or cat(s) vaccinated against rabies and obtaining from the animal control office of the county board of commissioners for each dog or cat the vaccination and license tag for the rabies certificate described in section 6-1. Such license tag is to be obtained either in person or by mail for each dog or cat from the animal control office within 30 days of such animal's annual inoculation. 
(Code 1996, § 9-102) 
Sec. 6-95. - Vaccination and registration of dogs and cats. 
All dogs and cats which have become four months of age shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian, and their owners shall obtain a license for such dogs or cats every 12 months following the original vaccination and licensing of these dogs or cats. 
(1)  Registration of dogs and cats. All persons owning, keeping or harboring any dog or cat shall pay a yearly registration fee to the county in such amount as fixed from time to time by the county commission ("commission"). 
(2)  Certification of registration. Upon receipt of the registration fee required by this section, and the exhibition of an unexpired certificate of rabies vaccination, the commission clerk, or other such person(s) designated by the commission, shall issue a registration certification to the owner of the dog(s)/cat(s), giving the owner's name, the date issued, the amount paid, the description, name, age, and sex of the dog(s)/cat(s), the registration tag number, and the date the dog(s)/cat(s) was vaccinated and the type of vaccine used. 
(3)  Registration tag. At the time a registration certificate is issued pursuant to this section, the commission clerk, or other such person(s) designated by the commission, shall also deliver a registration tag bearing the serial number of the registration certificate and year in which it was delivered. The shape and color of the tag shall be changed each year and it shall be the duty of every owner to provide each dog or cat for which a registration tag is issued with a collar or harness to which the registration tag must be affixed. The owner shall see that the collar or harness and the registration tag are constantly worn. In case a registration tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued upon presentation of a receipt showing the original payment and payment of the amount established by the board as a replacement fee for such duplicate. 
(Code 1996, § 9-103; Ord. of 5-14-2013) 
Sec. 6-96. - Tag to be attached; number of rabies certificate; term. 
(a)  Every dog or cat which has received a rabies vaccination as set forth in section 6-95 shall have attached to a collar around its neck a vaccination and license tag described in section 6-95; unless otherwise provided herein by this division. 
(b)  The rabies certificate shall bear a license number identified with that of the tag attached to the collar of the dog or cat. Both certificate and tag will expire one year from date of issue. 
(Code 1996, § 9-104) 
Sec. 6-97. - Kennel license. 
The fee for obtaining a license known as "kennel license" shall be as established by the board and this license shall only be issued to kennel owners keeping, breeding or maintaining ten or more dogs or cats that at the time of issuance of the license have reached the age of four months or over, and after each dog or cat therein has been vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian. All dogs and cats in the custody of or in the care of kennel owners or operators and not being the legal property of the kennel operator shall be inoculated and tagged. One tag per kennel will be issued. 
(Code 1996, § 9-105; Ord. of 5-14-2013) 
Sec. 6-98. - Re-vaccination. 
Where a license has been issued following vaccination, the owner of the dog(s) or cat(s) shall be exempt from paying a late fee provided the re-vaccination and license are acquired on or before the expiration date on the certificate for animal rabies vaccination issued by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 1996, § 9-106) 
Sec. 6-99. - Only licensed veterinarians to vaccinate; inferior vaccinations. 
(a)  No person who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state shall be allowed to vaccinate dogs or cats against rabies. 
(b)  A veterinarian or any person having vaccinated dogs or cats against rabies with inferior vaccines or any drugs biologic, chemical, or material, which are not specified in this division or that have not been approved by the health department or who violates any provision of this division in whole or in part shall not be permitted within the county to vaccinate dogs or cats against rabies and shall be fined as specified in section 6-2. 
(Code 1996, § 9-107) 
Sec. 6-100. - Impoundment of unlicensed, unvaccinated dogs or cats. 
Any dog or cat found within the county not wearing or displaying a valid, current vaccination tag, and not confined within a fence on the premises of the owner with all gates and openings closed shall be immediately impounded, quarantined, or otherwise disposed of as required by this article. Any dog found within the county not vaccinated as required by this division within the previous 12 months shall likewise be impounded, quarantined, or otherwise disposed of as required by this article. 
(Code 1996, § 9-108) 
Sec. 6-101. - Notification regarding tag requirement. 
Where any dog or cat is found within the county, but outside of the corporate limits of any municipality therein, without having a license tag as hereby required, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to issue a citation and subpoena for such violation of the county ordinance. 
(Code 1996, § 9-113) 
Secs. 6-102—6-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 6-131. - Impoundment of dogs and cats. 
Any dog or cat found upon the streets, lanes, highways, roads or on the premises other than the premises of its owner within unincorporated areas of the county will be in violation of this article, and shall be impounded by the animal control officer. The animal control officer shall have the specific right to enter upon any unenclosed private property to secure capture of any dog or cat in violation of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 9-114) 
Sec. 6-132. - Dogs and cats kept seven days. 
Any dog or cat impounded under the provisions of this division shall be kept for seven days in a place determined by the commission and to be known as the Richmond Hill or Pembroke animal shelters. 
(Code 1996, § 9-116) 
Sec. 6-133. - Payment of fees. 
Within seven days after a dog or cat is impounded, the owner, possessor or any representative of the owner or possessor may come forward and pay the annual license tax, if he has not paid the same, an impounding fee and a fee for each day that the dog or cat has been housed and fed in the animal shelter by the county. Such fees shall be as established by the board. 
(Code 1996, § 9-117) 
Sec. 6-134. - Dogs or cats put to death. 
Any dog or cat impounded under this division whose owner, possessor or representative shall not come forward within seven days after the impoundment and pay the license tax, if not previously paid, and the other fees specified in this division shall be put to death. 
(Code 1996, § 9-118) 
Sec. 6-135. - Delegation of shelter of dogs and cats. 
The shelter and impounding of dogs and cats in violation of this article may be delegated to and performed by such organizations as shall be selected by the commission, provided that the operation of such animal shelter shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the health department and any state or federal agencies having jurisdiction over such shelter. 
(Code 1996, § 9-119) 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1—8-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAWNBROKERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 8-19. - Title. 
The title of the article shall be "The Bryan County Pawnbroker Business Ordinance." 
(Code 1996, § 21-101; Ord. of 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Evidence means any article, documentation, or information that is retained by the pawnbroker that is material to any active investigation conducted by an appropriate law enforcement agency or any trial of any matter resulting from such an investigation or concerning such article or documentation. 
Law enforcement agency means any agency, organ, or department of this state, a county, subdivision or municipality thereof, or a railroad whose primary functions include the enforcement of criminal or traffic laws, the preservation of public order, the protection of life and property, or the prevention, detection, or investigation of crime. 
Pawn cards means those cards kept by pawnbrokers to record pawn transactions as described in this section. 
Pawn transaction means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on condition that the pledged goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time and may be leased back to the seller during such period of time. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this definition or any employee of any of the persons described in this definition. 
Pawnshop means any place of business where a person engaged in the business of pawnbroker conducts pawn transactions as described in this section. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
Pledged goods means any tangible personal property other than chooses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. 
(Code 1996, § 21-103; Ord. of 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-21. - Enforcement. 
The county sheriff's office shall enforce this article. 
(Code 1996, § 21-111; Ord. of 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-22. - License required. 
All persons, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop, or similar place involving pawn transactions, shall secure a pawnshop license from the county sheriff. There shall be no fee for such license. 
(Code 1996, § 21-104; Ord. of 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-23. - Documentation required. 
(a)  Record of purchase or loan. 
(1)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record book in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each loan or purchase, at a minimum: 
a.  The transaction number; 
b.  The date and time of the transaction; 
c.  The name of the person conducting the transaction; 
d.  The name of the seller or pledgor; 
e.  The address of the seller or pledgor; 
f.  The distinctive number from the seller or pledgor's state or federal license or picture identification card; 
g.  The date of birth of the seller or pledgor; 
h.  The race of the seller or pledgor; 
i.  The gender of the seller or pledgor; 
j.  The height of the seller or pledgor; 
k.  The weight of the seller or pledgor; 
l.  The current home phone number of the seller or pledgor; 
m.  An identification and description of the pledged or purchased goods, including the quantity, type, color, size, length, all identifying marks inscribed thereon, and if reasonably available, the make, model, serial number, or any other number; 
n.  The price paid or the amount loaned; 
o.  If the payment is made by check, the number of the check issued for the purchase price or loan; 
p.  The maturity date of the transaction; 
q.  The fingerprint, as set forth in subsection (e) of this section, of the seller or pledgor; and 
r.  The signature of the seller or pledgor. 
(2)  Entries shall appear in ink and shall be in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The record of each pawn or purchase shall be maintained for a period of not less than four years. 
(b)  Record of sale. 
(1)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record book in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each sale or disposition of pledged goods, at a minimum: 
a.  The date of sale or disposition; 
b.  The name of the purchaser; 
c.  The distinctive number from the purchaser's state or federal license or picture identification card; 
d.  The current address of the purchaser. 
(2)  The record of sale shall be referenced to the original record of purchase or loan made upon receipt of the pledged goods by the pawnbroker. The record of each sale or disposition shall be maintained for a period of not less than four years. 
(c)  Pawn cards. All pawn cards shall prominently display preprinted sequential numbers on the face thereof. Transaction numbers shall also be reflected on all pawn cards. All voided pawn cards shall be retained and submitted as are other cards. 
(d)  Legibility of documentation. All documentation shall be legible. Special attention should be made to ensure that legible fingerprints are obtained. Documentation that is illegible shall be returned to the pawnshop. If such documentation is returned to the pawnshop, the pawnbroker shall obtain the appropriate information and forward the same in a legible fashion to the appropriate law enforcement agency within 72 hours. Acceptable legibility shall be determined by said law enforcement agency. 
(e)  Fingerprints. In addition to other records and information as called for above, each pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pawning any articles with such pawnbroker the fingerprint of the right index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event, the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand of the person pawning the article or articles shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. Fingerprints and the information as required herein shall be obtained from all persons each time such persons pawn any article with a pawnbroker, regardless of whether that person may have previously pawned an article with such pawnbroker and have been fingerprinted. 
(f)  Penalties. Failure to comply with this section shall result in the forfeiture of the pawnbroker's license issued by the county sheriff. 
(Code 1996, § 21-105; Ord. of 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-24. - Access to property and documentation by law enforcement officers. 
All pawnbrokers shall keep accessible all record books, pawn cards, copies, logs, files and/or other documentation concerning pawn transactions at all times during normal business hours for audit by law enforcement agencies without notice. Pawnbrokers shall grant access to both property and records of transactions to representatives of law enforcement agencies upon request during the course of active investigations. Upon request and during the course of active investigations, pawnbrokers shall allow law enforcement officers to make copies, photographs, videos and any other such reproductions of said property or associated records. 
(Code 1996, § 21-106; Ord. of 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-25. - Mandatory ten-day retention of pledged goods. 
Pawnbrokers shall retain any pledged good, whether received for purchase or for pawn, for a minimum of ten days before making said good available for resale. 
(Code 1996, § 21-107; Ord. of 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-26. - Disposition of property—Criminal case. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers shall surrender to the representative of any appropriate law enforcement agency any evidence in their possession upon request. In return, the representative shall complete official documentation of receipt bearing a thorough description of the appropriated property and the letterhead of the law enforcement agency. The representative shall provide a copy of the official documentation to the pawnbroker. The representative shall also make available to the pawnbroker a copy of the incident report if the pawnbroker so requests. 
(b)  The pawnbroker shall retain the right to pursue civil or criminal prosecution of the individual that pawned the appropriated property to the pawnshop. 
(Code 1996, § 21-108; Ord. of 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-27. - Same—Civil case. 
(a)  Upon notification by the appropriate law enforcement agency, pawnbrokers shall segregate from normal inventory any evidence in their possession and hold said evidence for ten working days or, if sooner, upon release to the plaintiff in the civil case upon the following conditions: prior to the expiration of ten working days, the plaintiff must provide the pawnshop and the respective law enforcement agency with adequate proof of ownership of the property in question; if the same is provided, the plaintiff may retrieve the property once the balance due on the property has been paid. If the above conditions are not met after ten working days, the pawnbroker may release the property from segregation and return it to normal inventory for sale. 
(b)  The pawnbroker shall retain the right to pursue civil or criminal prosecution of the individual that pawned the appropriated property to the pawnshop. 
(Code 1996, § 21-109; Ord. of 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-28. - Transactions with minors prohibited. 
No pawnbroker shall buy, take or receive by any way of pledge, pawn or purchase, any goods, wares, merchandise, or articles of personal property of any kind from any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1996, § 21-110; Ord. of 7-7-1998) 
Chapter 10 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; emergency medical services, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Emergency medical service fees. 
Fees charged within the county for county emergency medical services shall be as established from time to time by the county commission. 
(Code 1996, § 4-404) 
Secs. 10-2—10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 10-21. - Title and jurisdiction. 
This article shall apply to the county in its entirety. The Bryan Emergency Management Agency (BEMA) is the only such agency approved by the county commission for coordinating emergencies, and therefore, it shall serve all of the municipalities and unincorporated area of the county plus all municipalities that agree to participate by signing the county emergency and disaster operations plan. 
(Code 1996, § 22-102; Ord. of 6-2-1998) 
Sec. 10-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County emergency and disaster management plan means the officially adopted, and state emergency management agency approved, emergency and disaster management plan for the county. 
Disaster means any happening that causes great harm or damage. 
Emergency means a sudden generally unexpected occurrence or set of circumstances demanding immediate action. 
Emergency interim successor means a person designated pursuant to this article, in the event an officer is unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of an office, until a successor is appointed or elected and qualified as may be prescribed by the Constitution, statutes, laws, charters, and ordinances of the state and its political subdivisions, or until the lawful incumbent or his successor is able to resume the exercise of the powers and the discharge of the duties of the office. 
Emergency management means the preparation for, and the carrying out of, all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Emergency management volunteer means any person officially recognized by the director of the county emergency management agency and assigned duties as an emergency management volunteer. 
Emergency operating procedures (SOP) means the standard operating procedures developed by each emergency response unit for the purpose of preplanning the unit's response to a BEMA request for emergency assistance. 
Emergency readiness means the level of readiness for an anticipated or impending emergency as expressed as an operational readiness conditions (OPCONS) rating number. 
Energy emergency means a condition of danger to the health, safety, welfare, or economic well-being of the citizens of the county arising out of a present or threatened shortage of usable energy resources; also any condition of substantial danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the county resulting from the operation of any electrical power-generating facility, the transport of any energy resource by any means whatsoever, or the production, use, or disposal of any source material, special nuclear material, or byproduct, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 68 Stat. 919, 42 USC 2011 et seq.; also any nuclear incident, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, occurring within or outside this state, substantially affecting the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of this county. 
Energy resources means all forms of energy or power, including, without limitation to, oil, gasoline, and other petroleum products; natural or synthetic gas; electricity in all forms and from all sources; and other fuels or any description, except wood. 
Local offices and local officers mean positions in the political subdivisions of the state. 
Local state of emergency means the condition declared by the county commission chairman or designee when, in the chairman's judgement, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the county is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the BEMA and other county departments and agencies to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several municipalities or private relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Office means the position of head of any and all departments, agencies, boards, or commissions of the state or any of its political subdivisions; all constitutional general assembly offices; all constitutional and other county offices; all of the judgeships of the state and its political subdivisions; and all of the positions in the legislative departments of the state or its political subdivisions. 
Officer means the individual who shall hold an office. 
Political subdivisions means cities, counties, towns, villages, authorities, and any other bodies created by the state and exercising any of the governmental powers of the state. 
State of emergency means the condition declared by the governor when, in his judgement, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the state is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the state to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several localities and relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Code 1996, § 22-104; Ord. of 6-2-1998) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 10-23. - Liberality of construction; enforcement. 
(a)  Liberality of construction. This article shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body of the county and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(b)  Enforcement. The BEMA director shall have the legal authority to conduct such necessary and appropriate investigations to carry out the duties prescribed in this article or properly assigned by the county, and for this purpose to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites involved with emergency management functions. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out their official duties. The law enforcement authorities of the state and of the political subdivisions thereof shall enforce the orders, rules, and regulations issued pursuant to articles 1 through 3 of the Georgia Emergency Management Act and this article. 
(Code 1996, § 22-110; Ord. of 6-2-1998) 
Sec. 10-24. - Statutory authorization. 
The general assembly of the state, in the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.), authorizes and directs each county to establish a local organization for emergency management in accordance with the state emergency management plan and program; and in the state Constitution, article IX, section II, Home Rule for Counties, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the board of commissioners of the county, acting under the authority granted to it by the Georgia Emergency Management Act, as amended, does ordain and enact into law the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1996, § 22-101; Ord. of 6-2-1998) 
Sec. 10-25. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  General. Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of emergencies or disasters resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack, and in order to ensure that preparations of the county will be adequate to deal with such emergencies or disasters, and generally to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of the county, it is found and declared to be necessary: 
(1)  To create a county emergency management agency; 
(2)  To confer upon the chairman of the county commission or the chairman's designee the emergency powers provided in O.C.G.A. title 38, ch. 3, arts. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.), 2 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-20 et seq.) and 3 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50 et seq.); 
(3)  To provide for the rendering of mutual aid among the political subdivisions of the county, with other counties, and with the state and federal governments with respect to the carrying out of emergency management functions; and 
(4)  To authorize the taking of such steps as are necessary and appropriate to carry out the requirements of O.C.G.A. title 38, ch. 3, arts. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.), 2 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-20 et seq.) and 3 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50 et seq.). 
(b)  Coordination. It is further declared to be the purpose of this article and the policy of the county that all emergency management functions of the county be coordinated to the maximum extent possible with the comparable functions of the state and federal governments, including their various departments and agencies, of other counties, states, and localities, and of private agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the nation's manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any emergency or disaster that may occur. 
(Code 1996, § 22-103; Ord. of 6-2-1998) 
Sec. 10-26. - Emergency management. 
(a)  Emergency management function. The term "emergency management" means the preparation for, and the carrying out of, all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or other state and federal agencies are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation to, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(b)  Emergency management concept of operations. 
(1)  Pre-emergency phase. Planning and preparation for an emergency by the Bryan Emergency Management Agency (BEMA) is an on-going activity that is funded, staffed, and managed on a countywide basis by the county through its county emergency management agency. Funding for BEMA is appropriated annually by the county commission with supplementary matching federal funding made available through the state from the emergency management agency. BEMA's mission is to create the highest possible state of emergency readiness and to be prepared to react promptly to save life and property in the county or any of its municipalities when threatened or hit by an emergency or a major disaster of any type and to accomplish the missions assigned to each department or agency in the plan. 
(2)  Emergency phase. Emergency response plans are based upon the principle that local authorities bear the initial responsibilities for disaster relief. Each level of government accomplishes the functions for which it is responsible, requesting assistance from the next higher level of government only after resources at the requesting level have been expended or are clearly inadequate to cope with the effects of the emergency or disaster. 
a.  Increased readiness period. During the emergency phase, operational activities of BEMA switch from being a one man county agency engaged in emergency readiness activities to activation of the county emergency and disaster plan. This is the time before the emergency or disaster strikes when severe weather conditions or domestic unrest poses a threat of serious harm to the county. During this period of time, the plan is activated and the BEMA director calls the emergency operations center (EOC) coordination staff together and either activates or prepares to activate the EOC. 
b.  Emergency operations. During the period of time that the plan is activated, BEMA and its director perform the inter-governmental coordination role described in the plan. Each local government is responsible for, and has the power and authority to perform, emergency management functions within the territorial limits of the political subdivision within which it is organized, and, in addition, shall conduct such functions outside of such territorial limits as it may have agreed to in the mutual aid agreements and so signified by signing the county emergency and disaster operations plan. 
(3)  Recovery phase. 
a.  This is the time when BEMA begins to plan and carry out action to return the community to normal. This phase can be subdivided into four overlapping periods. In the first of these (first period), the emergency period, the emergency plan is normally in operation and attention is paid to pressing agent-generated demands. The problems caused directly and indirectly by destruction and by the associated needs of the dead, injured, homeless, and missing provide the focus of attention. During this period, normal, social, and economic activities are suspended or greatly modified. Depending on the nature of the disaster agent, scale of loss, and the preparedness and capacity of BEMA and this community to respond to the emergency, the emergency period may last for as little as a day or as long as several weeks. It can be considered over when search and rescue operations have ceased, major transportation arteries have been cleared and are functioning once more, emergency mass feeding has been reduced, and immediate temporary housing needs have been met. 
b.  The emergency period gives way to the restoration period (second period) which is characterized by repairs to utilities, commercial, industrial, and residential structures. Those buildings that cannot be salvaged will be demolished and efforts will be made to return to relatively normal economic and social activities. By the end of this restoration period, major urban services, transportation, and utilities are functioning effectively again, debris has been removed, and those refugees who intend to return to their homes or temporary housing will have done so. 
c.  The replacement reconstruction period is the period (third period) during which capital stores are rebuilt and the economy recovers to pre-disaster levels or higher. This phase ends when population has returned to its pre-disaster level and losses in jobs, residences, and urban activities have been compensated for. Certain types of reconstruction will be under-taken long after this phase is over, but these will be major projects. Typically, replacement reconstruction takes several years to complete. 
d.  The last period (fourth period) in the recovery of a county or city from disaster has been termed the commerative, betterment, and developmental reconstruction period. During this final recovery period, reconstruction serves three differing but often interrelated functions: 
1.  Commemoration of the disaster; 
2.  Formation of future growth and development; and 
3.  Financing and marketing of betterment and improvement programs and projects. 
Characteristically, such projects are very large in scale and usually financed by public funds. Such projects are usually stimulated by the disaster recovery process and the community energy generated by the disaster. Not every disaster will have a fourth period to it, depending upon the nature and severity of the emergency or disaster. 
(Code 1996, § 22-105; Ord. of 6-2-1998) 
Sec. 10-27. - Office of the county emergency management director. 
There is hereby established the county emergency management office which shall perform emergency management functions countywide in the county. The county commissioners shall nominate to the state director of emergency management for appointment by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the county and its municipalities on matters pertaining to emergency management; 
(2)  To assist county and municipal officials in organizing county and municipal departments for emergency operations; 
(3)  To assist county department and municipal officials and directors with the development of emergency operating procedures (SOPs) for each of the local governmental, private, or volunteer organizations that will be responding to the emergency. Each organization must develop its own emergency response plan with BEMA assistance, and it shall be closely coordinated with BEMA's emergency and disaster operations plan which is an overall coordination plan; 
(4)  To develop in conjunction with municipal and county departments and agencies, the county emergency and disaster plan for emergency functions as defined in section 10-22. The plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and its municipalities for approval, and thence to the state emergency management director for approval; 
(5)  To maintain the county emergency management agency and/or department at the highest possible state of emergency readiness as defined herein, and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency; 
(6)  To submit reports and plans as required by federal, state, and local authorities in keeping with good management practices (e.g., financial, management activities, etc.); 
(7)  To operate and manage a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center (EOC); and 
(8)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operations center staff during periods of a declared emergency. 
(Code 1996, § 22-106; Ord. of 6-2-1998) 
Sec. 10-28. - County emergency management agency and emergency plan. 
(a)  BEMA. 
(1)  The Bryan Emergency Management Agency (BEMA) shall be established around existing municipal and county departments and agencies, and the emergency functions listed in section 10-26 are assigned as follows: 

 
  
(2)  The director of BEMA shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operation of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the county commission chairman and county administrator or their designee. Because the county emergency management agency is a countywide organization that coordinates the activities of each municipal and county department or agency, each local government retains authority over its own staff and equipment resources but subordinates itself to the overall coordination and direction of BEMA during an emergency. The extent of the participation of each local government during an emergency is determined in advance by the plan. 
(3)  The director is responsible for ensuring that all of the duties and responsibilities assigned to BEMA by the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 (O.C.G.A. § 38-1-1 et seq.), and subsequent changes, are fulfilled to the highest degree possible given the resources provided for BEMA, including the specific duties listed in this section. 
(4)  BEMA is responsible for assisting each participating municipal, county, private and volunteer organization, agency, or department that agrees to assist BEMA or participate in the emergency management program with the development of simple, workable, and understandable emergency standing operating procedures (SOP). The purpose of having such an emergency SOP is to ensure that the emergency response unit (department, agency, etc.) is organized and knows exactly what, when, and how it is to do its emergency response function. Such emergency SOPs will be submitted through the BEMA director to the appropriate local governing body for approval. 
(b)  The emergency and disaster plan. 
(1)  The county emergency management agency shall develop and periodically update the emergency and disaster plan for the purpose of establishing policies, procedures, programs, and projects to implement this article and enable the county and municipal governments to respond to natural and manmade emergency situations. 
(2)  The director of BEMA is responsible for the development, execution, and coordination of the county emergency and disaster plan. The plan shall be developed in close coordination with the state emergency management agency. It shall also be based on recommended principles and practices promulgated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other recognized emergency and disaster preparedness agencies and relief organizations. 
(3)  The plan shall be submitted to the county administrator and state emergency management agency for review, comment, and recommendation to the county commission. The plan shall be adopted by the county commission by resolution and may be changed and updated periodically by resolution. 
(c)  Activation of the county emergency and disaster plan. The county emergency and disaster plan shall become operative as follows: 
(1)  Automatically by the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor of the state as either a statewide, regional, or local area emergency or emergency alert; or 
(2)  Automatically by the declaration of a local state of emergency or threat thereof by the county commission chairman or vice-chairman, or other successor to the chairman in the event of his unavailability; or 
(3)  On order of the BEMA director, provided that the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency has been declared by the governor; or the director is acting as the designee of the chairman of the county commission. 
a.  The BEMA director is hereby authorized to order the mobilization of any appropriate emergency response organization, or any portion thereof, as required to provide for increased readiness in the event of the threatened existence of an emergency prior to the activation of the county emergency and disaster plan. 
b.  The BEMA director is further authorized to order the activation of the full county emergency and disaster plan and all emergency response organizations in the event that an emergency has already occurred but neither the county commission chairman nor his successor are available, nor can they be communicated with in a timely fashion; or, upon the request of the mayor, legally appointed successor, or the governing body of any county municipality or adjacent local government experiencing an emergency or disaster within their jurisdiction. 
(Code 1996, § 22-107; Ord. of 6-2-1998) 
State Law reference— Local organization for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 10-29. - Emergency response powers of the county and municipal governments. 
(a)  Declaration of local state of emergency or disaster and proclamation thereof. 
(1)  In the event of actual or impending emergency or disaster or natural or manmade origin, or impending or actual enemy attack or pandemic influenza emergency or public health emergency, anywhere within the county, the county commission chairman or vice-chairman or designee may declare that a local state of emergency or disaster exists. The local state of emergency or disaster shall continue for 30 days (unless extended) or until the county commission chairman or designee finds that the threat or danger has passed or the emergency or disaster has been dealt with, to the extent that emergency or disaster conditions no longer exist, and terminates the local state of emergency or disaster, whichever comes first. 
(2)  No local state of emergency or disaster may continue for longer than 45 days unless renewed by the county commission chairman or successor in the event of his unavailability. The county commission, by resolution, may terminate a local state of emergency or disaster at any time. Thereupon, the county commission chairman shall, by appropriate action, end the local state of emergency or disaster. 
(3)  A declaration of a local state of emergency or disaster shall automatically activate the county emergency and disaster plan. Further, such declaration shall automatically activate the response and recovery aspects of the plan as applicable to the political subdivision or area in question and shall be authority for the deployment and use of any forces to which the plan(s) apply and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, and materials and facilities assembled, stockpiled, or arranged to be made available pursuant to articles 1 through 3 of the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other law(s) relating to emergencies or disasters. 
(4)  Upon the declaration of a local state of emergency or upon activation of the county emergency and disaster plan, in accordance with any of the procedures established in this article, the county commission chairman, county administrator, BEMA director, or their designee should normally prepare an official proclamation of the establishment of the local state of emergency and communicate said proclamation to the citizens of the county using the most effective and efficient means available. The proclamation shall indicate the nature of the local emergency or disaster, the geographic area(s) affected by the proclamation, the conditions which required the proclamation to be established and the conditions under which it will be terminated. 
(b)  Emergency powers of the county and municipal governments. The county commission chairman shall have and may exercise for such period as the local state of emergency or disaster exists or continues, unless the state government assumes direct control of the emergency or disaster and the county's efforts are subordinated to the state, the following additional emergency powers within the unincorporated areas of the county: 
(1)  To enforce all laws, rules, and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control of all civil forces and helpers in the unincorporated area of the county. 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn property for the protection of the public in accordance with condemnation proceedings as provided by state law. 
(3)  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers, and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population of the county. 
(4)  To coordinate the exercise of the above emergency powers within the incorporated areas of the county with the mayors of the municipalities that may be affected by the emergency or disaster. 
(5)  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies as required for the emergency or disaster. 
(6)  In addition to any other emergency powers conferred upon the county commission chairman by law, he may specifically: 
a.  Authorize the removal of fallen trees, debris and wreckage caused by any emergency or disaster within 50 feet from the centerline of driveways, private roads or vehicle access lanes (if county right-of-way extends beyond the 50 feet centerline specified, work forces can go up to 20 feet beyond right-of-way) and within 100 feet of any primary residential dwelling, office, commercial or industrial structure. When working on private property, assurance must be given by the property owner(s) that they will hold the county, state, and federal governments harmless for damages that may occur; 
b.  Suspend any regulatory statute prescribing the procedures for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules, or regulations of any county agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule, or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder, or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster; 
c.  Utilize all available resources of the county government and subordinate agencies over which it has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
d.  Transfer the direction, personnel, or functions of any county department and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
e.  Commandeer or utilize any private property if the county commission chairman or his successor or designee finds this necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
f.  Direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area within the county, if the chairman deems this action necessary, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response, or recovery; 
g.  Prescribe routes, modes of transportation, and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
h.  Control ingress and egress to and from a disaster area, the movement of persons within the area, and the occupancy of premises therein; 
i.  Make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing. 
(Code 1996, § 22-109; Ord. of 6-2-1998) 
State Law reference— Local emergency management orders, rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28. 
Sec. 10-30. - Post disaster debris collection. 
In the event of a natural or manmade disaster that has been declared a public emergency by the county commissioner chairman or other authorized official, the county may exercise its authority to implement the measures set forth herein. 
The county administrator or chairman shall have the authority and responsibility to protect the public health and safety. The county administrator or chairman shall have the authority to remove debris which poses and immediate threat to life, public health and safety, significant damage to improved public and private property, and the economic recovery of the county. 
The county is hereby authorized to enter upon and remove debris from public and private roads, right-of-ways, storm drainage easements, and ingress/egress easements with the county limits, including private communities, for the purposes of emergency vehicle travel, stormwater conveyance, protecting public health and safety, facilitating response and recovery operations, and for any other purpose the county administrator or chairman determines is necessary to remove an immediate threat to life, public health and safety, significant damage to improved public and private property, and the economic recovery of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2017(1)) 
Secs. 10-31—10-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATES OF EMERGENCY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-47. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code, or any portion thereof, where: 
(1)  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2)  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of any emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and county building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(f)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fees means any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency means, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence, disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The subsequent recovery period shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
Temporary dwelling means any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district. 
(Code 1996, §§ 22-201, 22-202; Res. of 5-1-2007) 
Sec. 10-48. - Price gouging (overcharging). 
(a)  Prohibited. In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging. 
(1)  The term "overcharging" is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. 
(2)  The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency means, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 22-301, 22-302; Res. of 5-1-2007) 
Sec. 10-49. - Registration and building and repair services. 
(a)  Building contractor registration required. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto, without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this section. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this section if: 
(1)  He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2)  He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency means, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(c)  Registration; certification. All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(d)  Registration fees. Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this section in the amount established by the board. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(e)  Transferability. Each certification issued under this section is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(f)  Display of registration certification. Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(g)  Revocation; suspension. Each certification granted under this section is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this section or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(h)  Effective date; expiration. This section and any certification issued pursuant to it shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
(Code 1996, §§ 22-401—22-404, 22-406—22-408, 22-410; Res. of 5-1-2007) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56. 
Sec. 10-50. - Curfew. 
(a)  Institution of curfew. 
(1)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the county. 
(2)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(3)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this section from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, the term "exempt individuals" include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, and utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to section 10-49, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency means, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(c)  Prohibition. It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated Bryan County during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Code 1996, §§ 22-501—22-503; Res. of 5-1-2007) 
Secs. 10-51—10-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - 911 ROAD NAMING AND ADDRESSING 

Sec. 10-74. - Number and letter specifications and displaying. 
It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every structure in the incorporated and the unincorporated areas of the county to have placed immediately above, on, or at the side of the proper door of each building or house plainly visible from street, figures at least three inches high and not less than one-half inch in width or after June 1, 2000, four-inch reflective, showing the number of the house; any person, firm or corporation failing to so number any house, building or other structure occupied by him shall be in violation of this article and shall be penalized as specified in this article. Where multiple structures are present on a residence or commercial property, the county 911 director or his designee will determine which structure requires an address. Numbers shall be made of a durable reflective material and must contrast the color of the house, building, structure or background. 
(1)  Whenever any building or house is situated more than 50 feet from the street line or when such building or house is not visible from the street, such number shall be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to such building or house, or upon a gate post or fencepost or other appropriate place so as to easily identify the property from the street. The address will also be displayed on the building or house as specified herein, as well as any mailbox associated with the property. 
(2)  Where required by the 911 director or his designee, a directory sign shall be posted at each drive entrance, and at appropriate internal intersections to indicate the location of buildings or structures in multiple unit developments. Each building or structure shall be assigned a separate number or letter and such number or letter shall be posted as specified above. 
(3)  The number or letter assigned to each unit, along with the building identification number, where appropriate (for example, unit 122 in building C may be posted C-122 or 122C), shall be placed immediately above, on, or at the side of the appropriate door(s) so that the number is visible or legible. Individual unit address numbers and letters shall not be duplicated within multiple unit complexes. For units which are accessible only from an exterior hall or access way, letters and numbers shall be affixed to the door and shall be a minimum of 1½ inches in height and one-quarter inch in width. 
(Code 1996, § 17-101; Ord. of 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 10-75. - Assignment of address. 
Each house, building, structure, or multiple unit development shall be assigned an address by the director of the county 911 service or his designee. A number or alphabetical letter shall also be assigned for each building or structure within a multiple unit development and for each separate occupant or unit within each building or structure (examples include, but are not limited to, apartment and office complexes and shopping centers). Only the address numbers or letter assigned by the 911 director or his designee will be used, and all other numbers and letters shall be removed. 
(Code 1996, § 17-102; Ord. of 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 10-76. - Posting of address on telephones. 
(a)  Where units are intended for use by short-term visitors (such as hotels, time share units or villas, or complexes for examples), the address shall be posted on the telephone. 
(b)  Providers of public pay telephones shall post the address of the telephone location on the telephone. 
(Code 1996, § 17-103; Ord. of 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 10-77. - Installation and cost. 
The cost and installation of address numbers shall be the responsibility of the property owner and shall be posted within 21 days after receiving notification of the proper address assignment by the 911 director or his designee. 
(Code 1996, § 17-104; Ord. of 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 10-78. - Street names; 911 director to maintain directory of street names. 
For the purpose of clarifying and systematizing the street names in the county, the 911 director will maintain a directory of all streets within the county, and shall examine all street names within the county, and when he shall find duplication of street names which might cause confusion, or when he shall find street names that will cause difficulty in the assigning of numbers, he shall then recommend appropriate name changes to the planning commission. 
(Code 1996, § 17-105; Ord. of 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 10-79. - New subdivision plats to show street names; certification by 911 director. 
(a)  Prior to submitting a preliminary subdivision plat to the planning commission, the developer of the subdivision must submit to the county 911 director a preliminary plat showing the proposed street names, the location of fire hydrants and the location of community water supplies, if applicable, within the subdivision. 
(b)  Within 30 days of receipt of the plat, the 911 director or his designee shall assign each lot, fire hydrant and community water supply located in the subdivision a 911 address and make recommendations on street names. The 911 director or his designee will notify the planning commission in writing of his recommendations on street names and will certify that all lots, fire hydrants and community water supply locations within the proposed subdivisions have been assigned 911 addresses. The developer will cause to be included on the preliminary plat street names and 911 addresses as assigned by the 911 director. The planning commission will not approve any preliminary plat prior to receiving written notification from the 911 director that all requirements of the section have been met. 
(Code 1996, § 17-106; Ord. of 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 10-80. - New buildings; numbers required, prerequisite to issuance of building permit and final approval of structure. 
Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the owner, builder or other responsible person for the proposed building shall procure from the 911 director or his designee a 911 address for the property. The 911 director or his designee will provide to the owner, builder or other responsible person a letter certifying that he has procured a 911 address for the specified property. Within ten days of the issuance of a building permit, the owner, builder or other responsible person will cause to be located on the property in a conspicuous place visible to the road, the 911 address issued for the property. Final approval of any structure erected, repaired or altered or modified shall be withheld by the building inspector until permanent and proper numbers as specified in this article have been affixed to the structure. 
(Code 1996, § 17-107; Ord. of 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 10-81. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by any office of the building inspector of the county. Citations for violations may be issued by the building inspector or any other person designated or authorized to issue citations (code enforcement officer). 
(Code 1996, § 17-108; Ord. of 7-11-2000) 
Chapter 12 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Conservation and natural resources, O.C.G.A. title 12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions for hazardous materials emergency response team. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where terms are not defined herein, ordinarily accepted meanings within the proper context shall apply. 
Automatic aid means a written agreement between two or more public safety agencies that permits dispatchers to send the nearest available unit automatically, regardless of jurisdictional boundaries. 
Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any hazardous substances or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so that such substances or waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any water, including groundwater. 
Duly-authorized agency means any private company or public agency deemed necessary, by the fire chief or his designee, to assist in the mitigation of a possible or actual discharge of a hazardous substance and/or hazardous waste. 
Fire chief means the fire chief of county fire and emergency services. 
Hazardous substance means a substance which satisfies any one of the following requirements: 
(1)  A substance which, because of the toxic or hazardous properties which it exhibits, is determined by the fire chief to represent a significant risk to the public health and safety as a result of foreseeable use, handling, accidental spill, exposure, or contamination. 
(2)  A substance which is known by the employer to present a significant risk of personal injury or illness in the workplace in the county, as a result of foreseeable use, handling, accidental spill, exposure, or contamination. This section shall not be construed as requiring any employer to compile or generate new data. 
(3)  A substance or material that has been determined to pose an unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property. 
(4)  A substance defined under section 9601(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA). 
(5)  Any biological agent and other disease causing agent which after release into the environment and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation, or assimilation into any person, either directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, will or may reasonably be anticipated to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutation, physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions in reproduction) or physical deformations in such persons or their offspring. 
(6)  Any substance listed by the U.S. Department of Transportation as hazardous materials under 49 CFR 172. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Federal Act which is in force and effective February 1, 1986, codified as 40 CFR 261 and those substances defined as hazardous waste in 49 CFR 171. 
Hazardous waste generation means the act or process of producing hazardous waste. 
Mutual aid means a written agreement between two or more public safety agencies to respond to request for assistance under specified conditions or a formal verbal request from a public safety agency requesting a response for assistance. 
Person means and includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality, political subdivision of a state, and any agency or instrumentality of the United States government or any other entity and includes any officer, agency, or employee of any of the above. 
Substance means any element, entity, compound, combination, or any mixture thereof, whether organic or inorganic. 
(Code 1996, § 33-101) 
Sec. 12-2. - Hazardous material resource recovery fees. 
When dispatched or called to assist in an emergency incident involving the containment, collection, removal or other handling of hazardous substance or waste material, or to assist in vehicle accident, the county shall be entitled to charge a fee as set forth herein. 
(1)  Routine services. 

 
  
(2)  When additional county fire and emergency services resources are needed, charges will be assessed, in addition to the routine service rate as follows: 

 
  
(3)  Charges for contaminated equipment, equipment that is no longer serviceable, and special equipment, including, but not limited to, personal protective equipment, backhoes, bulldozers, and aircraft will be assessed on the actual cost incurred, including, but not limited to, salaries, benefits and depreciation. 
(Code 1996, § 33-102) 
Sec. 12-3. - Review of hazardous material resource recovery fees. 
When concurrence of the county administrator, the fire chief will periodically review and revise the fees stated above, based on established practices, to reflect the prevailing cost of equipment and personnel. 
(Code 1996, § 33-103) 
Sec. 12-4. - Collection of fees. 
The fire chief shall issue invoices for such services as set forth in this chapter and shall collect such fees on behalf of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 33-104) 
Secs. 12-5—12-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 12-27. - Definition. 
Any act of any person or group within the county whereby the health or life of any person may be endangered, injured, or impaired, or any disease may, directly or indirectly, be caused by the act, or because of the act any property may be endangered, injured or damaged, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful. 
(Code 1996, § 6-301) 
Sec. 12-28. - Acts of nuisance. 
Acts of nuisance shall include, but are not expressly restricted to: 
(1)  The owner, occupant or the agent of any owner or occupant of lots, parcels or areas within the county permitting the premises to become unsanitary, or a fire menace by allowing any offensive of unsafe matter to grow, accumulate or otherwise occupy and remain upon such premises. 
(2)  The owner, occupant or the agent of any owner or occupant of lots, parcels or areas within the county permitting pools of water to accumulate and remain upon the premises and become stagnant and foul. 
(3)  Except as otherwise permitted by law, the owner, occupant or the agent of any owner or occupant of lots, parcels or areas within the county allowing junk, disabled cars, trucks, trash, waste or old lumber to accumulate and remain upon the premises as a possible harborage for rats, snakes and other vermin. 
(Code 1996, § 6-302) 
Sec. 12-29. - Definition of nuisance on private property. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "nuisance" is also defined to mean any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or the depositing on, or the scattering over the premises of any of the following: 
(1)  Lumber, junk, trash, or debris. 
(2)  Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as wrecked, partially dismantled, junked, discarded or otherwise non-operating vehicles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers, machinery, implements, equipment and personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purpose for which it was manufactured. 
(3)  Any compost pile which is of such a nature as to spread or harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors or harmful gas, or attract rodents, vermin or other disease-carrying pests, animals or insects, provided that the presence of earthworms in a compost pile shall not constitute a nuisance. 
(4)  Keeping unsanitary matter on premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or permit another to keep, upon any premises deleterious or septic material, unless such material is retained in containers or vessels which deny access to humans, flies, insects, rodents and animals. 
(Code 1996, § 6-303) 
Sec. 12-30. - Duty of maintenance of private property. 
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. 
(Code 1996, § 6-304) 
Sec. 12-31. - Exterior storage of personality prohibited. 
No person in charge of or in control of premises shall allow any of the items described in section 12-29 to remain on such property longer than ten days; and no person shall leave any such item on any property within the county for a longer time than ten days; and the violation thereof shall be a nuisance, except that this section shall not apply with regard to any such item in an enclosed building or so located upon the premises as not to be readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. This article shall further not apply with regard to any such item on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place, and operated in a lawful manner, when the keeping or maintenance of such item is necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or with regard to an item in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the county or any other public agency or entity. 
(Code 1996, § 6-305) 
Sec. 12-32. - Enforcement of article. 
Enforcement of this article may be accomplished by the county in any manner authorized by law, and in addition, any person who, by reason of another's violation of any provision of this article, suffers special damage to himself different that suffered by other property owners throughout the area generally, may bring an action to enjoin or otherwise abate an existing violation. 
(Code 1996, § 6-306) 
Sec. 12-33. - Abatement of nuisance by owners. 
The owner, owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot upon which such storage as described in section 12-31 is made, and also the owner, owners, and/or lessees of said personalty involved in such storage (all of whom are hereinafter referred to collectively as "owners"), shall jointly and severally abate said nuisance by the prompt removal of said personalty into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 6-307) 
Sec. 12-34. - Abatement by county. 
Whenever said owners fail to abate said nuisance then the county shall remove the said personalty to a location of its selection. The cost of removal to be recoverable in a suit at law. 
(Code 1996, § 6-308) 
Secs. 12-35—12-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INDIVIDUAL AND SEMI-PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Wells and drinking water, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-70 et seq. 

Sec. 12-57. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Community water system means a public water system which services at least ten service connections. The term "community water system" shall also embrace and include every subdivision water system, regardless of the number of service connections. 
Non-community public water system means a water system which, although having less than ten service connections, is used by the public. The term "non-community public water system" includes, but is not limited to, those systems serving places of business such as hotels, motels, restaurants, camp grounds, schools, factories, churches, service stations, and the water system used at other public places and places of business. The term "non-community public water system" does not include domestic or home water systems serving less than ten connections. 
(Code 1996, § 6-801) 
Sec. 12-58. - Approval. 
From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, no new community water system or non-community public water system shall be built, constructed or operated in the unincorporated area of the county, nor shall any existing system be substantially rebuilt or expanded, unless the same shall fully comply with the minimum standards set forth herein, and further, unless the same shall be approved by the county commission or its designee as hereinafter set forth. 
(Code 1996, § 6-802) 
Sec. 12-59. - Standards. 
All new community water systems or non-community public water systems built in the unincorporated area of the county shall meet at least the following minimum standards, and should any such existing systems in the unincorporated areas of the county be substantially rebuilt or expanded, then such rebuilt or expanded portions or such existing systems shall also meet at least the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Minimum water supply. All such water systems shall be capable of delivering the following amounts and pressures: 
a.  For systems serving ten connections or less, at least 200 gallons per minute at a pressure of 20 pounds per square inch, when measured at any point in the system, including, but not limited to, the end of the longest run of pipe in the system. 
b.  For systems serving ten connections or more, at least 250 gallons per minute at a pressure of 20 pounds per square inch, when measured at any point in the system, including, but not limited to, the end of the longest run of pipe in the system. 
c.  The minimum water supply standards contained in this section shall not apply to wells used only for backup or emergency service, nor shall they apply to existing water systems, when such systems are connected to new water systems for the sole purpose of backup or emergency water supply. 
(2)  Fire hydrants required. All such water systems shall have standard three-way type fire hydrants, either left handed or right handed, as specified by the county commission or its designee, installed in the system at the following minimum intervals: 
a.  For residential systems, hydrants shall be spaced no more than 1,000 feet apart, and so that no house is more than 500 feet from a hydrant. 
b.  For multifamily residential and commercial systems, hydrants shall be spaced no more than 600 feet apart, and so that no building is more than 300 feet from a hydrant. Further, the system shall provide, at every hydrant, the minimum water supply set out in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Valves, and system looping required. All such water systems shall either have a sufficient number of valves installed, or be looped, or a combination thereof, so that a line break of failure in the system will not affect more than 1,000 feet of the mains in the system. Further, valves shall be maintained in good operating condition, and shall be inspected on at least an annual basis, with a report of such inspection being filed in the office of the county building inspector. Provided further, that the county building inspector may, in his discretion, require more frequent inspections. 
(4)  Minimum water main sizes. All such water systems shall be constructed with main water lines of at least six inch pipe. The final decision of all pipe and other material sizes shall be made by the county commission or its designee, as hereinafter set forth, but no system shall be approved which uses water mains of less than six inch pipe. 
(5)  Minimum pipe standards. All such water systems shall be constructed, in their entirety, of pipes which shall be of at least the quality specified for AWWA class 900 PVC pipe. 
(6)  Minimum test pressures. No such water system shall be given final approval for operation until it shall be demonstrated to the county building inspector or his designee, that the system, in its entirety, has withstood and held a pressure of 150 pounds per square inch for at least two hours. 
(Code 1996, § 6-803) 
Sec. 12-60. - Plans. 
(a)  No new community water system or non-community public water system shall be built, constructed or operated in the unincorporated areas of the county, unless and until a plan of such system shall have been prepared by a registered professional engineer, who shall certify that such system meets the minimum requirements of this article, and such plan shall have been filed with the county commission or its designee, and such board has given its preliminary approval of such plans. Further, such system shall not be put into operation, or otherwise used, until the county commission or its designee shall have satisfied itself that such system is in full compliance with all of the provisions of this article, as well as all other applicable laws, and the board has given its final approval. 
(b)  Likewise, no such existing systems shall be substantially rebuilt or expanded until like plans have been submitted to the county commission or its designee, and like approvals obtained. 
(Code 1996, § 6-804) 
Secs. 12-61—12-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SMALL SYSTEM GROUNDWATER WELLS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Water well standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-79. - County approval. 
(a)  No person shall erect, construct, or operate a public water system, nor undertake substantial enlargements, extensions, additions, modifications, renovations or repairs to any public water system, including storage, distribution, purification, or treatment components, without having first secured the county approval. 
(b)  Before a person may initiate construction of a new water system or increase the capacity of an existing water system, the person shall notify the county and obtain the county's approval for development of the project within its jurisdiction, prior to the submittal of the plans and specifications to the county for approval. To the extent practicable, the person should avoid locating part or all of the new or expanded facility at a site which: 
(1)  Is subject to a significant risk from earthquakes, floods, fires or other disasters which could cause a breakdown of the public water system or a portion thereof; 
(2)  Except for intake structures, is within the floodplain of a 100-year flood or is lower than any recorded high tide where appropriate records exist; or 
(3)  Is on or in close proximity to an abandoned landfill or any other site used for waste disposal. 
(c)  To assure the continuity of operation and maintenance, the supplier of the water system shall submit a copy of a trust indenture or other legal agreement approved by the county. The trustee should preferably be the county (if agreed) or be a property owners association organized to guarantee the operation and maintenance of the water system. The association must be made up of members who are owners of properties served by the water system. For acting as the trustee of the water system, the county may at its discretion require the owner to provide a trust fund, performance bond, or irrevocable letter of credit. The trustee under the conditions of the trust indenture may use funds from the trust fund, performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit to obtain compliance with the said regulations and/or correct said deficiencies. In addition, if the water system owner fails after a reasonable period of time to correct all said violations and deficiencies, under the conditions of the trust indenture the trustee may assume ownership of the water system in order to ensure that the water system is properly maintained and operated for the benefit of the system's customers. 
(Code 1996, § 31-101; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-80. - Spring protection. 
(a)  Springs must be protected by an enclosed structure. The walls of the structure must extend down to bedrock, or into the soil sufficiently to provide for a proper foundation to prevent surface water infiltration. 
(b)  All surface water run-off must be diverted from the spring. 
(c)  The spring must be protected from any entry of surface water. 
(d)  The overflow from the spring's enclosed structure must be designed to prevent entrance of contaminants or animals. 
(e)  A chlorine contact time of a least 30 minutes shall be provided. 
(f)  Continuous turbidity monitoring shall be provided with an automatic cutoff at 1.0 NTU. 
(g)  The pumping and water treatment facilities must be enclosed in shelters that are of weather and vandal-proof construction. 
(h)  The spring area must be secured to prevent unauthorized entry. 
(Code 1996, § 31-301; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Secs. 12-81—12-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GROUNDWATER WELLS 

Sec. 12-104. - Groundwater. 
A groundwater source includes all water obtained from drilled wells or springs. 
(Code 1996, § 31-201; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-105. - General. 
(a)  The person constructing the well must be a licensed water well contractor in the state in accordance with the provisions of the Water Well Standards Act of 1985 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.). The contractor must maintain accurate driller logs, including material setting and grouting data, complete the results of the pump test, including water level measurements, and must furnish a signed copy of the results to the owner and to the county. 
(b)  Groundwater sources (wells and springs) shall be evaluated for direct influence of surface water, when required by the county. 
(c)  Two important concerns in the design of water wells must be adequately addressed: 
(1)  The provision for the proper depth to which the well casing shall be installed as a watertight conduit; and 
(2)  The provision for positive sealing of the annular space between the outside of the well casing and the well hole to prevent movement of water vertically along the outside of the well casing pipe. The well must be protected from contamination by surface waters and other sources of contamination. 
(Code 1996, § 31-202; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-106. - Location. 
(a)  Wells shall be located: 
(1)  Generally at the highest point, and as far removed, and in a direction opposite to the groundwater flow from any known or probable source of contamination; 
(2)  Not less than 50 feet from a septic tank; 
(3)  Not less than 100 feet away from a septic tank absorption field; 
(4)  Not less than ten feet away from a sewer; 
(5)  Not less than 1,000 feet away from a solid waste disposal site and not in a direction where groundwater flow from the site may be intercepted by the well; 
(6)  As far removed as possible from all open abandoned wells; 
(7)  Not is areas of sink holes; 
(8)  Not in the floodplain areas, unless adequate protection is provided to prevent submergence of the well casing, pumps and appurtenances; 
(9)  Not less than 100 feet from surface water; 
(10)  Not less than 100 feet from buildings, mobile homes, permanent structures, animal houses or lots, or cultivated areas to which chemicals are applied; 
(11)  Not less than 100 feet from a chemical or petroleum fuel underground storage tank with secondary containment. 
(b)  The county may require greater separation distances or impose other protective measures when necessary to protect the well from any potential source of pollution, based upon the hazard or health risk associated with the source of pollution; the proximity of the potential source to the well; the type of material, facility or circumstance that poses the source or potential source of pollution; hydrogeological features of the site which could affect which well operation might have on the movement of contamination; and the feasibility of providing additional separation distances or protective measures. 
(c)  The well and the associated pumping and water treatment equipment shall be protected from unauthorized entry and use by an enclosed shelter or enclosed by a fence. The water treatment equipment shall be enclosed in a weatherproof shelter. 
(Code 1996, § 31-203; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-107. - Well abandonment. 
(a)  Wells not used as sources of water supply shall be filled, plugged and sealed to protect against contamination of the groundwater. 
(b)  Wells to be abandoned shall be sealed to prevent undesirable exchange of water from one aquifer to another. 
(c)  Preferably, the well hole should be filled with neat cement grout. 
(d)  Fill materials other than cement grout or concrete shall be disinfected and free of foreign materials. 
(e)  When filled with cement grout or concrete, these materials shall be applied to the well hole through a pipe, tremie, or bailer. 
(Code 1996, § 31-204; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-108. - General well construction. 
(a)  All public water supply wells must be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water, chapter 391-3-5, by a water well contractor licensed in the state. 
(b)  Pitless adapter wells shall not be constructed for public water supply systems. 
(c)  Wells shall be tested for plumbness and alignment in accordance with the latest edition of AWWA A100 Standard. 
(d)  Drilling fluids must be from an uncontaminated source or must be disinfected. 
(e)  All permanent casing, liners, screens and other manufactured material used in the well installation must be new. Material used shall preferably be wrought iron or steel. 
(f)  All casing and liner pipe joints shall be watertight the entire length in drilled wells. They shall have full circumferential welds or threaded coupling joints. 
(g)  The well casing shall neither terminate below ground nor in a pit. 
(h)  Packers shall be of a material that will not impart taste, odor, toxic substances or bacterial contamination to the water in the well. 
(i)  During the periods of stoppage of the well construction and when the site is unattended, the drilling contractor must have the well opening securely covered to prevent tampering and possible contamination. A welded metal plate is preferred for capping a well. 
(j)  During the well construction, the premises, construction material, tools and equipment must be maintained in a sanitary manner to prevent contamination of the well by the person excavating the well. 
(k)  The pump house floor shall be at least one foot above the original ground surface and not less than two feet above the highest known flood elevation. 
(Code 1996, § 31-205; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-109. - Steel casing. 
(a)  Steel pipe well casing shall conform to American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Specification A 120 or A 53 or American Petroleum Institute (API) Specification 5L or 5LS or equal standard and meet the following minimum wall thickness unless otherwise approved by the division: 

 
  
(b)  The guides or centralizers shall be attached to the bottom of the casing and at intervals not greater than 25 feet. 
(c)  The grout shall be placed under pressure by a positive displacement method, such as pumping, from the bottom of the annular space upward until the grout is extruded at the earth's surface in one continuous operation. 
(d)  The wall thickness of the cement grout surrounding the outer, permanent, protective casing shall be not less than 1½ inches at any point. 
(e)  Subsurface well construction shall cease for at least 24 hours after grouting. 
(Code 1996, § 31-206; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-110. - Plastic pipe casing. 
(a)  The use of plastic well casing and screens must be approved by the division prior to well installation. 
(b)  The plastic well casing and couplings shall meet the requirements of the ASTM Standard F 480 or equal standard and the National Sanitation Foundation standard for use with potable water. 
(c)  Any approved plastic well casing shall conform to the following minimum wall thickness: 

 
  
(d)  The plastic well casing and screen shall not extend to a depth of greater than 300 feet below the ground surface. 
(Code 1996, § 31-207; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-111. - Casing depth and grouting. 
(a)  The outer, permanent, protective casing shall extend at least five feet into the first solid, unweathered or impervious subsurface rock strata encountered, and shall have a minimum length of 25 feet from the ground surface into a well excavated into water-bearing formations in crystalline rocks and 50 feet in a well excavated into sedimentary water-bearing formations. 
(b)  The outer, permanent, protective casing shall be cement grouted its entire length with a cement slurry consisting of not more than six gallons of water to one cubic foot of cement, plus standard additives, when necessary, to facilitate placing or setting. The neat cement shall conform to ASTM Standard C150. 
(c)  The outer protective casing shall be provided with sufficient guides or centralizers attached or welded to the casing to permit unobstructed flow and uniform thickness of grout. 
(Code 1996, § 31-208; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-112. - Gravel pack wells. 
(a)  The gravel for gravel-packed wells must be washed, free of organic matter, and composed of well-rounded particles which are 95 percent siliceous material. 
(b)  Gravel shall be properly sized and disinfected immediately prior to or during placement. 
(c)  Gravel pack shall be placed in one uniform continuous operation. 
(d)  Gravel refill pipes, when used, shall be Schedule 40 steel pipe incorporated within the pump foundation and terminated with screwed or welded caps at least 12 inches above the pump house floor or concrete apron. 
(e)  Gravel refill pipes located in the grouted annular opening shall be surrounded by a minimum 1½ inches of grout. 
(f)  Protection from leakage of grout into the gravel pack or screen shall be provided. 
(Code 1996, § 31-209; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-113. - Well screens. 
Well screens shall: 
(1)  Be constructed of material which will not be damaged by the chemical action of groundwater or future cleaning operations; 
(2)  Have the size of openings based on sieve analysis of the formation and/or based on the size of gravel if any artificial gravel pack is installed; 
(3)  Have sufficient length and diameter to provide adequate specific capacity and low aperture entrance velocity. Usually the entrance velocity should not exceed 0.1 feet per second; 
(4)  Be installed so that the pumping water level remains above the screen under all operating conditions; 
(5)  Be designed and installed to permit removal or replacement without adversely affecting the watertight construction of the well; 
(6)  Be provided with a bottom plate or washdown bottom fitting of the same material as the screen. 
(Code 1996, § 31-210; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-114. - Well development. 
(a)  The well shall be properly developed, disinfected, and pump tested by the drilling contractor. 
(b)  Development of the well shall accomplish removal of native silts and clays, drilling mud or finer fraction of the gravel pack, and shall continue until the maximum specific capacity is obtained from the completed well. 
(c)  Every well shall be tested for yield and drawdown. The static water level, drawdown and pumping water level must be measured. 
(d)  The well shall be test pumped at not less than the desired yield for a period of at least 24 hours and shall continue for at least four hours after the pumping level has stabilized. 
(e)  The methods of testing shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Constant discharge method. This type of test is preferred for wells completed in unconsolidated aquifers. It is made by maintaining a constant rate of discharge equal to or greater than the desired yield of the well throughout the entire period of pumping. Measurements of pumping rate and water level shall be made every minute for the first ten minutes of the test, every two minutes for the next ten minutes, every five minutes for the next 40 minutes, every 15 minutes for the next hour, every 30 minutes for the next three hours, and hourly for the remainder of the pumping period. Recovery water-level measurements shall be made with the same frequency beginning with the cessation of pumping and continuing until complete recovery has occurred or until sufficient data have been collected to extrapolate full recovery. 
(2)  Step drawdown method. This method is preferred for wells completed in consolidated rock formations. It involves the well being "step" tested at rates approximately one-half, one, and 1½ times the design capacity of the well. Each step should consist of equal periods of pumping except the final step may be continued for a longer period of time if desired by the owner. The pump is operated continuously for the entire period of the test. The discharge must be controlled with a gate valve if electric driven, or a gate valve and throttle if engine driven. The discharge is controlled and maintained at approximately the desired discharge for each step with an accuracy of + five percent. Pump discharge is measured with a meter such as a circular orifice meter that will permit instantaneous determination of the discharge rate. A half-inch I.D. or larger pipe is installed from a point about two feet above the pump intake to the well head. The top of the pipe is readily accessible to insert, remove and read the depth to water using either a steel tape or two-wire electric sonde. Measurements of pumping rate and water level are made for each step of the test according to the schedule given in the constant discharge method. Recovery water-level measurements are made with the same frequency until the well has fully recovered or until sufficient date have been recovered to extrapolate full recovery. The test pump shall be capable of pumping 150 percent of the desired yield of the well. 
(f)  The pumping equipment shall be capable of operating continuously without interruption for the maximum period contemplated for the test. 
(g)  Data shall be provided to the county health department. 
(Code 1996, § 31-211; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-115. - Well disinfection. 
(a)  The well must be disinfected prior to the pumping test by the introduction of a chlorine solution into the well under sufficient pressure to overcome the natural flow pressures of all developed water-bearing zones, and in sufficient quantity to produce a minimum chlorine residual of 50 parts per million (mg/l) in six hours after such application. 
(b)  Table to determine chlorine compound necessary to dose 100 feet of water-filled well at 50 mg/l: 

 
  
(c)  After disinfection, the well must be pumped until no trace of chlorine remains in the water, nor in the water samples taken for microbiological analysis. If the water samples submitted are found to be unsatisfactory, the disinfection procedure must be repeated. 
(d)  The permanent pump and pumping equipment shall be disinfected with a chlorine solution prior to being placed into service. 
(Code 1996, § 31-212; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-116. - Well appurtenances. 
(a)  A concrete slab with a minimum thickness of six inches shall be constructed around the well casing and shall extend at least two feet in all directions, sloping away from the casing. 
(b)  The well casing shall extend at least 12 inches above the concrete slab of the floor. 
(c)  When a submersible pump is used, the top of the casing shall be effectively sealed against the entrance of water under all conditions of vibration or movement of conductors or cables. 
(d)  For submersible pump installations, the well casing shall be provided with a sealed cover plate and vented by a screened riser pipe so that the screened opening terminates downward at least 12 inches above the top of the casing or ground level. 
(e)  For turbine pump installations, a concrete block to support the pump motor shall be constructed around the outer well casing, shall extend at least 12 inches above the concrete slab, and: 
(1)  The outer casing shall extend at least one inch above the pump motor block; 
(2)  The well head and pump base shall be sealed to prevent seepage and the casing shall be vented by a screened riser pipe so that the screen opening terminates downward and above any point of backflow of contaminants into the well; and 
(3)  Oil lubricated vertical turbine pumps shall be lubricated with an acceptable turbine oil as prescribed by the pump manufacturer. 
(Code 1996, § 31-213; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-117. - Discharge piping. 
Discharge piping shall: 
(1)  Be designed to keep friction losses at minimum; 
(2)  Be equipped with a check valve, a shutoff valve, a pressure gauge and a means of measuring flow (water meter); 
(3)  Be provided with a raw water sampling tap prior to the well discharge pipe check valve; 
(4)  Where applicable, be equipped with an air release-vacuum relief valve located upstream from the check valve, with exhaust/relief piping terminating in a down turned position at least 18 inches above the floor and covered with a 24 mesh corrosion resistant screen; 
(5)  Have an access port of not less than five-eighths inch in diameter, with screen cap, for water level measurements; a deep well air line and gage may also be used in conjunction with the access port; 
(6)  Where pneumatic water level measuring equipment is used, it shall be manufactured using corrosion resistant materials attached firmly to the drop pipe or pump column and in such a manner as to prevent the entrance of foreign materials; 
(7)  Have all chemical injection ports located downstream from the well discharge pipe check valve; 
(8)  Have control valves and appurtenances located above the pumphouse floor; 
(9)  Have all exposed piping, valves and appurtenances protected against physical damage or freezing; 
(10)  Be properly anchored to prevent movement; 
(11)  Be protected against surge or water hammer; 
(12)  Be valved or have means of pumping to waste (a blow-off), but shall not be directly connected to a sewer. 
(Code 1996, § 31-214; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Secs. 12-118—12-147. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN CAPACITIES AND WATER DEMANDS 

Sec. 12-148. - General. 
An important factor in the planning and design of a water system is an accurate estimate of the quantities of water which must be supplied to meet water needs. These estimates are pivotal to the entire design, including the production of water, pumping, treatment, storage, and the distribution system. Each water system component is designed to meet certain flow requirements and to ensure that water will be available at the various water use points throughout the system in adequate quantities to meet demands. 
(Code 1996, § 31-401; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 12-149. - Estimating basic water demands. 
(a)  The various components of a water system are designed to meet specific water flow criteria which are dependent upon the type of water system and the objectives of the system. 
(b)  Average daily demand expresses the quantity of water used in a system in an average day. It is based upon experience from water meter readings in similar water systems over an extended period of time and reflects the normal seasonal and daily variations. For design purposes, it is usually determined by estimating the population or units of housing or other units and multiplying by an average per person or per unit water consumption derived from past experience. The average daily demand will be exceeded on many days (during peak demands), so it is not appropriate to design merely for the average. The greatest amount of water usage in one day or other period of time must be considered. 
(c)  The following provides a guide for estimating the average daily demand for various types of establishments, in gallons per day per unit. The unit is persons per day unless otherwise indicated. The values are for normal water requirements and do not include special needs or unusual conditions. Additional allowances should be made for firefighting, lawn watering, swimming pool, industrial or commercial process water and other special uses. 

 
  
(d)  Maximum daily demand expresses the greatest amount of water a system will use in one day. Small residential water systems may experience that their maximum day is 1½ to two times the average day. However, this ratio may not apply to other types of water systems. In general, the smaller the water system, the greater the variation between the average and the maximum day. 
(e)  Maximum hourly demand expresses the greatest amount of water which will be used in any hour during the day. This is sometimes referred to as the peak hour demand, although these will be short-term peak demand rates lasting for several minutes which will exceed the maximum hourly demand rate. Each type of system exhibits its own maximum hourly and short-term peak demands and the hours of peak occurrence will vary. For example, shopping centers usually experience hourly peaks in the early afternoon while residential communities may experience two peak hours, about 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The maximum hourly demand is often expressed as a ratio of the average daily demand, in gallons per minute. Generally speaking, the smaller the water system, the greater the maximum hour rate in respect to the average daily rate. The peak hourly demand at small residential communities may range about six to over ten times the average daily demand. 
(f)  Peak demand (instantaneous demand) is the maximum amount of water necessary to meet the peak short-term demand rate which may occur several times during a day, usually occurring during the peak hour period. The instantaneous peak may last for several minutes. The rate is particularly important in considering the sizing of the storage tank in a hydro pneumatic system. The effective storage capacity is usually designed to meet these short-term peaks. The minimum effective storage volume of pressure tanks, in gallons, shall equal the peak demand, in gallons per minute (gpm), minus the pumping capacity (gpm), multiplied by 20. In the absence of sufficient effective storage to meet extended peak demands, the wells and pumps must be capable of meeting the peak demands. The smaller the water system, the greater the ratio of the peak demand to the average demand. 
INSTANTANEOUS (PEAK) DEMAND FOR RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITIES 

 
  
Note: It should be noted that fire flow is not included in the definition of average daily and maximum daily demands and should be added if fire protection is desired. Fire flows are usually expressed as gallons per minute to fight a fire of a certain duration, and could be designed into a water system for firefighting purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 31-402; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Chapter 14 - FRANCHISES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cable television franchises, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq.; statewide franchising, O.C.G.A. § 36-76-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-19. - Franchise; granted and limitations. 
The franchise to be granted by the county board of commissioners pursuant to this article shall grant the right, privilege, and franchise to erect, construct, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all such extensions thereto and additions thereto in the county; and poles, wires, cables, conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of a CATV system for the interception, sale, transmission and distribution of television programs and other audiovisual electrical signals and the right to transmit the same to the inhabitants of the county on the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth. The county expressly reserves the right to grant a similar use of said streets, alleys, public ways and places to any person at any time during the period of this franchise. It is further the intention of this article to limit the activity of a grantee hereunder solely to the operation of cable television systems within the limits of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 15-101) 
Sec. 14-20. - Duration. 
The term of the franchise to be granted to the county pursuant to this article shall be for a period of not more than 30 years from and after the grant and acceptance date of this franchise to be awarded, subject to the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided, and further providing that the county board of commissioners shall have the right to review such franchise periodically at such times as the commission may from time to time elect to do so and as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1996, § 15-102) 
Sec. 14-21. - Rights subject to police powers. 
In accepting this franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the county to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the county pursuant to such power. 
(Code 1996, § 15-103) 
Sec. 14-22. - Franchise required; duration and exclusivity. 
The county shall grant a franchise for the use of the streets and roads within the county for the construction, operation and maintenance of a CATV system. No system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets or roads of the county or be allowed to operate without a CATV franchise. This franchise shall be granted for a term of not more than 30 years. The franchise to operate a cable television service shall be on a nonexclusive basis. 
(Code 1996, § 15-104) 
Sec. 14-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cablecasting, origination and access. 
Access cablecasting means services provided by a cable television system on its public, education, local government or leased channels. 
(1)  Public access channel. A specifically designated noncommercial public access channel available on a first-come nondiscriminatory basis for which the system shall maintain and have available for public use at least the minimal equipment and facilities necessary for the production of programming for such a channel. 
(2)  Education access channel. A specially designated channel for use by educational authorities. 
(3)  Local government access channel. A specially designated channel for local government uses. 
(4)  Leased access channel. Portions of the system's non-broadcast bandwidth including unused portion of the specially designated channels for leased access services. 
Cablecasting means programming (exclusive of broadcast signals) carried on a cable television system. 
Origination cablecasting means programming (exclusive of broadcast signals) carried on a cable television system over one or more channels, and subject to the exclusive control of the cable operator. 
Cable communication system, cable system, CATV or system means a system of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors and equipment used or to be used to originate or receive television or radio signals directly or indirectly off the air and to transmit them via cable to subscribers for a fixed or variable fee, including the origination, receipt, transmission, and distribution of voices, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, and any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical impulses, whether or not directed or originating signals or receiving signals off the air. 
County means the County of Bryan, Georgia, and all the territory within its existing and future territorial limits. 
County officer(s) or employee(s) means the person or persons elected to or appointed to such position. 
Converter means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, or by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated dial locations. 
Franchise includes this franchise and all rights, powers, and privileges thereunder. 
Franchise agreement means the agreement between the county and the franchisee made pursuant to this article, as amended are part of the franchise agreement. 
Franchisee means the entity to whom the CATV franchise is awarded and shall include all persons having any rights, powers, privileges, duties, liabilities or obligations under a franchise agreement, and also all persons having or claiming any title or interest in or to the system, whether by reason of the franchise itself or any subcontract, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, hypothecation, security agreement, management or operating agreement, or otherwise arising or created. 
Gross subscriber revenues means those revenues derived directly from the supplying of regular subscriber service within the county, including monthly service charges and fees for regular cable benefits, including the transmission of broadcast signals and access or origination channels if any; it also includes installation fees or reconnect charges, revenues derived from per-program or per-channel charges, leased channel revenues, advertising revenues, or any other revenue derived from the system, except any revenue derived from investment or other income producing revenue of net profits from the system. 
Pay TV means an arrangement under which a charge is made to a subscriber for receiving a particular television program or series of programs. 
Programmer means any person, firm, corporation or entity who produces or otherwise provides program material for transmission by video, audio, digital, or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes, to subscribers, by means of the cable communications system. 
Public agency means an agency which is supported wholly, or substantially, by public funds. 
Service, basic and additional. 
Basic subscriber service means a total of all the following: 
(1)  The transmission of all broadcast video channel signals provided for herein. 
(2)  The transmission of the public, educational, or local government access channel signals. 
(3)  The transmission of the local origination channel signals. 
(4)  The transmission of such other cable cast channel signals as are required by the FCC to match the number of broadcast channel signals being transmitted. 
(5)  The installation and re-connection of subscriber outlets. 
Additional services means such video services as the transmission of all leased access channel signals not included in basic subscriber service, as well as the transmission of cable cast video advertising messages and pay television signals. 
Streets and highways means streets, roads, avenues, highways, boulevards, concourses, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, waterways, docks, bulkheads, wharves, piers, alleys and all other public right-of-way and public grounds or waters within or belonging to the county. 
Subscriber means a person or organization whose premises are physically wired to receive, and/or who is receiving by any manner, any transmission from the system. 
Subscriber service drop means such extension wiring from the franchisees distribution lines to a subscriber's building or ultimate usage terminal. 
User means a person utilizing a system channel as a producer, for purposes of production or transmission or material, or as a subscriber, for purposes of receipt of material. 
(Code 1996, § 15-105) 
Sec. 14-24. - Acceptance of franchise. 
(a)  This franchise and the rights, privileges and authority hereby granted shall take effect and be in force from and after acceptance by the franchisee of the franchise offered by the county board of commissioners, subject to the terms of this article and the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and/or its successor agency. The franchisee must, within 60 days after being offered this franchise by the county board of commissioners, accept such provisions of this article, as amended. Such acceptance and agreement shall be in writing, duly executed and sworn to, by or on behalf of the grantee before a notary public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths. This franchise contract is made part of this section as though fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Should the grantee fail to comply with subsection (a) of this section, it shall acquire no rights, privileges or authority under this franchise whatsoever. 
(Code 1996, § 15-106) 
Sec. 14-25. - Procedure to consider franchise renewal. 
(a)  At least 30 days public notice shall be given of a meeting of the commissioners to proceed to determine whether the operator has satisfactorily performed his obligations under his franchise. To determine satisfactory performance, commissioners shall look at the technical developments and performance of the system, programming, services offered, cost of service, and any other particular requirement set forth in this article such as the availability of programming equipment and personnel to aid access channel users; also, the commissioners shall consider the franchisee's annual reports made to the county or to the FCC; provisions shall be made for community comment; and industry performance on a national basis shall be considered. 
(b)  The commissioners will have four months after notification to determine the franchisee's eligibility for renewal. 
(c)  If the commissioners find the franchisee's performance satisfactory, a new franchise may be granted pursuant to the ordinance as amended. 
(d)  In the event the current franchisee is determined to have performed unsatisfactorily, the company shall have 60 days from the date of determination in which to cure any discrepancies, to the satisfaction of the commission. In the event such cure is not accomplished within the time allotted, the commission shall have the right to terminate the franchise without penalty or other recourse by the franchisee. 
(Code 1996, § 15-107) 
Sec. 14-26. - Poles. 
The poles used for the franchisee's distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by an electric, telephone, or other public utility company, when and where practicable, provided mutually satisfactory rental agreements can be entered into with said companies. Where the use of poles owned by an electric, telephone, or other public utility is not practicable or mutually satisfactory rental agreements cannot be entered into with said companies following a good faith effort on the part of the franchisee to obtain such agreements, the franchisee may request the board of commissioners to authorize the franchisee to erect and maintain its own poles, as may be necessary for the proper system. The location and physical characteristics of the poles must be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1996, § 15-108) 
Sec. 14-27. - Transmission and distribution systems. 
(a)  The franchisee's transmission and distribution system poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of the persons or the use of county roads, or to interfere with existing and/or new improvements this county may deem proper to make or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of streets, alleys, bridges, of other public property of the county or its citizens. The franchisee will at the request of the county move and relocate, if necessary, any of the franchisee's installations, including removal of poles to avoid such interference at the franchisee's expense. The board of commissioners shall be the sole judge as to what constitutes interference. However, the commission shall not act arbitrarily in determining what constitutes interference. Approval of the commissioners prior to erection of any transmission or distribution facilities is required. Any change in location of these facilities shall also be subject to prior approval by the board of commissioners. Construction and maintenance of the transmission or distribution system, including house connections, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electric Safety Code, as amended, prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electric Code, of the National Fire Protection Association, as amended, and such applicable ordinances, and regulations of the county affecting electrical installations, which may be presently in effect, or changes by future ordinances. 
(b)  The franchisee shall, on the request of any private party holding an appropriate permit issued by the county, temporarily raise or lower its lines to permit the moving of any building or other structure, and the actual expense of the same shall be paid by the party requesting the same. In those areas where telephone and electric service lines are underground, the franchisee shall place its cables and service lines underground unless approval to place the cables and service lines on poles is secured from the commissioners. The franchisee is authorized to place all cables and service lines underground in areas where poles are located. 
(Code 1996, § 15-109) 
Sec. 14-28. - Maintenance of system. 
(a)  In the maintenance and operation of its television transmission and distribution system in the streets, alleys and other public places, and in the course of any new construction or addition to its facilities, the franchisee shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by the franchisee in the course of its operations shall be made only after having obtained prior written permission to do so from the chairman of the board of commissioner or his representative, and the proper state and/or federal highway officials if a state and or federal highway is involved. All such work shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences, or boarding, the bounds of which, during and between periods of 30 minutes prior to sunset and for 30 minutes after sunrise, shall be clearly designated by appropriate warning lights. 
(b)  All work in any way necessitated by the business of the franchisee which may involve the opening, breaking up or tearing up of a portion of the street, sidewalk or other part of any county-owned or county-controlled property, shall be done and repaired in a manner approved by the county, and may be done by the county at the expense of the franchisee if mutually agreed upon by the board of commissioners and the franchisee or by the board of commissioners and charged to the franchisee if the franchisee refuses to repair the streets, sidewalks or county property promptly and/or fails to repair such in a satisfactory manner. 
(Code 1996, § 15-110) 
Sec. 14-29. - Interference with existing reception prohibited. 
Installations by the franchisee shall be maintained so as not to interfere with TV reception already in existence. 
(Code 1996, § 15-111) 
Sec. 14-30. - Transmission standards. 
Installation and maintenance of equipment shall be such that standard color signals shall be transmitted to any subscriber receiver. During the terms of this franchise, the franchisee shall (subject to approved construction schedules) furnish to all persons desiring the service offered (subject only to the specifications of this article and paying for the same) a service capable of producing as good a quality of television picture or reception as may be practicable from time to time, and essentially, of the same quality as received at the antenna site. The franchisee shall make all reasonable and practicable efforts to improve the quality of services as the state of the art develops. 
(Code 1996, § 15-112) 
Sec. 14-31. - Indemnification by franchise. 
The franchisee shall indemnify, protect and save harmless the county at all times during the franchise period and any renewal thereof as a result of the grant of a franchise and from and against losses and physical damages to property, and bodily injury or death to persons, including payments under workmen's compensation law, which may arise out of or be caused by the erection, maintenance, presence, use or removal of said attachments on poles within the county, or by an act of the franchisee, its agents or employees arising out of operations of the franchisee. The franchisee shall carry insurance with a company authorized to do business in the state to protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities which may arise or result directly or indirectly from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. The amounts of such general liability insurance against liability due to physical damage to property shall not be less than $50,000.00 per occurrence for property damage and not less than $100,000.00 per aggregate for property damage, and not less than $300,000.00 per person for personal injury to or the death of one person and not less than $500,000.00 per occurrence. The company shall also carry such insurance on its vehicles in an amount no less than $100,000.00 for each person and not less than $300,000.00 per occurrence and property damage insurance of $300,000.00 per occurrence. Workmen's compensation shall be maintained as required by the laws of the state. All insurance required by this agreement shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire life of the franchise. Said policy of policies of insurance or a certified copy or copies thereof shall be approved by the county attorney and then deposited with and kept of file by the county clerk. A certificate showing that such coverage has been obtained and is currently in force and effect shall be filed with the county clerk prior to the commencement of construction by the franchisee and within 30 days of the anniversary date of the policy in each and every year as long as this franchise and any extension thereof is in force. The certificate will state that the insurance carrier will give the board of commissioners 60 days advance notice of termination of any policy furnished hereunder. Further, the franchisee will save harmless and defend the county against copyright and patent infringement matters which arise out of the construction, repair, maintenance, and operation of this franchise. 
(Code 1996, § 15-113) 
Sec. 14-32. - County revenue. 
In further consideration of the granting of this franchise to the franchisee, the franchisee shall pay to the county annually, no later than 90 days after end of franchisee's fiscal year, an amount equal to five percent of gross (present Federal Communications Commission standard rate) of all cable revenues, including, but not limited to, subscriber revenues, advertising, pay cable and leased channel revenues of the franchisee derived from cable television operations within the unincorporated limits of county during the previous year. Provided further, if the standard percentage rate is increased by the Federal Communications Commission or its successor, then the fee authorized hereunder may be amended by the commissioners of the county to the highest standard fee authorized by the Federal Communications Commission or its successor for regulatory matters, effective as of the date such higher standard fee is approved by such regulatory agency. The commissioners of the county shall have reasonable time for the purpose of ascertaining accurately what the actual gross receipts of the franchisee may have been for cable television for the past month, months, year and/or for the present year. 
(Code 1996, § 15-114) 
Sec. 14-33. - Records. 
The franchisee shall, during each year of the franchise, provide to the county copies of his federal and state income tax returns showing gross revenue received from the franchise area by the franchisee. In addition, the franchisee shall supply copies of any and all reports concerning revenue required to be filed with the Federal Communications Commission and the public service commission of the state and any other regulatory agencies. In addition, the franchisee agrees to prepare and maintain his records, books and accounts in such a manner as to accurately reflect the gross income from any franchise area granted to the franchisee by the county. These records, books and accounts shall be available for inspection by the county at any reasonable time during normal working hours. Any such records required by the county and any reports shall be submitted to the county within 90 days of the close of the franchisees fiscal year. The franchisee further agrees that within 90 days of the end of its fiscal year it shall submit to the county a report of all gross revenue derived from any area under which the county has granted a franchise. 
(Code 1996, § 15-115) 
Sec. 14-34. - Other regulations. 
The franchisee shall, at all times, be in full compliance with all FCC regulations, as amended, pertaining to cable television systems. The franchisee shall furthermore at all times be in full compliance withal existing federal, state and local laws, ordinances and statutes as are applicable to the operation of a cable television system. No part of this article shall be construed as a waiver of any local, state or federal law, or as a limit of liability. 
(Code 1996, § 15-116) 
Sec. 14-35. - Certificate of compliance. 
The franchisee shall file with the Federal Communications Commission an application for a certificate of compliance and/or any and all reports required by said agency or its successor. 
(Code 1996, § 15-117) 
Sec. 14-36. - Minimum requirements. 
(a)  To the extent required by the present rules of the Federal Communications Commission or any other rules or regulations or amendments thereto and until such time as that rule is changed or specific relief therefrom is granted by the FCC, the franchisee shall provide services, system performance, channel capacity, one- or two-way communications, operational policies, etc., in strict conformance with said rules. 
(b)  In any case where the proposal shall provide for, or promise services, system performances, etc., which exceed the minimum requirements of the Federal Communications Commission, the proposal of the applicant shall be binding and shall be made a part thereof. 
(c)  Section 76.31 of the rules of the Federal Communications Commission, and any amendments thereto, set out certain requirements and provisions that must be contained in the franchise in order for the franchisee to obtain a certificate of compliance from the FCC. It is the knowledge and belief of the county and the franchisee that all the present requirements of those rules are contained herein. Any changes in said rules that may be authorized and ordered by the FCC from time to time shall be incorporated into this agreement within the period of time stipulated by the FCC. 
(Code 1996, § 15-118) 
Sec. 14-37. - Enforcement. 
Failure to enforce or insist upon compliance with any of the terms of this franchise shall not operate as or constitute a general waiver of relinquishment of any of such terms of conditions, but the same shall be and remain at all times in full force and effect. 
(Code 1996, § 15-119) 
Sec. 14-38. - Subsequent regulation. 
The right is hereby reserved by the county, by ordinance, to adopt in addition to the provisions herein contained and in addition to other existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power. In the event the Federal Communications Commission elects not to regulate cable television partially or abandons regulation of cable television, all of the rules and regulations set forth by the FCC at the time this article was enacted shall remain in effect until changed by another regulatory agency, state or federal, and/or changed by the action of board of commissioners. 
(Code 1996, § 15-120) 
Sec. 14-39. - Privacy. 
(a)  Use of data for subscriber. A franchisee shall not initiate or use any form, procedure or device for procuring information or data from cable subscriber's premises by use of the cable system without prior valid written authorization from each subscriber so affected. Valid authorization shall mean written approval from the subscriber for a period of time not to exceed one year, and said authorization shall not have been obtained from the subscriber as a condition of service. Further, it shall be unlawful for the grantee, without such authorization, to activate and/or utilize any "Class IV Cable Television Channel" in any manner from the subscriber's premises. In any case, the subscriber shall have the right and opportunity to deactivate the return path from his premises. 
(b)  Identifying subscribers. The county or a franchisee shall not, without prior valid written authorization from each subscriber so affected, provide any data identifying subscriber's names or addresses to any other party. 
(c)  Procurement of information. It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation, governmental body or agency to procure information or data from cable subscribers premises by use of the cable system without prior written authorization from each subscriber so affected. 
(d)  Specific authorization. No authorization for procurement or dissemination of subscriber identifiable information or data shall be valid unless: 
(1)  It specified the type or types of information or data covered; and 
(2)  The parties are authorized to collect, receive, store, record, transmit, or otherwise convey this information or data. 
Further, all authorization shall specify the maximum period of time that any subscriber identifiable information or data shall be preserved in any manner or form. 
(Code 1996, § 15-121) 
Sec. 14-40. - Antenna structure. 
(a)  Any antenna structure used in the county's cable television system shall comply with Construction Marking and Lighting of Antenna Structure, 47 CFR 17.1 et seq., September 1967. 
(b)  All working facilities and conditions used during construction, installation, and maintenance of the county's cable television system shall comply with the standards of the occupational safety and health administration. 
(Code 1996, § 15-122) 
Sec. 14-41. - Establishment of a regulatory entity. 
The county shall have continuing regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over the operation of any franchise granted hereunder and may from time to time adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as they may deem necessary for the conduct of the business contemplated thereunder. 
(Code 1996, § 15-123) 
Sec. 14-42. - Radiation. 
Stray radiation (RF leakage) shall be checked at reception locations for emergency radio services to prove no interference signal combinations are possible. Stray radiation shall be measured adjacent to any proposed aeronautical navigation radio sites to prove no interference to airborne navigational reception in the normal flight patterns. 
(Code 1996, § 15-124) 
Sec. 14-43. - Forfeiture of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the county by virtue of this franchise or otherwise, the county reserves the right to terminate and cancel this franchise and all the rights and privileges to the grantee hereunder in the event that the grantee: 
(1)  Violates any provisions of this article as may be amended from time to time or any rules, order of determination of the board of commissioners of the county made pursuant to this franchise, except where such violation is made without fault, or through excusable neglect. 
(2)  Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt. 
(3)  Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this article or the franchise or practices any fraud or deceit upon the county. 
(4)  Fails to secure a certificate of compliance from the FCC or any other necessary license or permit within four months of the acceptance of this franchise. 
(5)  Fails to exhibit substantial progress toward the completion of the construction of the system for a period of three consecutive calendar months. 
(6)  Fails to complete construction schedule approved by the county under this franchise within the time set forth in the construction schedule accepted by the county. 
(7)  Leases, subleases, sells or transfers the franchise without written consent of the commissioners of the county. A sale of more than 51 percent of the stock of the corporation to any entity or entities and/or person or persons, and/or more than 51 percent interest in the franchise and/or 51 percent of the working control of the franchise is considered a transfer under this section of the ordinance. 
(b)  Such termination and cancellation shall be by action of the commissioners of the county, adopted after 30 days' notice of the grantee, and the granting of a period of 60 days in which the company shall correct any such discrepancies. This shall in no way affect the county's rights under the franchise agreement or any provision of law. In the event that such termination or such cancellation depends upon a finding of fact as made by the commissioners of the county and/or its representative, such findings of fact shall be conclusive on all parties; provided, however, that before this franchise may be given an opportunity to be heard before the commissioners of the county. The county, in making such findings, shall not act in an arbitrary manner. 
(Code 1996, § 15-125) 
Sec. 14-44. - Damaging and interfering with franchise property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy cables, pipes, conduit, wire, lines, posts, lamps or other apparatus belonging to the franchisee or intentionally and without authority to secure television cable service in any manner or interfere with the operations of the franchisee in providing television cable service to other subscribers on the television cable system owned by the franchisee. Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth herein and/or the person who with knowledge of such violation receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of such improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. 
(Code 1996, § 15-126) 
Sec. 14-45. - Further agreement and waiver by franchisee. 
The franchisee agrees to abide by all provisions of this article and the franchise agreement, and further agrees that it will not at any future time set up against the county the claim that the provisions of this article and/or franchise are unreasonable, void or arbitrary. 
(Code 1996, § 15-127) 
Chapter 16 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Health, O.C.G.A. title 31; county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HEALTH DEPARTMENT RULES 

Sec. 16-19. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  There are currently in existence certain rules and regulations adopted by the county board of health with the purpose of preserving the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county. This article specifically incorporates by reference and makes a part of this article the provisions of the following rules and regulations which are in force at the time of the adoption of this article: 
(1)  The rules of the department of public health pertaining to on-site sewage management, being Ga. Admin. Code 511-3-1, as now or hereafter amended. 
(2)  The rules of the department of public health pertaining to food service, being Ga. Admin. Code 511-6-1, as now or hereafter amended. 
(b)  The above rules available for review at the offices of the county board of health. 
(c)  All rules adopted by the county board of health, as now or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1996, § 6-702) 
Sec. 16-20. - Implementation. 
(a)  The duty of implementation and enforcement of these regulations rests with the county board of commissioners, and by virtue of this article the same is hereby expressly delegated to the county board of health, which is hereby charged with the promulgation of sufficient procedures for ensuring compliance with these rules and regulations by the citizens of the county. The county board of health is directed to implement procedures which will ensure that the citizens of the county will receive all procedural rights to which they are entitled under the laws of the state. 
(b)  Any violation of the rules and regulations hereby referenced shall be a violation of this article and shall be a misdemeanor offense. Any violator shall be subject to the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(c)  The magistrate's court of the county shall have jurisdiction over violations of this article and all procedures for enforcement of this article shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. title 15, ch. 10, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.). Complaints of violations of any provision of this article shall be brought before the magistrate's court by a designated representative of the county board of health and shall be brought before the magistrate's court only after all notices and rights to a hearing before a hearing officer of the board of health shall have been provided. 
(Code 1996, § 6-703) 
Secs. 16-21—16-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TATTOOING/BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Tattoo studios, O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1 et seq. 

Sec. 16-44. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved means determined by the health authority to be in compliance with this article. 
Body piercing means the creation of an opening in an individual's body other than the individuals earlobe, to insert jewelry or other decoration. 
Body piercing studio means a facility in which body piercing is performed. 
Environmentalist means a person authorized to represent the health authority in conducting inspections of tattoo establishments. 
Health authority means the county board of health and/or the county health director or his authorized representative. 
Operating permit means a written permit issued by the health authority to the owner of a tattoo/body piercing establishment and a written permit issued to the individual tattoo artist to perform tattooing under the provisions of this article. 
Sanitize means the approved bactericidal treatment by a process that provides enough accumulative heat or concentration of chemicals for a length of time sufficient to reduce the bacterial count, including pathogens, to a safe level on utensils and equipment. 
Sterilize means the approved bactericidal treatment by a process that provides enough accumulative heat or concentration of chemicals for a length of time sufficient to eliminate the bacterial count, including pathogens. 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in color matter so as to form indelible marks or figures or by producing scar tissue. 
Tattoo artist means any person who performs tattooing. 
Tattoo establishment means any room or space where tattooing is performed or where the business of tattooing is conducted or any part thereof. The term "tattoo establishment" is synonymous with "tattoo parlor." 
Tattoo operator means any person who controls, operates, conducts, or manages any tattoo establishment, whether actually performing tattooing or not. 
(Code 1996, § 26-101; Ord. of 2-6-2001) 
Sec. 16-45. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Application. No person shall operate a tattoo establishment or engage in the practice or business of tattooing/body piercing as a tattoo/body piercing operator or as a tattoo/body piercing artist unless such person shall first obtain an operating permit from the health authority. Applications for such operating permit can be obtained from the environmental health office, during normal working hours. Applications shall be made in writing, in duplicate, on the form prescribed by the health authority, wherein the applicant shall agree to conform to all laws governing such places now in effect or as subsequently enacted, and to authorize and permit such examination and inspections as may be deemed necessary by the health authority. Completed applications shall be returned to the environmental health office during normal working hours. 
(b)  Minimal training; other requirements. 
(1)  Tattoo artists/body piercers and their employees must show evidence of current certification and completion of courses in subsections (b)(2) and (3) of this section prior to receipt of a certificate of registration. 
(2)  Basic training in First Aid and advanced CPR as well as proof of attendance at required renewal courses. 
(3)  Completion of a course on prevention of disease transmission and blood borne pathogens, conducted by an instructor trained and sufficiently knowledgeable to teach this OSHA course. Such knowledge shall include the requirements of standards 29 CFR 19010.1030. 
(4)  Tattoo artists/body piercer registration shall expire December 31 of each year. The place of business shall meet all other department requirements. 
(5)  Tattoo artists/body piercers must have liability insurance for the amount of $100,000.00. 
(6)  Tattoo artists/body piercers must present evidence of at least one year of apprenticeship experience with no history of their piercing causing short- or long-term health problems. Apprentices must register with the health board when beginning the apprenticeship. 
(c)  Inspections. Before a permit to operate a tattoo/body piercing establishment is granted, it shall be the duty of the health authority to cause an inspection to be made of the establishment and premises in which the business is to be conducted and to refuse the permit if the condition of the establishment and premises or its equipment shall not conform to the requirements of this article. If the establishment conforms to the requirements, the health authority shall issue the operating permit requested after payment of the applicable fee. An operating permit issued to one person is not transferable to another person or to another location. 
(d)  County board of health. It shall be the duty of the county board of health to hear appeals. Applicants will be notified by the county board of health of its decision within seven working days of its quarterly meeting dates. 
(e)  Terms and renewal of an operating permit. 
(1)  All operating permits issued pursuant to this section shall, unless revoked earlier, expire each calendar year on December 31. The requirements for their renewal shall be the same as for new operating permits, as set forth in this section. Each operating permit may be revoked for violation of this article. 
(2)  The fee schedule for operating permits is as follows: A permit for operation of a tattoo establishment, valid for 12 consecutive months, shall be set by the county board of health. No fee shall be provided. 
(3)  Any tattoo/body piercing parlor already in business at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall comply with all rules and regulations within 30 days of approval of this article. 
(f)  Public display of operating permit and grade notice. It shall be the duty of the operator or owner of the tattoo establishment to display current operating permits and grade notices in a conspicuous place designated by the health authority. 
(Code 1996, § 26-102; Ord. of 2-6-2001) 
Sec. 16-46. - Inspections. 
(a)  Authorized. It shall be the duty of the health authority to cause unannounced inspections to be made on a recurring basis at least semi-annually of all tattoo/body piercing establishments and their equipment. If the place of business is not maintained, conducted or operated in conformity with the requirements of this article, the health authority may suspend or revoke the operating permit of the establishment until its operation is made to conform to the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Revocation of operating permits. Upon inspections, when a tattooing establishment receives a sanitary grade of less than 90 percent more than one time out of four consecutive inspections or receives a sanitary grade of less than 70 percent, immediate revocation of the establishment's operating permit shall be mandatory. Any violations of this article shall be sufficient cause for revocation of an operating permit. No operating permit shall be reissued until the establishment has been reinspected by the health authority and found to be in compliance with this article. 
(c)  Reinspections. In the case of establishments that have been closed for failure to comply with this article, a reinspection to consider the reissuance of a permit shall be made within 30 days after a written request for reinspection has been made. A reinspection fee is set by the county board of health. 
(d)  Record of inspection. The grading of tattoo/body piercing establishments shall be recorded on an inspection form provided by the health department, a copy of which is a part of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 26-103; Ord. of 2-6-2001) 
Sec. 16-47. - Records required. 
Records for each patron or customer shall be kept and maintained by the operator of each tattoo/body piercing establishment. Records of each client shall be prepared prior to the procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name and signature, address, proof of age, date tattooed, design, its location and name of the artist. A statement of informed consent by the individual receiving the tattoo must be maintained on file. A copy of procedures signed by the client advising them of proper subsequent care of the tattoo shall be maintained on file. A copy of instructions signed by the client informing them on the risks involved and possible complications that might result from the tattoo procedure must be maintained on file. All records shall be available for inspection upon the request of the health authority. Records shall be maintained a minimum of five years. 
(Code 1996, § 26-104; Ord. of 2-6-2001) 
Sec. 16-48. - Removal of tattoo. 
No tattoo operator or artist shall remove or attempt to remove any tattoo. 
(Code 1996, § 26-105; Ord. of 2-6-2001) 
Sec. 16-49. - Standards for the operation and maintenance of tattoo establishments. 
(a)  Facilities. Facility must be located in an area zoned for business. The floors, walls, and ceilings of the establishment shall be constructed of impervious, easily cleanable material, light in color, and shall be at all times maintained in a clean condition. Sufficient and approved toilet, urinal and handwashing facilities shall be convenient and accessible to customers, operators and artists. No part of the tattoo establishment shall be used for domestic purposes. 
(b)  Premises. The premises inside and outside shall be kept clean and free of vermin at all times. No animals, except for guide dogs accompanying blind persons, shall be allowed in the tattoo studio. Obsolete articles and other litter shall not be permitted to accumulate on the premises. 
(c)  Operating room facilities. Each tattoo/body piercing establishment shall have an operating room, which shall be separate and apart from a waiting room. Patrons or customers shall be tattooed only in the operating room. The operating room shall be equipped with hot and cold running, potable water, together with such sinks and basins as may be necessary. Furniture and furnishings used within the operating room shall be constructed of such materials as to permit proper cleansing with hot or cold disinfecting solutions. Work tables and chairs shall be provided for each tattoo/body piercing artist. There shall be proper ventilation to keep the area dry and air circulating. The use of a HEPA ventilator system is highly recommended. There shall be no smoking in operating room. 
(d)  Disinfection of workplace. The tattoo/body piercing operator must develop and implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination and tasks or procedures to be performed. This schedule must be documented and available for review upon request. The following procedures shall be adhered to: 
(1)  Clean and sanitize all equipment and work surfaces with an appropriate disinfectant after completion of tattoo/body piercing procedures and at the end of work shift when surfaces have become contaminated since the last cleaning. 
(2)  Remove and replace protective coverings such as paper sheeting, plastic wrap and aluminum foil after each tattoo procedure. 
(3)  Inspect and decontaminate, on a regular basis, reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have likelihood for becoming contaminated. 
(e)  Storage of tattooing equipment and materials. Tattoo/body piercing instruments, medicine, accessories, dyes, stencils and other materials used in tattooing that come in contact with the patron or customer shall be stored in closed containers, which shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each artist for the entire day and night of operation. When poisons such as Cidex, etc., are used in a tattoo establishment, separate facilities shall be provided specifically for the storage of these materials. 
(f)  Dyes and pigments. All dyes and pigments used in tattooing shall be from professional suppliers specifically providing dyes and/or pigments for the tattooing of human skin. In preparing dyes or pigments to be used by a tattoo artist, only nontoxic, sterile materials shall be used. Single-use or individual portions of dyes or pigments in clean, sterilized individual containers or single-use containers shall be used for each patron. After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use or individual containers shall be discarded along with the container. 
(g)  Regarding piercers jewelry. 
(1)  Client and piercer should have appropriate size and quality jewelry chosen before the procedure begins. 
(2)  Only appropriate jewelry should be used in piercing. Appropriate jewelry is made of implant grade, high quality surgical stainless steel (316 E series), solid 14k or 18k gold, niobium, titanium, platinum. Appropriate jewelry has no nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces which might endanger the tissues. 
(3)  Ear studs or other jewelry designed for earlobe piercing are not appropriate jewelry for other body parts and must not be used by piercers. 
(h)  Sterilization. 
(1)  Each tattoo establishment shall be equipped with a sterilizing device approved by the health authority. Used, non-disposable instruments shall be kept in a separate puncture-resistant container until brush-scrubbed in hot water and soap, and then sterilized by autoclaving. Autoclaves must be tested monthly by independent laboratories to ensure they are working adequately. Records shall be maintained for two years. 
(2)  The following procedures should be followed during the sterilization process: 
a.  Prior to being placed in the autoclave, all equipment shall be bagged, dated, and sealed. 
b.  Each autoclave bag may hold no more than one liner and shader tube with needle and bar inserted into tube. 
c.  To protect needle tips from damage, an appropriate sterile protective covering shall be placed on needle tip. 
d.  Instruments shall remain in the autoclave 55 minutes from a cold start. 
e.  If the process begins with a hot start, then instruments should be processed for 35 minutes. 
f.  To achieve proper sterilization, temperature must reach 273 degrees Fahrenheit and 15—30 psi. 
g.  Spore indicators shall be used with each load to ensure spore eradication. 
(i)  Age policy. No person under the age of 18 shall be tattooed/body pierced without written parental consent and notarized. No person under the age of 16 shall be tattooed/body pierced without written parental consent and notarized and in the presence of legal guardian. 
(j)  Alcohol/drug policy. Tattoo/body piercing artists shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing tattoo/body piercing procedures. A statement by the client attesting that he is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs shall be kept on file. 
(k)  Procedure when infection suspected. 
(1)  If an employee displays the symptoms of a communicable disease (jaundice, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, arthralgias), that employee shall be prohibited from working and the health authority notified. When the health authority has reasonable grounds to suspect that infection is being transmitted by any employee of an establishment, the local health authority is authorized to require any or all of the following measures: 
a.  The immediate exclusion of the employee from any activity with the potential for transmitting infection to clientele. 
b.  The immediate closing of the establishment concerned until the health authority determines no further danger of disease outbreak exists. 
c.  Adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his associates, with such laboratory examination as may be indicated. 
(2)  The health authority shall take prompt action to determine whether further danger of disease outbreak exists. 
(l)  Personal cleanliness of tattoo/body piercing artists. Prior to the start of the tattoo/body piercing procedure, the artist should inspect his hands; if a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Each tattoo/body piercing artist shall scrub his hands and forearms with soap and warm water, using an individual hand brush, clean his fingernails with an individual file or orange stick and thoroughly rinse his hands in a germicidal solution before working on each patron or customer. An individual disposable napkin shall be used for drying the tattoo/body piercing artist's hands and arms after rinsing. All jewelry such as watches, rings, etc., should be removed and nails trimmed prior to the start of the tattoo procedure. Single-use disposable latex examination gloves shall be worn during the tattooing process. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the application of the tattoo, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whenever their ability to function is compromised. Each tattoo/body piercing artist shall, while engaging in tattooing, wear a fresh disposable gown or clean coat. After each client, the artist must change into a fresh disposable gown or clean coat. Proper facilities shall be provided specifically for the storage of soiled uniforms and coats. No tattoo/body piercing artist and/or patron shall engage in the use of tobacco in any form while in the operating room. Tattoo/body piercing artists who are experiencing symptoms of diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, skin infections, or jaundice shall refrain from tattooing/body piercing activities. 
(m)  Preparation of area to be tattooed/body pierced. When it is necessary to shave the area to be tattooed/body pierced, only single-use disposable razors shall be used. After shaving the area to be tattooed/body pierced, or if the area does not need to be shaved, the site of the tattoo shall be cleaned with soap and warm water, rinsed with clean water and a germicidal solution applied in a sanitary manner before the design is placed on the skin. Other sterile, individual towels or gauze shall be used in preparing the site to be tattooed/body pierced, and properly disposed of after use on each patron. 
(n)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  Body piercers shall set up equipment in front of the client. 
(2)  Sealed autoclave bags containing any equipment required to be sterile shall be opened in front of the client, and the autoclave bag discarded. 
(3)  All jewelry contaminated with only airborne pathogens (not previously worn or contaminated) should be disinfected with a nonhazardous hard-surface disinfectant approved by the EPA. All jewelry contaminated or potentially contaminated with blood borne pathogens (previously worn by another person) should be autoclaved, stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(4)  All needles used in piercing must be pre-sterilized, used on one person, in one sitting, for single piercing and immediately disposed of in a medical sharps container. 
(5)  All forceps, tubes, etc., must be pre-sterilized, stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated, used on one person, in one sitting. After one such use, they must be autoclaved and stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(o)  Stencil for transferring design. The stencil for transferring the design to the skin shall be thoroughly cleaned, rinsed and sterilized in a germicidal solution approved by the health department following each use and shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition. 
(p)  Tattooing/body piercing procedures. A sterile set of needles shall be used for each patron or customer. Needles used in tattooing shall be sterilized by a hot or cold sterilization method, approved by the health department, after each use and, if not immediately used, stored in sterile containers. The open end of the needle tube of the tattooing machine shall be cleaned and sterilized in a similar method after each use. 
(q)  After tattoo application. Excess dye applied to the skin shall be removed with individual sterile gauze pads or sterile cotton only. The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. After the area has dried, a thick layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied. A bandage shall then be applied to the tattoo using sealed telfa (non-stick) pads. Written instructions, approved by the health authority, shall be given to each patron or customer on the care of the skin of the tattooed site to prevent infection after each tattooing. A copy of these instructions shall also be posted in a conspicuous place in the tattoo establishment, clearly visible to the person being tattooed. 
(r)  Disposal of waste. Needles, razors, or other sharp instruments used during tattoo procedures shall be placed in puncture-resistant, closed containers immediately after use. Needles shall not be purposely bent or broken, or otherwise manipulated by hand. Containers of sharp waste shall be sent to a facility where they are either incinerated or otherwise rendered nonhazardous. Disposable waste shall be placed in easily cleanable, closed containers provided with tight-fitting lids to prevent leakage or spillage. Disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of to minimize direct exposure of personnel or clients to waste materials. The containers shall be located as near as feasible to the area of use. 
(Code 1996, § 26-106; Ord. of 2-6-2001) 
Sec. 16-50. - Right of entry. 
The health authority shall have the right to enter at all reasonable times and inspect any known or suspected tattoo establishment for the purpose of investigating a known or suspected tattoo operation, but nothing in this article shall authorize entry into a private noncommercial dwelling without consent of the occupants or a proper warrant for such entry having been issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1996, § 26-107; Ord. of 2-6-2001) 
Sec. 16-51. - Enforcement by private citizens. 
Any person other than persons responsible for enforcement of this article may initiate legal action on his behalf against any person who is alleged to be in violation of any provision of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 26-108; Ord. of 2-6-2001) 
Sec. 16-52. - Right to appeal. 
Should any controversy arise regarding the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit required by this article, the person aggrieved may appeal to the county board of health for a hearing. No such hearing shall be held unless a written petition is filed in the office of the health director on or before the tenth day following the day on which the action or lack of action took place that caused the petitioner to be aggrieved. The written petition requesting the hearing must set out the grievance or grievances of the petitioner. Within seven working days of receipt of the petition, a hearing shall be held before the board. The findings of the board of health shall be final. 
(Code 1996, § 26-109; Ord. of 2-6-2001) 
Sec. 16-53. - Application to be tattooed required. 
All persons desiring to be tattooed shall apply in writing to the licensed tattoo parlor. No tattoo shall be given until 24 hours from the date of the initial application. 
(Code 1996, § 26-111; Ord. of 2-6-2001) 
Chapter 18 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 18-1. - Restricted uses of county-owned property or facilities. 
(a)  Purpose. The county board of commissioners desires to restrict county-owned property or facilities to certain uses and activities, so as to protect the health, welfare and safety of residents and persons using said property or facilities. 
(b)  After-hours use of county-owned property or facilities; violation. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use or otherwise be in any manner upon any county-owned property or facilities during hours of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m., except when: 
(1)  Such person or persons are a participant in or attending a public meeting, or other such meetings as sanctioned by the county board of commissioners, or any county department(s). 
(2)  Such person or persons are a participant in or a spectator at an event sponsored or sanctioned by the county board of commissioners, or any county department(s). 
(3)  Such person or persons are using said tennis facilities for the purpose of playing or practicing said game. 
(4)  Such person or persons are launching or retrieving water craft on boat ramps or public landings. 
(c)  Possession of alcoholic beverages on county-owned property or facilities is prohibited; violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage upon property owned or leased by the county; said property to include, but not limited to, county parks, recreational facilities and governmental buildings. For the purposes of this section, the term "alcoholic beverage" shall mean and include all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine and fortified wine, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended. 
(Code 1996, §§ 23-101—23-103; Ord. of 6-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-2. - Firing of weapons in residential and county-owned property; firing of weapons at night. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the firing of weapons on most residential and county-owned property; to define terms; and to provide jurisdiction. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County-owned property means any real estate in which the county owns an interest, fee simple, leasehold, or otherwise, and that is also designated as real estate owned by the county either by sign on the real estate or on any building. This includes, but is not limited to, county office complexes, courthouse, or recreational areas. 
Night means between the hours of 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise. 
Residential area means any and all real estate zoned AR-2.5, AR-1.5, AR-1, R-20, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4, as defined in article XI of the county zoning ordinance, and any lot of five acres or less zoned A-5. 
(c)  Jurisdiction. This section shall be effective and applicable in the county, outside the corporate limits of any municipality therein. 
(d)  Firing of weapons in a residential area prohibited. On and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, it shall be unlawful for any person to fire or use a weapon in a residential area unless such person is a law enforcement officer discharging his duties or a citizen defending his home, property, person, or liberty against threatened or imminent attack. 
(e)  Firing of weapons on county-owned property. On and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, it shall be unlawful for any person to fire or use a weapon on county-owned property unless such person is a law enforcement officer discharging his duties. 
(f)  Firing of weapons at night. On and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, it shall be unlawful for any person to fire or use a weapon at night unless such person is a law enforcement officer discharging his duties or a citizen defending his home, property, person, or liberty against threatened or imminent attack, or as permitted by regulations of the state department of natural resources. 
(g)  Turkey shoots. This section shall be inapplicable to permitted shoots. Permitted turkey shoots are defined as those authorized in advance by the county's planning and zoning department on submission by an applicant of a form designated by the department and on an applicant's payment of a fee as established by the board. 
(Code 1996, §§ 108-101—18-107; Ord. of 1-9-2007) 
State Law reference— Local firearms ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-173. 
Sec. 18-3. - Breach of peace. 
(a)  Violations. A person commits the offense of breach of the peace when such person commits any of the following in a public or private place: 
(1)  Tumultuous acts, that is, noisy and disorderly conduct. 
(2)  Acts that infringe on the person or property of another so as to place such person or property in danger of being injured, damaged or destroyed. 
(3)  Opprobrious conduct or epithets, such as that expressing or carrying a sense of disgrace or contemptuous scorn. 
(4)  Obstreperous conduct, such as being noisily and stubbornly defiant and aggressively boisterous. 
(5)  Engaging in any fracas infringing on the rights of others or directing fighting words toward another, that is, words that by their very nature tend to incite a breach of peace. 
(6)  Being at a place and acting in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property. 
(7)  Interfere, by acts, deeds or words, with the lawful pursuit of another's life, liberty or occupation by harassment or other means. 
(8)  Congregate with others or another in or on a public or private place or way, so as to halt or hinder the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(9)  Disrupt, by actions that tend to incite a breach of the peace, the activities of any lawful meeting, gathering, procession, or event. 
(10)  Disregarding the safety of others through any act of omission. 
(11)  Mistreat, either intentionally or through neglect or omission, any animal owned by the offender or any other person or entity, public or private. 
(12)  Appear in any public place or private business premises patronized by the public in any state of being or condition when such state of being or condition causes disruptive or annoying behavior that interferes with the lawful pursuits of others. 
(13)  Discharge a weapon, except as permitted by state law or ordinance. 
(14)  Permit or allow dogs to go beyond their owner's property onto the property of others, either public or private, or take no action to stop dogs from going beyond their owner's property onto the property of others, either public or private. 
(15)  Permit or allow dogs to bark to the extent of being a nuisance to residents of property adjacent to or in the vicinity of the property on which the barking dog is situated or take no action to stop such barking. 
(16)  Permit or allow dogs to deposit excrement beyond their owner's property or take no action to stop such depositing or excrement beyond their owner's property. 
(17)  Either intentionally, or through neglect or omission, allows or permits a dog or pet to attack another dog or pet which results in the maiming or death of said dog or pet. 
(b)  No effect on state law. This section shall not be deemed or construed to affect or limit the enforcement of any state law. 
(Code 1996, §§ 24-106, 24-107; Ord. of 6-2-1998; Ord. of 5-4-1999) 
Chapter 20 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Highways, bridges and ferries, O.C.G.A. title 32. 

Chapter 22 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL AND SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq. 

Sec. 22-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biomedical wastes means pathological waste, biological waste cultures and stocks of infection agents and associated biologicals, contaminated animal carcasses (body parts, their bedding, and other wastes from such animals), sharps, chemotherapy waste, discarded medical equipment and parts, not including supplies and materials which have not been decontaminated, and other such waste materials. 
Business trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to business operations. 
Codes enforcement officer means the person or persons authorized by the board of commissioners to issue citations to violators of this article or any other county ordinance. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Containers (dumpsters) means any bulk device used for the collection of garbage, refuse, trash and litter, commonly referred to as a dumpster. 
Construction/demolition wastes means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings, and other structures. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste containing asbestos, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper, cardboard, and other nonputrescible wastes associated with construction and demolition activities which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. Inert waste landfill materials approved by the board for disposal in landfills permitted by rule and regulation are also included in this definition if disposed in a construction or demolition waste landfill. 
Construction/demolition waste landfill means any facility or disposal site where any treatment, utilization, processing, storage, or disposal of solid wastes, other than putrescible wastes, occurs and such wastes are disposed of on land by placing any earth cover thereon. 
Convenience center means an area designated by or owned by the county and used for the collection of solid waste or recyclable materials from the residents of the county. 
County means the duly authorized governing body of the county, or the geographical area of the county, outside the corporate limits of any incorporated municipality therein. 
Dumpster means a bulk container used for the collection of garbage, refuse, trash and litter. The use of this term is generic, and does not refer to a bulk container manufactured by a specific manufacturer. 
Garbage means the byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gasses or odors, or which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Garbage bag means a plastic (or other similar non-porous material) bag or sack designed specifically to contain garbage or household trash in a secure air-tight manner. Such bags shall also include suitable means of closure to ensure that the material contained therein is not exposed to the outside air. 
Hazardous waste means any substance listed as a hazardous constituent in regulations promulgated pursuant to the federal act by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency which are in force and effect on February 1, 1992, codified as appendix VIII to 40 CFR 261, Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste, and subsequent changes. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste regulated under the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.). Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: electrical power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food and related products and byproducts; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. The term "industrial waste" does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Junked vehicles means any wrecked or inoperable automobile, truck or other vehicle, or vehicle which does not bear a current license plate. 
Landfill, municipal, means any facility or disposal site where any treatment, utilization, processing, storage, or disposal of solid wastes, including putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, occurs and such wastes are disposed of on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Litter means all garbage, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals, or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Monitor means the person or persons authorized by the board of commissioners to inspect and patrol the areas where compactors or dumpsters are located in the county, and the roads and streets of the county. 
Parking lot means: 
(1)  An area, whether paved or unpaved, designated, reserved or used for the reserved parking of motor vehicles, excluding street parking, which has more than ten parking spaces or can accommodate more than ten parked vehicles; 
(2)  Any commercial parking lot or garage; and 
(3)  The driveway, drive-through, parking spaces or other paved areas adjacent to convenience stores, gas stations, restaurants and other retail establishments. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road, street or highway; and any body of water or watercourse or the shores of beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being quickly decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to, kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, dead animals, garbage, and wastes which are contaminated by such wastes. 
Recycling means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Road or street shall be mutually inclusive, and shall likewise be deemed to include any alley, lane, court and other thoroughfare, however described or designated. 
Rubbish includes waste paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metal cans, glass, packing material and similar material. 
Scavenger or scavenging means any unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded solid waste materials from landfills, containers, dumpsters or from convenience centers. 
Sharps means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, items such as needles, IV tubing and syringes with needles attached, and scalpel blades. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a water waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 STAT. 923). 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative material resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Code 1996, § 6-102) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Sec. 22-20. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county, to protect the environment, to enhance the physical quality of life in the county, and to contribute by these efforts to improving the quality of life in the county and enhancing the natural beauty of our state and county by establishing minimum standards for the storage, collection, transportation and disposal of solid wastes that originate in the county, or which originate outside of the county but are stored, transported or disposed of with the county, and by establishing the mechanism by which these standards are enforced. 
(Code 1996, § 6-101) 
Sec. 22-21. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this article or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished by one or more of the following: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00; 
(2)  By imprisonment for a period of not more than 60 days; 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the magistrate court in which a conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; 
(4)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the magistrate court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he had deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(5)  The magistrate court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(Code 1996, § 6-129; Ord. of 6-9-2015) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
Sec. 22-22. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcing officer. 
(1)  The board of commissioners shall name an employee(s) of the county to oversee all matters concerning the enforcement of this article; such person to be known as the code enforcement officer(s). 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall name a person(s) to be a monitor. Such monitor shall patrol, inspect and monitor dumpster and container sites to ensure compliance with this article. The monitor(s) shall report their findings to the code enforcement officer described in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  The code enforcement officer, the sheriff and any deputy of the county sheriff's office shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provision of this article or to the owner or any other person who may be in possession of any property upon which any condition exists which constitutes a violation of any provision of this article. Such citation shall be on a form approved for such use by the board of commissioners and shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the representative of the county who completes and serves it. 
(b)  Rebuttable presumptions. 
(1)  Whenever solid waste is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. In the case of a commercial or private hauler if the operator is unknown, then it shall be prima facie evidence that the company or owner of the service has violated this article. 
(2)  Whenever any solid wastes which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. If such person can show that he lawfully gave possession, custody and control of such solid wastes to another person, then he shall make a sworn statement to such effect, supported by any documentary evidence available, at which point the presumption shall shift to such other person(s). 
(3)  Whenever this article is violated by an employee or agent, then the employer or principal shall be rebuttably presumed to have violated this article unless and until he shall provide a sworn statement providing the name, address and telephone number of the employee or agent who violated this article, the basis of the employer's or principal's knowledge of which individual violated this article, and a statement to the effect that the employee or agent acted outside the scope of his employment or agency. 
(4)  If a person accused of violating this article on the basis of the rebuttable presumptions created in subsections (b)(1) through (3) of this section shall demonstrate by sworn testimony that another person had control of such litter, then the presumption shall shift to such other person. 
(5)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall thereafter be arrested on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(Code 1996, § 6-128) 
Sec. 22-23. - Containers/dumpsters. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall designate areas in the county where containers/dumpsters intended to be for public use shall be located and maintained. These containers/dumpsters shall be located on public property, along the right-of-way of public roads on streets, on private property with the express written consent of the owner and tenant in legal possession of the property, and shall be located in such a manner that there is a minimum danger of the spread of noxious odors and the detrimental effect on the environment is minimal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons not a resident of the county to place or deposit any garbage, refuse, litter, household trash or other material of any kind in these containers/dumpsters. The containers/dumpsters shall carry a placard or sign stating that they are solely intended for the use of residents of the county, and that it is unlawful to deposit anything other than garbage or household trash therein. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to place or deposit industrial waste or construction/demolition wastes in these containers/dumpsters unless they are specifically designated for such use by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to place or deposit any hazardous solid wastes of any kind in the containers/dumpsters. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or discard in the containers/dumpsters any hypodermic injection devices before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse, any hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device and without safeguarding the disposal thereof by wrapping or securing same in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(f)  Ashes may not be deposited in the container/dumpster. 
(g)  No highly combustible liquid shall be placed or deposited in the container/dumpster. 
(h)  No material or substance governed or regulated as a noxious or toxic material by any governmental agency or which would pose a hazard to the health, safety and well-being of the collection personnel or residents of the county, or which could contaminate the groundwater or surface water of the county, or which would pose a danger to the wildlife of the county, shall be placed or deposited in the container/dumpster. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to place or deposit any garbage or household trash in the container/dumpster without first placing and securing such in a garbage bag of suitable strength and thickness. Objects which could puncture the garbage bag in the course of the ordinary and intended use thereof shall be wrapped or protected so that the bag shall remain intact. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful to place or deposit garbage or household trash on the ground adjacent to the container/dumpster or in any location other than the container/dumpster, unless otherwise directed and except that recyclable materials may be placed in designated containers where provided. Any person using the container/dumpster shall clean up any spills caused by his use of the container/dumpster and shall not drop or discard any garbage or household trash in the area surrounding the containers/dumpsters. 
(k)  Dead or live animals shall not be placed or deposited in or around the containers/dumpsters. 
(Code 1996, § 6-103) 
Sec. 22-24. - Public municipal, construction/demolition or inert waste landfill. 
(a)  The county, through the board of commissioners, may operate and maintain public landfills located on county property in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations, and may adopt procedures, rules and regulations to govern the operation and use of these landfills. 
(b)  Public sites approved for the disposal of solid wastes shall be identified by appropriate directional signs posted near the roadside and at the location of the county landfills. 
(c)  Such sites shall be maintained in use until permanently closed, at which time, additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting and through public advertisements. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall restrict certain sites or portions thereof to a specific type or types of solid waste. The board of commissioners may adopt operational policies concerning the separation, storage and use of recyclable materials. Citizens are encouraged to practice source separation of specific types of solid wastes for disposal at specific sites by different methods. 
(e)  Commercial collectors, including yard maintenance men, may use the public designated landfills upon the payment of applicable fees, if any, established by the board of commissioners. 
(f)  Residents of the county and businesses located in the county, other than commercial collectors, may use the public designated landfills upon payment of a fee to be set by the board of commissioners, in accordance with the regulations for the particular site and under the instruction of the site attendant. 
(g)  Municipalities located within the county may use the public landfills upon payment of applicable fees, if any, established by the board of commissioners. 
(h)  No solid wastes generated outside the county will be accepted at any disposal site operated by the county unless approved by a specific, affirmative act of the county commission through amendment of this article or adoption of superseding regulation. 
(i)  Authorized public disposal sites shall be operated on the days established from time to time by the board of commissioners. During the hours designated by the board of commissioners, acceptable solid wastes generated in the county shall be received for disposal from any resident of the county. 
(j)  No person shall enter a disposal site except when an attendant is present and during the hours and days prescribed. All materials delivered and deposited for disposal in a disposal site shall immediately become the property of the county, unless the county refuses any such materials at the time presented for deposit in the disposal site, or the county, within a reasonable time, notifies the depositor of the unacceptableness of the materials and to retrieve the materials. 
(Code 1996, § 6-104) 
Sec. 22-25. - Private collection and disposal. 
(a)  Private collectors. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect solid wastes within the county except from his own residence, business or industrial plant, without first having obtained a proper permit from the state department of natural resources and the county, and without first having paid the appropriate occupation tax in the state. This provision shall not prohibit the utilization of centralized recycling collection facilities by persons not in the business of recycling. Commercial recyclers must pay the aforementioned tax in the state. 
(b)  Private landfills. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a landfill, waste disposal area, or waste storage area intended to be used or used by others for the disposal or storage of waste without first having obtained a proper permit from the state department of natural resources and the county. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued by the county until the applicant has shown, to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners, that all federal, state, and county regulations and ordinances will be complied with in the operation and management of the landfill, waste disposal area, or waste storage area, and that there is no or only minimal detriment to the environment, including, but not limited to, noxious odors, runoff, or contamination of surface water and groundwater, so that the maximum protection is afforded to the health, safety and well-being of the citizens of the county. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued except by resolution of the board of commissioners after notice of the application has been published by the applicant in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. Such notice of the application shall run in the newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks before the meeting of the board of commissioners at which the application is to be considered. The notice shall contain a description of the property whereon the landfill, waste disposal area, or waste storage area is to be located, the names of the owner or owners of such property, the names of the operator or operators of the landfill, waste disposal area, or waste storage area, and a description of the types of waste to be handled at said facility. 
(e)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health. 
(f)  The board of commissioners hereby designates its code enforcement officer as its designee who shall have the right to enter a private disposal site at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting the site to determine whether or not the site is in compliance with this article and all other pertinent laws and regulations of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 6-105) 
Sec. 22-26. - Private litter control. 
(a)  Commercial establishments. 
(1)  Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any commercial, institutional or industrial building or property shall be obligated, jointly and severally, to provide solid wastes containers of that character, size, number and type as may be specified by the board of commissioners or its designee to be reasonably required to hold solid wastes generated by operations on the premises. Specifically, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the requirement for those containers shall apply to shopping centers, supermarkets, convenience stores, fast food restaurants, service stations and similar establishments; and shall likewise apply to commercial establishments, garages, schools, colleges and churches. 
(2)  All commercial and industrial establishments shall store their solid wastes in containers as specified in this article so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about their establishments. Approved methods of containerization shall include solid wastes receptacles, bulk containers and detachable containers. Any spillage or overflow shall be immediately cleaned up by said establishment. 
(b)  Parking lots. 
(1)  All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide solid wastes receptacles. The county or its designee shall have the authority to determine the number and types of receptacles necessary to provide proper containerization, based on guidelines adopted and maintained, as amended from time to time, by the county or its designee. Such receptacles shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his agent to collect the solid wastes and trash deposited in such containers and store this material in a location until collected by a private hauler or to otherwise dispose of the same. 
(2)  It shall be the obligation of all persons using the parking areas to place any litter in receptacles or containers and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, scatter, or throw on any parking lot, any solid wastes, garbage or trash of any kind. 
(3)  The owner and the tenant in possession of any parking lot or establishment with a parking lot shall collect and remove on a regular basis all loose solid wastes, garbage, litter or trash of any kind from the parking lot and open area of the premises and shall maintain surveillance to ensure that all solid wastes is placed in the proper container and the area is kept in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. 
(c)  Loading and unloading areas. All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with solid wastes receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The owner or occupant of the commercial establishment shall be responsible for the placement of the number of containers in said area necessary to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. The number of such containers to be placed in service for a particular establishment shall be determined by the county or its designee, based on guidelines adopted and maintained, as amended from time to time, by the county or its designee. The occupant of the premises shall maintain surveillance to ensure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. 
(d)  Construction sites and demolition sites. All construction and demolition contractors shall provide on-site solid wastes receptacles, bulk containers, or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap construction/demolition wastes, and other trash produced by those working at the construction site. The site shall be kept in as litter-free condition as reasonably practicable. The number of solid wastes receptacles or bulk containers, or detachable containers, shall be determined by the size of the job, based on guidelines adopted and maintained, as amended from time to time, by the county or its designee. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris upon any public or private property belonging to a person other than the owner of the construction site shall be removed by the contractor as generated. Building material originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of new buildings, alterations or additions to an existing building of whatever type or from demolition of existing structures shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. All solid wastes from construction and related activities shall be kept on site in such a manner as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about the site. 
(e)  Residences and private properties. 
(1)  Every owner, occupant, tenant and lessee using or occupying a residence, apartment, duplex, or other dwelling, jointly and severally, are required to remove all litter, solid wastes, household trash, garbage and other solid wastes and dispose of the same by depositing in a public landfill or public container in accordance with this article or by placing in proper containers in a suitable place readily accessible to sanitation collection crews or contracting with a private hauler to collect the same on a regular basis, but at least once each week. Where collection is conducted by means of curbside pickup, the containers shall be placed at the curb for pickup no earlier than 24 hours prior to the scheduled pickup time and shall be removed from the curb no later than 24 hours after the scheduled pickup time. 
(2)  All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in litter free condition as reasonably practicable. 
(3)  No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk accumulation of litter from any building or property. 
(Code 1996, § 6-106) 
State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq. 
Sec. 22-27. - Practices and procedures. 
(a)  General. The following practices and procedures shall be employed by persons in the county in order to facilitate the collection of solid waste: 
(1)  Solid waste. All solid waste shall be placed and maintained in containers as specified herein. All containers shall be maintained at all times with tight-fitting lids or covers. 
(2)  Garbage. All garbage placed in containers for collection shall be wrapped, bagged, or enclosed in paper or plastic materials. 
(3)  Household trash. Household trash may be combined with other bagged garbage. 
(4)  Injurious trash items. All waste material of an injurious nature, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes, and television tubes, shall be securely packaged and wrapped for the purpose of preventing injury to the collection crews or other parties. 
(b)  Unlawful to dump, deposit, etc., solid waste on any road, street or public or private property of the county. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of solid wastes on any road or street or any public or private property in the county, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or county or by any of their agencies for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle, container, or dumpster installed on such property and designated for the disposal of litter. 
(c)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of solid wastes and trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property except with the written consent of the owner thereof, and then only in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any solid wastes, trash, solid wastes receptacles, or containers on, over or near any storm drain or drainage ditch, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(e)  Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation of solid wastes or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Failure of the owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of solid wastes after appropriate notice from the board of commissioners or its designee shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this article. 
(f)  Use of streets. The operator of any vehicle from which any material or solid wastes is thrown, dropped, spilled or blow shall stop and retrieve such material and solid wastes. 
(g)  Junk. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling, any dilapidated furniture, appliances, machinery, equipment, building material, junked motor vehicle, or other item which in a partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled, or inoperative condition, and which is not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. Any such item or items which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of 30 days after notice of violation of this article shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the county without further notice. The county may charge the owner or occupant a fee for the cost of removing said item or items. This subsection on junk shall not apply to licensed junk dealers or currently licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvaging of equipment or furniture, unless stated in county ordinances. 
(h)  Scavenging. No person shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing solid wastes pending its collection, or remove any contents therefrom or remove such container from its location. 
(i)  Scattering of solid wastes and littering. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Throw or deposit any solid wastes on any public or private street or to scatter such solid wastes or litter on public or private property; 
(2)  Throw or deposit any solid wastes, trash, or debris in any marsh area, stream, drainage ditch, body of water or beach area. 
(Code 1996, § 6-107) 
Sec. 22-28. - Contagious disease solid wastes. 
The removal of clothing, bedding or other solid wastes from any place where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be decontaminated prior to removal under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such solid wastes shall not be placed in receptacles or bulk containers for collection until decontaminated. 
(Code 1996, § 6-108) 
Sec. 22-29. - Hypodermic instruments. 
No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of use. Such items should be further safeguarded by wrapping or securing same in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury or infection to the collection personnel or other parties. 
(Code 1996, § 6-109) 
Sec. 22-30. - Hazardous waste, industrial waste and building material. 
No hazardous waste, industrial waste or building material shall be placed in any receptacle at any time. The county shall not be required to collect any hazardous waste or building materials. These hazardous wastes shall be secured against the possibility of causing injury to any person and shall not be placed on public property or private property without the written consent of the state environmental protection division and the owner thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 6-110) 
Sec. 22-31. - Yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings shall be composted on the owner's premises in conformity with this article and any applicable state law or removed by the owner of the property and disposed of in a manner approved by this article. This part shall not require the removal of wood cut and/or stored for later use as firewood. 
(Code 1996, § 6-111) 
Sec. 22-32. - Trees, shrubbery branches, etc. 
Trees and shrubbery branches, limbs and trimmings cut by landscape or tree service contractors or other commercial workmen or resulting from land being cleared shall be composted on the owner's premises in conformity with this article and any applicable state law or collected and removed by those who have performed the work or shall be removed by the person for whom the work was performed. 
(Code 1996, § 6-112) 
Sec. 22-33. - Leaves. 
Leaves may be composted on the owner's premises in conformity with this article and any applicable state law or removed by the owner of the property and disposed of in a manner approved by this article. 
(Code 1996, § 6-113; Ord. of 4-6-2004) 
Sec. 22-34. - Receptacles and containers. 
(a)  Every person in possession, charge or control of any building or from which business trash, industrial waste or other waste is accumulated or produced shall provide and keep in a suitable place readily accessible to licensed private collectors receptacles and containers suitable for the storage of all such waste materials which will normally accumulate between the established collection dates. This provision shall not be construed to require such persons to use the services of a licensed private collector for solid wastes removal so long as each person ensures the removal and disposal of such solid wastes in a manner permitted by this article at least as frequently as private collector's normal schedule for the area, but in any event at least once each week. 
(b)  All receptacles and containers as required by this article shall be constructed of an opaque, non-porous material such as metals, hard plastics or similar materials of safe construction and design and shall be maintained in good, orderly and serviceable condition at all times. Any receptacle or container which does not conform to the requirements of this article, or which has ragged or sharp edges or any other defects likely to hamper of injure the person collecting the contents therefrom or the public generally, shall be promptly replaced by the user thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 6-114) 
Sec. 22-35. - Household furniture and furnishings. 
Property owners, themselves or using public or private haulers, shall remove normal household furniture and appliances, including sofas, chairs, beds, refrigerators, washers, dryers, hot water heaters, and similar items. These items shall be disposed of in conformity with this article and any applicable state law. 
(Code 1996, § 6-115) 
Sec. 22-36. - Cardboard boxes and cartons. 
Prior to depositing cardboard boxes and cartons for collection in authorized containers or receptacles or in commercial containers, the person disposing of any such boxes or cartons or the person in charge of the premises shall collapse all cardboard boxes and cartons. 
(Code 1996, § 6-116) 
Sec. 22-37. - Maintenance. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private property and the tenant in possession of any private property, jointly and severally, to keep the property in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health. 
(Code 1996, § 6-118) 
Sec. 22-38. - Burning. 
No garbage, solid wastes, litter or other trash shall be burned as a private means of disposal except leaves, trimmings and the like. These items may be burned if a burn permit is first obtained from the state forestry commission. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit commercial incinerators where appropriate and necessary approval from county, state and federal authorities are required. 
(Code 1996, § 6-119) 
Sec. 22-39. - Handbills and advertising matter. 
In addition to the activities declared to be in violation of this article, the following activities are hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this article: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to place in or on any automobile in the county any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, or other literature unless the same is secured so as to prevent wind-driven debris and unsightly litter. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place on any private property any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard, newspaper or other literature or advertising device, unless the following conditions are met: no such publication shall be thrown, dropped or otherwise placed upon public right-of-way. 
(Code 1996, § 6-120) 
Sec. 22-40. - Dead animals. 
(a)  Any person who owns or is caring for an animal which has died or has been killed shall dispose of said dead animal in the manner provided for under state law. 
(b)  The term "dead animals" means the carcasses, parts of carcasses, effluence, or blood of farm livestock, including poultry and equines, except where dead animals are found within the rights-of-way of all highways within the state maintained either totally or in part with state funds, in which case the term "dead animals" means the carcasses or parts of carcasses of all animals, regardless of whether they are considered to be farm livestock, poultry, equines, domesticated animals, pets, or any other type of animal and includes all such animals regardless of the cause of death of such animals. 
(c)  Acceptable methods for disposal of dead animals are burning, burial, or rendering. It is the duty of the state department of transportation to remove and dispose of dead animals found within the rights-of-way of state highways. It shall be the road department's responsibility to remove and dispose of dead animals found within the rights-of-way of county roads. Where dead animals are found outside of the rights-of-way of state highways, no person shall dispose of a dead animal by burial or burning on the land of another without the permission of the owner of the land. Arrangements for proper burial or burning must be made with an appropriate county official prior to disposal of a dead animal in a county municipal landfill. 
(Code 1996, § 6-121) 
Sec. 22-41. - Composting. 
Composting is an acceptable means of handling yard trash, tree and shrubbery trimmings, leaves, grass clippings or other organic wastes produced by landscaping and lawn maintenance activities. Composting shall be performed in a manner to minimize offensive odors and prevent escape of wind-blown litter from the compost site. Composting activities shall be conducted so as not to constitute a nuisance to neighboring property owners. 
(Code 1996, § 6-122) 
Sec. 22-42. - Lead acid vehicle batteries. 
No person shall place or dispose of a lead acid vehicle battery in any container, dumpster, or landfill located in the county, or otherwise discard or dispose of a lead acid vehicle battery except by delivery to a battery retailer or wholesaler, to a secondary lead smelter, or to a collection or recovered materials processing facility that accepts lead acid vehicle batteries. 
(Code 1996, § 6-123) 
Sec. 22-43. - Motor oil. 
No person shall place or dispose of motor oil in any container, dumpster, or landfill located in the county, or otherwise discard or dispose of motor oil except by delivery to a county recycling collection facility or a disposal facility authorized and specifically designed to accept motor oil. 
(Code 1996, § 6-124) 
Sec. 22-44. - Recyclable material. 
The collection, transportation, handling, storage and conversion of recyclable materials shall be permitted so long as such activities conform to the requirements of federal, state and county laws or rules. 
(Code 1996, § 6-125) 
Sec. 22-45. - Biomedical wastes. 
All biomedical wastes shall be handled and disposed of in accordance with the rules of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division and the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.). 
(Code 1996, § 6-126) 
Sec. 22-46. - Community health and welfare. 
(a)  Declared nuisances. Within the county, it shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance on his property or property occupied by him, or to allow a nuisance to remain on his property or property occupied by him. Dead animals, stagnant water, decayed vegetables or fruits, filthy privies or unkept stables or anything having an offensive odor, or anything that causes injury or damage to the health or life of any other person, are declared nuisances. 
(b)  Trash and weeds. 
(1)  Within the county, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain his premises, including vacant lots or land, in such a way as to allow trash, garbage or miscellaneous solid wastes to accumulate if the condition of the property causes a nuisance, or causes injury to the health or welfare of residents in the vicinity, or causes injury to neighboring property. Drive-in restaurants and other food establishments that permit carry-out food service shall maintain at all times on their premises sufficient receptacles for the disposal of trash, garbage and miscellaneous solid wastes. 
(2)  Within the county, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, cause or permit uncut grass or weeds on any property on which is located a residential dwelling or commercial establishment or vacant property intended for such use under such circumstances that the grass or weeds become a breeding place for insects, rodents or reptiles, or constitute a fire hazard. 
(Code 1996, § 6-127) 
Secs. 22-47—22-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE COLLECTORS 

Sec. 22-66. - Title. 
The title of this article shall be "The Bryan County for Hire Garbage Collectors Ordinance." 
(Code 1996, § 6-201) 
Sec. 22-67. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
For hire garbage collectors means and includes all persons, firms, partnerships, limited or otherwise, corporations and other business entities engaged in the collection and/or pickup of trash, rubbish, garbage and any other waste materials from any home, residence, apartment, mobile home park, condominium, plant, factory, warehouse, or any other dwelling or group of dwellings or place of business in the unincorporated areas of the county in exchange for a fee or any other monetary consideration. 
(Code 1996, § 6-202) 
Sec. 22-68. - Jurisdiction. 
This article shall be effective and applicable in the county outside the corporate limits of any municipality therein. 
(Code 1996, § 6-203) 
Sec. 22-69. - Rules and regulations. 
Original jurisdiction for all violations of this article shall be in the magistrate's court of the county. The following rules and regulations are hereby established and shall govern the conduct and operation of each and every for hire garbage collector operating in the county outside the corporate limits of any municipality: 
(1)  All such businesses operating hereunder must fully comply with all sanitary requirements promulgated by the county health department. 
(2)  All trash, rubbish, garbage and any other waste materials collected by for hire garbage collectors must be dumped, unloaded or otherwise discharged in the county's permitted landfills, or other permitted regional facilities. It shall be illegal for hired garbage collectors to deposit waste collected in the county maintained dumpster sites. 
(3)  All trash, rubbish, garbage and any other waste materials collected by for hire garbage collectors must not be dumped, unloaded or otherwise discharged in the county except during the times set by a time schedule for such dumping by the governing authority of the county. 
(4)  All for hire garbage collectors must follow all rules promulgated by the environmental protection division (EPD) to obtain and maintain a permit for hauling waste materials within the boundaries of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 6-204) 
Sec. 22-70. - Possession and reading of article. 
It shall be the duty of the management of all for hire garbage collectors to maintain a copy of this article and to instruct all employees on the terms thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 6-206) 
Chapter 24 - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1—24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DISTRICT 

Sec. 24-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business premises means any place of business operation, including, but not limited to, offices, warehouses, sheds, stores, and any other such location where commercial activity takes place. 
Dwelling means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, including, but not limited to, manufactured homes, relocatable homes or mobile homes. 
Firefighting services means the transportation of fire department equipment to a parcel and the actions of fire department personnel to extinguish a fire on said parcel. 
Improvement means any structure attached to or situated on real property, including, but not limited to, office buildings, stores, factories, barns or garages. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
Parcel means a lot or tract of land situated in the county located without the limits of incorporated municipalities therein and which has been assigned a property identification number by the county tax assessor for the year in which the special fire assessment authorized herein is made. 
(Code 1996, § 16-102; Ord. of 12-22-1994) 
Sec. 24-20. - Purpose. 
As provided for in article IX, section II, paragraph VI of the Constitution of the state, there is hereby established a special district to be known as the "Bryan County Fire District" and consisting of the area of the county located without the limits of incorporated municipalities therein as the same shall from time to time exist. 
(Code 1996, § 16-101; Ord. of 12-22-1994) 
Sec. 24-21. - Fire prevention and fighting services provided. 
Within the county fire district, the county shall provide fire prevention, firefighting services and firefighting operations as it may from time to time determine, including, but not limited to, the provision of such services by contract or in cooperation with any municipalities within the county or with any other fire protection entity. 
(Code 1996, § 16-103; Ord. of 12-22-1994) 
Sec. 24-22. - Disposition of proceeds of special fire assessment. 
Proceeds from the special fire assessment so levied shall be deposited in a special fund and accounted for separately from other tax funds of the county and shall be used exclusively for operation of fire departments, including, but not limited to, the acquisition of realty, the construction of buildings, the acquisition of equipment, the payment of personnel services and administrative costs, the performance of firefighting services, and the maintenance, repair, remodeling, improvement, and replacement of land, buildings and equipment as the same from time to time shall be deemed necessary (collectively "firefighting operations"); provided, however, that the county may from time to time determine to use revenue sharing or other tax revenues and grants to defray the cost of any of such items either in whole or in part. 
(Code 1996, § 16-104; Ord. of 12-22-1994) 
Sec. 24-23. - Billing. 
(a)  The cost of fire prevention, firefighting services and firefighting operations as defined herein shall be established annually for the county fire district by the board of commissioners of the county ("board") and shall be an assessment against all parcels of real property in the county fire district upon which one or more dwellings or business premises are situated ("taxable parcels"). If more than one dwelling or business premises is situated on a taxable parcel, then the amount of special fire assessment shall be assessed against all such dwellings or business premises. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, when the manufactured home, relocatable home or mobile home situated on a taxable parcel is not owned by the owner of such taxable parcel, the special fire assessment shall be assessed against the owner of such manufactured home, relocatable home or mobile home and no permit required pursuant to county or state law shall be issued for such manufactured home, relocatable home or mobile home for which such permit is sought until the special fire assessment due thereon has been paid in full. 
(c)  If a dwelling is not situated within the county on January 1 of any calendar year commencing January 1, 1997, or if construction of a dwelling is not completed and the dwelling occupied on January 1 of any calendar year commencing January 1, 1997, then the owner of the taxable parcel on which said dwelling is situated or, in the case of a manufactured home, mobile home or relocatable home described in subsection (b) of this section, the owner of such manufactured home, mobile home or relocatable home shall pay a portion of the special fire assessment due on such dwelling as established by the board depending on the date of which such dwelling is either moved into the county or completed and occupied, as the case may be. 
(Code 1996, § 16-105; Ord. of 12-22-1994; Ord. of 12-19-1996; Ord. of 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 24-24. - Collection. 
The special fire assessment shall be collected by the tax commissioner of the county or such other official as the board shall designate and may be enforced by the issuance of fi. fas. or executions for said assessments in the same manner and with the same lien dignity and priority as fi. fas. or executions are issued for state and county taxes. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the tax commissioner or such other official as the board shall designate shall be authorized to enforce the collection of the special fire assessment in the same manner as authorized by O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 48-3-1 et seq.) and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-44 for the collection and payment of taxes, fees, or assessments. The board may also establish additional charges for late payment and assess any costs incurred in collecting delinquent assessments and may establish and compel compliance with reasonable rules and regulations for the provision of firefighting operations and firefighting services. 
(Code 1996, § 16-106; Ord. of 12-22-1994) 
Sec. 24-25. - Use of special fire assessments restricted. 
No part of the revenues derived from the special fire assessments levied upon property located in the county fire district shall be used for any purpose other than those specified in this article and no part of the ad valorem revenues derived by the county from property located within the corporate limits of municipalities shall be used for such purposes. It is the intent of the board that neither property located within the limits of municipalities nor the owners thereof shall in any wise be required to support the firefighting operations without the corporate limits of such municipalities. 
(Code 1996, § 16-107; Ord. of 12-22-1994) 
Sec. 24-26. - Special fire assessment levy determined annually. 
The amount of special fire assessment levy to be made for the purpose of firefighting operations shall be determined annually by the board and shall be assessed equally against all dwellings and business premises situated on taxable parcels located within the county fire district, commencing with the calendar year 1995. 
(Code 1996, § 16-108; Ord. of 12-22-1994) 
Sec. 24-27. - Accounting for revenues. 
The board shall establish and maintain separate accounting for revenues derived from special fire assessment levies made for firefighting operations and shall not commingle the same with any other funds of the county. If, at the end of any fiscal year, there remain any funds unexpended in the account so established, the same shall not lapse or revert to the general funds of the county, but shall be maintained exclusively for the purposes specified in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 16-109; Ord. of 12-22-1994) 
Sec. 24-28. - Parcels with no dwellings situated thereon. 
An owner of a parcel on which no dwelling or business premises is situated thereon ("parcel with no dwelling or business premises") may, by written notice received by the board prior to February 1 of each calendar year, elect to pay the special fire assessment on such parcel. The form for such notice shall be prepared by the board and made available to the residents of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 16-110; Ord. of 12-22-1994) 
Sec. 24-29. - Special fire assessment on parcel with no dwelling or business premises. 
(a)  If firefighting services are performed on a parcel with no dwelling or business premises, the owner of such parcel shall, upon receipt of a notice from the board, pay the county a special fire assessment on a parcel with no dwelling or business premises as established by the board. 
(b)  The special fire assessment on a parcel with no dwelling or business premises shall be collected in the same manner as authorized for the collection of special fire assessments in section 24-24. 
(Code 1996, § 16-111; Ord. of 12-22-1994) 
Secs. 24-30—24-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL COUNTY ROAD PAVEMENT TAX DISTRICTS 

Sec. 24-47. - Constitutional authority. 
The board of commissioners of the county is authorized by article IX, section II, paragraph VI of the Constitution of the state to create special districts for the provision of local government services within such districts, and to levy and collect fees, assessments, and taxes within such district to pay, wholly or partially, the cost of providing such services therein. 
(Code 1996, § 32-101; Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 24-48. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide citizens of the county with a procedure for the paving of as of yet unpaved streets in unincorporated parts of this county. To that end, this article is adopted in order to effect the creation of road pavement tax districts to pay for such pavement. 
(Code 1996, § 32-102; Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 24-49. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Lot owner includes all persons holding fee simple title according to the real estate records of the county to real property within a proposed road pavement district at the time the petition for the creation of said district is submitted as provided herein. For the purpose of the petitioning of the board of commissioners for the creation of a new road pavement district, the lot owner/owners shall have one vote per platted lot within a particular proposed road pavement district. The term "property owner" specifically excludes tenants in possession of property within the road pavement district. However, the term "lot owner" shall include the developer or any subdivision of less than ten lots or otherwise not covered by the county's subdivision ordinance who has fee simple title to an existing or proposed road and has promised to dedicate said road to the county. 
Road pavement district is a specific type of special tax district within the county. A special tax district is authorized pursuant to article IX, section II, part VI of the Constitution of the state. Road pavement districts may be created in order for lot owners to amortize the cost of paving a road or roads within the district. 
(Code 1996, § 32-103; Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 24-50. - Road pavement tax districts created; register; responsibility for costs. 
(a)  New special tax districts which shall be known as road pavement tax districts may be created upon the submission of proper petition and resolution of the board of commissioners. Each new road pavement district so created shall be assigned a number and be designated by recorded plats showing each lot therein. 
(b)  A register of road pavement districts shall be maintained in the office of the county administrator or his designee and the office of the county tax commissioner. Such registers shall be available to the public for inspection upon reasonable notice to either of these offices. 
(c)  The cost of paving the road or roads shall be advanced by the county. The county shall have the authority to contract with the necessary parties to complete the job. This cost shall then be paid by the residents of the road pavement tax district and amortized for up to a 15-year period. The amortized cost of the paving shall be assigned to each platted lot. Each lot, whether vacant or improved, will pay the same assessment. For example, if the cost of paving the road is $10,000.00, the special tax district shall pay $1,000.00 per year, plus administrative costs as described below. If there are ten lots in the district, for each lot, whether vacant or improved, the district will pay $100.00 per year. The road pavement tax district shall end upon the payment of the amortized cost to the county. 
(d)  Administrative costs incurred by the county in the collection of the road pavement tax shall be the responsibility of the owners of property in the district for which said costs were incurred. The administrative charge assessed each year shall be set by the board of commissioners, but shall not exceed 15 percent of the amortized amount due in the special tax district each year. The board of commissioners shall be authorized to establish different administrative charges for different special tax districts and to adjust the respective rates from time to time by resolution, after taking into consideration all of the cost factors involved in collecting the charges contemplated in this article, including, but not limited to, the delinquency rate within a special tax district. The pro-rata portion of the administrative charges shall be charged to the owners of the property. Notwithstanding anything herein, the minimum annual administrative fee for any special purpose road pavement tax district shall be as established by the board. 
(Code 1996, § 32-104; Ord. of 10-3-2006; Ord. of 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 24-51. - Collection and responsibility for administration. 
(a)  The charges for road pavement in each road pavement district shall be paid as a road pavement district tax and shall be collected concurrently with the ad valorem tax billed to each lot owner within each road pavement tax district. The date for determining ownership of each lot shall be January 1 of each year. 
(b)  The administration payment and accounting of the amortized cost herein authorized shall be the responsibility of the county board of commissioners or some department of the county government to which responsibility shall be assigned by the board of commissioners. Any proration of such charges between the owners of lots to which title is transferred during any year shall be the responsibility of the buyers and sellers of such lots. 
(c)  The office of the tax commissioner of the county shall be responsible for the timely collection of taxes, fees, and assessments assessed to each road pavement district and shall remit such sums to the board of commissioners in the same manner as other taxes are remitted. 
(Code 1996, § 32-105; Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 24-52. - Liens created. 
In addition to any other rights of collection for late or unpaid charges, the county shall have all rights available under the laws of the state for the assessment and creation of a lien upon the property of the owner receiving the service provided, together with all rights of execution, levy, foreclosure, and sale. 
(Code 1996, § 32-106; Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 24-53. - Deposit and forfeiture. 
(a)  In addition to charges authorized in this article, the county may require deposits from the lot owners within the road pavement district in any or all such road pavement districts created hereunder in an amount not to exceed one year's prorated cost for the pavement of the road. This deposit shall be held by the county as security for payment for services rendered pursuant to this article, and the county shall have the authority to setoff against the deposit for non-payment for services at such times and on such occasions as shall be determined by the county. Notice of setoff shall be given to the lot owner by mail at the address of the property, although advance notice of such setoff shall not be required. In the event of a reduction in the deposit of a property owner because of failure to pay charges assessed pursuant to this article, the lot owner shall be required to restore the deposit to its required level upon request by the county. 
(b)  Any required deposit as contemplated herein shall be retained by the county so long as the road pavement district is in existence. Any deposit remaining in the last year of the road pavement district shall be applied by the county to the remaining indebtedness with any excess refunded to the lot owner. 
(Code 1996, § 32-107; Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 24-54. - Establishment of road pavement district in existing or new residential areas. 
(a)  Any lot owner in any unincorporated area of the county may present a request for the creation of a road pavement district to the county administrator or his designee. The request shall designate the boundaries for a road pavement district which shall serve the lot owner presenting the request and other lot owners within the geographical area. The request shall include a plat or plats showing the proposed road pavement district. The office of the county administrator shall then provide a petition to be circulated by the presenter of the request among the lot owners in the proposed district. At least 75 percent of the lot owners within the proposed district must sign the petition for the petition to be presented to the board of commissioners. If the proposed road pavement district encompasses more than one subdivision as shown by plats filed in the public land records of the county, 75 percent of the lot owners within the proposed road pavement district in each and all of the included subdivisions must sign the petition. Unless 100 percent of the lot owners have signed the petition, a public hearing shall be held by the board of commissioners after having advertised one time in the official legal organ of the county, and a sign or signs shall be posted in the proposed road pavement district giving notice of the hearing, at least ten days before the public hearing. 
(b)  The petition for the creation of the proposed road pavement district must be returned to the county administrator within 90 days of the presentment of the request. The county administrator or his designee shall verify the signatures on the petition and that requisite number of lot owners have signed said petition. Said petition must be accompanied by a certificate of title or other document that shows county's right-of-way in road or a letter of commitment from the owner(s) to convey the road or a right-of-way to the county before implementation of the tax or paving of the road. 
(c)  By signing the petition for the creation of a new road pavement district, all petitioners within a proposed road pavement district shall be deemed to have actual or constructive notice of this article and all the provisions contained herein as well as the request and petition for a road paving district. 
(d)  All successors in interest to the lot owners within a certain district at the time of the creation of said road pavement district shall be deemed to have constructive notice of this article and the existing road pavement district or request wherein the lot is located due to the existence of public records containing such information. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a petition as provided herein and after a public hearing, if one is required, the board of commissioners shall take under consideration the establishment of the requested tax district. The board of commissioners, in its sole discretion, may vote to create one or more of such districts based upon all of the evidence presented to the board of commissioners. Nothing contained herein shall create any right by any lot owner or owners to the creation of such districts. The creation of one or more of such districts shall not generate a precedent or obligation on the board of commissioners to approve future requests for a road pavement district; rather, each proposed district shall be considered based on the totality of the evidence regarding each respective district. The decision of the board of commissioners, in the exercise of its discretion, shall be final. 
(f)  The decision of the board of commissioners to create special road pavement districts shall be evidenced by resolutions adopted at a regular or special meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1996, § 32-108; Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 24-55. - Applicability of article. 
This article shall only be applicable to roads where all parties with a property interest in the road have consented to the county having a right-of-way in the road. Roads may become public roads by being dedicated by all owner(s) of the road and the county's acceptance as evidenced by resolution of the board of commissioners or the county's maintenance of the road. All petitions for a road pavement district must include a title certificate or other document showing the county's right-of-way or a letter of commitment from the owner to convey road or right-of-way to the county prior to implementation of tax and paving of road. 
(Code 1996, § 32-109; Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 24-56. - Federal, state laws to prevail. 
If any provision of this article is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation, or any order of any agency of this state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the state or federal law or rule, regulation, or order shall prevail such that the remaining portion of this article shall be deemed to be of full force or effect. 
(Code 1996, § 32-110; Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
BRYAN COUNTY ROAD PAVEMENT SPECIAL TAX DISTRICT PETITION 

 
  
Check applicable line: 

 
  
____________ Signatures verified by the County Administrator 
Attach more sheets as needed. 
REQUEST FOR PETITION FOR ROAD PAVEMENT TAX DISTRICT 
Name of Subdivision (if applicable): ____________ 

 
  
Check here if request is made by a developer or less than ten lots or is otherwise not covered by the Bryan County Subdivision Ordinance: ____________ 
Applicant Name: ____________ 
Street Address: ____________ 

 
  
Phone Number: ____________ 
Email Address: ____________ 
Please attach a plat or plats showing the proposed Road Pavement Special Tax District. Applications without such a plat or plats will not be considered. 
I hereby certify that the road or roads that are to be included in the Road Pavement Special Tax District are public roads dedicated to and accepted by Bryan County. Private roads cannot be paved by the creation of a special tax district. 
I further declare that the information provided herein is true and accurate to the best of my knowledge. 
____________ 
Signature of Applicant 
Chapter 26 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. title 48. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Reports by mobile/manufactured home park owners. 
(a)  On or before October 15 of each year, every owner and operator of a mobile/manufactured home park shall give the tax commissioner an inventory of all mobile homes and manufactured homes based in the mobile/manufactured home park as of October 1 of said year. 
(b)  Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile/manufactured home park shall report to the tax commissioner any mobile home or manufactured home removal from said park prior to the home being removed. 
(c)  Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile/manufactured home park shall furnish to the tax commissioner an updated lot map of said park by January 1 of each year. 
(d)  Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile/manufactured home park shall notify the tax commissioner of any change in ownership or of the name of said mobile/manufactured home park within 30 days of such change. 
(Code 1996, § 28-103; Ord. of 9-13-2001) 
Secs. 26-2—26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Occupation tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 26-21. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing of the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, which is the major and principal source of income of such business. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2, but not a form I.R.S. 1099. An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied by a local government on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation as designated by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 1996, § 7-102) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 26-22. - Occupation tax required for business dealings in the county. 
For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the county, whether with a location in the county or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state, exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no fixed business location in the county, such business tax registration shall be shown to the code enforcement officer or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of said county, upon request. 
(Code 1996, § 7-101) 
State Law reference— Occupation tax authorized, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 
Sec. 26-23. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee as established by the board shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, annual renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. The regulatory fee levied in this article is an exercise of the police power of the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is as established by the county. 
(Code 1996, § 7-103) 
State Law reference— Regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8 et seq. 
Sec. 26-24. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule. The tax rate shall be determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 7-104; Ord. of 10-13-2009) 
State Law reference— Occupation tax authorized, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7; authority to tax on basis of number of employees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 26-25. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state; exemption for tax paid in other state. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the county and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees, principals, representatives or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(b)  Any business or practitioner of a profession with no location or office in the state shall be exempt from assessment of an occupation tax under this article if such business or practitioner submits proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state on the business's or practitioner's sales or services in the state. 
(Code 1996, § 7-105) 
State Law reference— Taxation of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 
Sec. 26-26. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the code enforcement officer and that line of business being noted by the code enforcement officer upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Code 1996, § 7-106) 
Sec. 26-27. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the county. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Code 1996, § 7-107) 
Sec. 26-28. - Professionals. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(c)(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 26-24. 
(2)  A fee as established by the board, per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by February 1 of each year. 
(Code 1996, § 7-108) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 26-29. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1996, § 7-109) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13. 
Sec. 26-30. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue proposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-28. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 1996, § 7-110) 
Sec. 26-31. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar year thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Registration shall be due on January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by February 1 of each year, be subject to penalties and interest for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the county in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a 25 percent penalty imposed. The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the code enforcement officer and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the judge of the magistrate court of the county, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the code enforcement officer may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 1996, § 7-111) 
State Law reference— When payment due, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20. 
Sec. 26-32. - Exemption on grounds that business is a nonprofit organization. 
Any nonprofit organization shall be exempt from the levy of occupational tax under this article. 
(Code 1996, § 7-113) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13. 
Sec. 26-33. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1996, § 7-114) 
Sec. 26-34. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 1996, § 7-115) 
Sec. 26-35. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation that require registration without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 7-116) 
Sec. 26-36. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all taxes and fees as provided herein before February 1 of each year, and on February 1 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the board of commissioners and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offers to transact, in the county, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 7-117) 
Sec. 26-37. - Code enforcement officer; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The board of commissioners and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal business inspectors with full subpoena power in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Code 1996, § 7-119) 
Sec. 26-38. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission and the department of public safety. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 40-1-115. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 1996, § 7-120) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-163. 
Sec. 26-39. - When occupation tax due and payable; payment options. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the county at the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners on January 1 each year and delinquent if not paid on or before February 1 each year. Interest at a rate of 1.5 percent per month shall be imposed on delinquent occupation taxes for each month of delinquency. 
(Code 1996, § 7-122) 
State Law reference— Authorized interest, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
Sec. 26-40. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the county in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid within 30 days from the date such business commences operation within the county. Where a taxpayer fails to make any such payment on or before the due date for such payment, a 1.5 percent penalty will be imposed for the balance of the month that payment is due and an additional 1.5 percent penalty will be imposed for each additional month of delinquency thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 7-123) 
Sec. 26-41. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Code 1996, § 7-124) 
Sec. 26-42. - Businesses and practitioners required to provide certain information to the county; inspections of books and records. 
(a)  All businesses and practitioners doing business within the county shall provide to the code enforcement officer of the county: 
(1)  The address of any location or office maintained by such business or practitioner within the county; 
(2)  A description of the business or types of business conducted or occupation or profession performed at such location; and 
(3)  The payment of any business or occupation tax or regulatory fee to any other county. 
(b)  In any case, the board of commissioners of the county, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business or person for which the returns are made. The code enforcement officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the county, and upon demand of the code enforcement officer, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the county within 30 days. Failure to submit such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept in the county, for examination by the code enforcement officer at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under-reporting, a penalty of ten percent of the tax due over 90 days will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Code 1996, § 7-125) 
Chapter 28 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. title 40; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

Sec. 28-1. - Uniform rules of the road. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 and O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.) are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this county, with like effect as if recited fully herein. 
(b)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1996, § 10-101) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Chapter 30 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority means the director of the state environmental protection division. 
Authorized representative of the user means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (2) of this definition, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to BCW&SU/A. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Board means the members of the county water and sewer utility/authority created and established by the county board of commissioners and having jurisdiction over maintenance and operation of the water and sanitary sewer systems within the county. 
Board of commissioners means the duly elected officials of the county board of commissioners. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of the drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house connection." 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405—471. 
Chain-of-custody means a written record of sample possession for all persons who handle (collect, transport, analyze, dispose of) a sample, including names, dates, times, and procedures followed. 
Composite sample means the accumulation of a number of individual samples over a period of time, so taken as to represent the nature of the wastewater. 
Consumer means any person, corporation, partnership, joint venture or public body that uses, has use of, has use for, or seeks to use water furnished by the utility. 
County means the county, or members of the board of commissioners of the county and its agents and employees. 
County water system means the total water treatment and distribution system owned, operated and maintained by the county water and sewer utility; also the administrative framework that operates the facilities. 
Developer means any person, corporation, partnership, joint venture, public body or legal entity that is selling, offering for sale, dividing, subdividing or developing property for residential, commercial or industrial use. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater to the waters of the state. 
Domestic wastewater means that wastewater discharged into the wastewater system from domestic sources such as toilets, sinks, showers and bathtubs. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others, including such meaning as given under all applicable federal and state rules, regulations and statutes (O.C.G.A. title 44, ch. 9 (O.C.G.A. § 44-9-1 et seq.)), as the same may be, from time to time, amended or replaced. 
Effluent means the treated flow discharge from a water pollution control facility. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU). An ERU represents water demand averaging 300 gallons per day. Example: one bedroom apartment, 100 gallons per day - three one bedroom apartments represent one ERU. A two bedroom apartment represents water demand averaging 200 gallons per day - three two bedroom apartments represents two ERUs. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
Flammable means any material with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit using the test methods described in 40 CFR 261.21. 
Floatable oil and grease means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by floatation from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility or interceptor. 
Food service facility means any facility which cuts, cooks, bakes, prepares, or serves food, or disposes of food-related wastes. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the domestic and commercial handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Grab sample means a sample that is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream, and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Grease means a material composed primarily of fats, oils, and grease from animal or vegetable sources. The terms "fats," "oils," and "grease" shall be deemed as grease by definition. The term "grease" may also include petroleum-based products. 
Grinder means a device that shreds or grinds up solid or semisolid waste materials into smaller portions for discharge to the sanitary sewer. 
Grit means matter consisting of sand, gravel, cinders, or other heavy solid materials that have settling velocities or specific gravities greater than those of organic putrescible solids normally encountered in domestic wastewater. 
Hauler or transporter means one who transfers waste from the site of the user to an approved site for disposal or treatment. The hauler is responsible for ensuring that all federal, state, and local regulations are followed regarding transport. 
Health officer means the director of the county board of health or other person designated by the board of commissioners and their duly appointed assistants. 
High-strength wastewater means wastewater that contains quantities of specified constituents that exceed the quantities normally encountered in domestic wastewater. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial waste surcharge means the additional service charge assessed against industrial users in the county whose wastewater characteristics exceed established limits. 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater or liquid waste, of whatever nature, arising out of any manufacturing, industrial processing, fabrication, treating, renovating, or other commercial trade or business operation as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. BCW&SU shall determine from time to time specific waste designated as "industrial waste," and such definitions shall be included herein. 
Infiltration/inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the wastewater system through cracked pipes, joints, manholes and other openings. 
Inflow means water that flows into a wastewater system from the surface, streams, roof drains, downspouts or other such source. 
Influent means the wastewaters arriving at the water pollution control facility. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interceptor or separator or trap means a device so constructed as to separate, trap, and hold fats, oils, greases, sand, and grit substances from the wastewater discharge by a facility to prevent these substances from entering the sanitary sewer. 
Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations of its sludge processes, use or disposal; and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of BCW&SU's NPDES or LAS permits or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Manager means the general manager of the water and sewer systems of the county appointed by the county board of commissioners or their designee and authorized by the board to fulfill the requirements of these rules and to be responsible for the operations of the water and sewer systems, or duly authorized representative. 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Metered water means the amount of water used by the system user as measured by a county water meter, or other approved metering device. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake and any other body of surface water or groundwater. 
New source. 
(1)  The term "new source" means any building, structure, facility, or installation for which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of any existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b or c of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment that is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
Noncontact cooling water or cooling water means water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of a BCW&SU's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 30-114. 
Publicly-owned treatment works or POTW means a "treatment works," as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by BCW&SU. The term "publicly-owned treatment works" or "POTW" includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances that convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Septic tank waste or septage means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2)b of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, BCW&SU may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration that could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 30-114. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Storm drain , sometimes termed storm sewer, means a drain or sewer conveying surface water, groundwater, subsurface water, or any unpolluted water from any source. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Surcharge means a separate charge by the county sewer and water utility for the handling and treatment of high-strength wastewater. 
Suspended solids or TSS means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Total Kjehldahl nitrogen or TKN means the sum of ammonia-nitrogen and organic nitrogen concentrations. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination or pollutants listed as toxic in the regulations promulgated by the EPS administrator under the provision of CWA 307(1) or other acts. 
Under-sink or in-line grease interceptor means a device placed under or in close proximity to sinks or other facilities likely to discharge grease in an attempt to separate, trap, and hold oil and grease substances to prevent their discharge to the sanitary sewer. 
User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge to the BCS&WU sanitary sewer. 
Utility means the members of the county sewer and water utility department and its agents and employees. 
Waste or wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW that is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of waters either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(b)  Those definitions as set forth in the Engineering and Design Manual of Bryan County, and those definitions as set forth in the International Plumbing Code, as adopted by the county, are hereby incorporated as part of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. I; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Secs. 30-2—30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-21. - Access to consumer's premises by agents and employees of utility/authority. 
Duly authorized agents and employees of the utility shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer and developer for the purpose of installing and removing the property of the utility, inspecting the utility's facilities, reading and testing meters, and repairing and maintaining the facilities of the utility. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. II; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-22. - Water service. 
(a)  Any developer, builder or consumer desiring to be provided water services by the utility shall make an application for water services in person at the office of the utility located at the planning and zoning office in Richmond Hill and Pembroke. 
(b)  If the water distribution system is adjacent to or directly across the road from the developer's/builder's/resident's property and no water line extension is required, service will be provided upon the consumer executing the water subscription contract and payment of the connection fees. If a service delivery line is required, the developer/builder/resident will pay the cost for installing the service delivery line. If excess capacity is available for others to be serviced by the same service delivery line, the developer/builder/resident will pay their pro-rata share of the cost for the service delivery line based on a percentage of capacity used. 
(c)  Upon complying with subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the consumer will purchase a meter from the utility, pay any other associated fees and have the meter installed by an authorized licensed plumber; the utility will verify installation before any work is covered. Notification of service is required 30 days in advance of need; if service is needed sooner than 30 days, then the developer/builder/resident would have to pay an additional rescheduling fee as established by the board. 
(d)  The county recognizes that a number of private water systems are already in place. Where such systems are clustered, those areas will be outside the areas targeted for expansion of public delivery as the private entities have large investments which will be respected and protected; and where county water systems are not available, water services may be provided by private providers. However, all existing private water delivery systems that do not include firefighting capabilities (fire hydrants) will be required to update their systems to provide this capability within 24 months of the approval of this article. 
(e)  The county shall have the first right of refusal to provide water service to any developments in the county service delivery area. Any development that applies for sewer service by the county shall also be required to apply for water service by the county. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. III; Ord. of 7-10-2007; Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 30-23. - Water line extensions. 
(a)  General. Water lines may be extended along presently existing county roads which have a dedicated 60-foot right-of-way or along existing county roads where easements acceptable to the utility for the installation and maintenance of the water lines have been obtained at no expense to the utility. 
(b)  Line extension by petition, developer, builder, or residents. A line extension by petition may occur with a minimum of 20 taps per mile (or any proportionate amount). This equates to 264 linear feet for each connect. Any resident (applicant) seeking to obtain a water line extension must comply with the following procedures: 
(1)  Obtain from the utility a water line extension application. 
(2)  Contact each property owner having road frontage along the county road where the water line is to be extended and determine whether or not they desire to participate in the water line extension. 
(3)  Obtain such right-of-way deeds and/or easements that are required by the county and by the utility. Provide a letter from the county public works to verify existence of a county road right-of-way and ensure there will be no conflicts with future road improvements. 
(4)  Properly fill out the application. 
(5)  Once the application is signed by all residents who desire to participate in the line extension, return the application to the utility's general manager or his designee. The general manager will present the application to the board of commissioners for approval, should the requirements of 20 taps per mile be met. Once the board approves the application, each developer, builder or resident shall purchase the meter to serve their property prior to the scheduling of the project for construction. 
(c)  Requirements of the utility/authority employees. 
(1)  Compute the length of the water line extension. The water line extension will be measured from the utility's existing water line that has sufficient capacity and pressure to provide the service requested by each applicant to the furthermost property line of each applicant. 
(2)  Compute the fee for the water line extension. 
(3)  Notify the applicant of the amount of the fee that is due. 
(4)  Present the application to the utility for its review and consideration. 
(5)  Provide the applicant with an estimated date of completion, subject to work schedule, weather conditions, breakdowns, material delivery or other unpredictable changes. 
(d)  Service to residential subdivision developments. If the water line extension is to serve a residential development, the applicant shall submit to the utility the following: 
(1)  An application for line extension. 
(2)  Three copies of a plat or accurate drawing of the property to be served. Said plats or drawings shall contain the following information: 
a.  Location of the closest existing water line of the utility which is of sufficient size to serve the property; 
b.  Location of the existing roads and proposed roads to serve the property; 
c.  Exact footage of water line that will have to be installed in order to serve the property; 
d.  Location of all water lines and appurtenances to be constructed in the area to be developed; and 
e.  A letter from the county public works to verify the existence of a county road right-of-way and assure there will be no conflicts with future road improvements. 
(3)  Once the above requirements have been met, the developer shall pay the utility materials and labor cost, based on the annual labor contract, to extend the water line. 
(4)  At the utility's discretion, based on the number of projects on the construction schedule, the developer may install the line at his own expense using a contractor approved by the utility. Construction shall be per the utility's specifications and shall be inspected by the utility. The developer shall be responsible for all engineering, plans, bonding, etc. Prior to acceptance of the water line by the utility, all required documents within the utility's policies and procedures package must be completed. 
(e)  Water line extension to serve industrial and commercial development. 
(1)  If the water line extension is to serve an industrial or commercial development, the applicant shall provide the information under subsection (d) of this section, including the following: 
a.  A letter from the county planning and zoning board stating that the property has been properly zoned for the proposed use. 
b.  Estimated daily consumption for the development to be served. 
(2)  If units served will require fire lines and/or sprinkler systems to the structure, expenses for same shall be paid by the developer. 
(f)  Line extensions within municipalities. 
(1)  The utility will contract with the municipalities located within the county for the construction or extension of water lines. The contract price will be the amount that the utility is paying under its existing labor contract for water line extensions plus the cost of all materials if the same are purchased from the utility. The work will be performed by the utility's contractor at a time that is acceptable to the utility, the contractor and the city. 
(2)  The municipality may elect to purchase its own materials or may purchase the materials from the utility at its actual cost. 
(3)  The municipality shall be responsible for obtaining all construction permits, rights-of-way, road repairs, relocation of other utilities and required insurance coverage. 
(g)  Water line services inside residential subdivisions, industrial sites and commercial sites. It shall be the developer's responsibility to construct the complete water system inside the subdivision. The developer shall: 
(1)  Pay for all labor and materials in the construction of the water line inside the area to be developed, which cost shall include supply lines, fire hydrants, gate valves, reducers and regulators, together with service line conduits, and any other pertinent structure that may be needed for proper construction of said lines and appurtenances thereto. 
(2)  Construct all water lines according to plans and specifications of the utility and have the same inspected by the utility prior to covering. The area in which the water line is installed shall be compacted to the specification of the county engineer. 
(3)  Pay any required fees set by the utility. 
(4)  Upon completion of the construction but prior to the commencement of water services by the utility: 
a.  Execute an affidavit stating the actual cost of all labor and materials expended in the construction of all water lines and appurtenances thereto; 
b.  Execute a deed conveying the water line, appurtenances thereto, and a permanent easement to the county; 
c.  Post a surety bond or letter of credit from a banking institution located within the state with the utility in the amount of 15 percent of the total cost of construction of said line, which said bond or letter of credit shall guarantee payment to the utility for any repairs or maintenance needed in said line over a period of two years from the date of conveyance of said line; 
d.  Submit three copies of as-built drawings of the subdivisions showing the exact location of said water lines and appurtenances thereto as built; 
e.  Execute an affidavit prescribed by the utility stating that the cost of all labor and materials has been paid in full. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. IV; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-24. - Water subscription contracts. 
Prior to commencement of water service by the utility, each consumer must execute a water subscription contract with the utility. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. V; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-25. - Charges for initial water service. 
(a)  Each consumer subscribing for use of water services of the utility shall pay all associated fees as set forth by the utility. 
(b)  Any relocation of water lines, meter boxes, fire hydrants and appurtenances to the water system of the county that are requested by the consumer or required by the utility will be billed to the owner at the actual cost of the removal or relocation of each said item. 
(c)  A duplex, quadraplex, or any apartment building shall have a meter installed for each unit and the prevailing tap-on fee shall be paid for each unit. 
(d)  A professional building shall have a meter installed and shall pay on an ERU basis, plus any associated fees, as determined by the utility 
(e)  A security deposit shall be collected for water from renters and mobile homes. A deposit shall also be collected for sewer from renters and for mobile homes. The amounts of such deposits shall be as established by the board. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. VI; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-26. - Utility's responsibilities and liabilities. 
(a)  Upon meeting the requirements of section 30-22, the utility will run a water distribution line to the property of the consumer. 
(b)  The utility may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the utility's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the right-of-way. 
(c)  The utility reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(d)  Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the utility. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. VII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-27. - Consumer's responsibilities and liabilities. 
(a)  Water furnished by the utility shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use said water. The consumer shall not allow anyone else to connect on to the water system serving the consumer. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, or other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard of this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  The consumer has the following additional responsibilities and duties: 
(1)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, which is unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(2)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(3)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense so as to prevent backflow. 
(4)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the utility's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the utility's water system; and all applicants, by becoming consumers of the utility, covenant and agree that, so long as they continue to be consumers of the utility, they will not permit the connection of any private wells to the utility's water system. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. VIII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-28. - Turning on or connections on to utility's water by persons other than authority personnel. 
Only authorized utility personnel can connect or tap on to the water distribution system. No person or consumer will be authorized to connect or tap-on to any water distribution system owned by the utility. Violation of this provision of this article shall authorize the utility to immediately terminate water services without notice to the consumer. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. IX; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-29. - Rate schedule. 
The charges, fees, and rates for all utility services, including water and sewer, shall be as fixed from time to time by the county commission by means of the adoption of a resolution, and a schedule of such utility fees, charges, and rates shall be maintained on file in the office of the county administrator and county clerk. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art X; Ord. of 7-10-2007; Ord. of 1-17-2015) 
Sec. 30-30. - Meter readings. 
The water meter serving the consumer's property shall be read on a monthly basis and official records of each reading thereof shall be kept for a period of one year. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XI; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-31. - Billing and collections. 
(a)  The consumer shall pay promptly on a monthly basis all water registered by the meter serving said property at the rate or rates set by the utility from time to time, which shall include water used, water wasted or leakage, except for water that may be traced by the utility to the utility's system. 
(b)  Said bill shall be paid within 15 days from the date of said bill. In the event that the bill assessed thereon is not paid within 20 days from the date of said bill, the utility shall have the right to commence procedures to terminate the water service. 
(c)  If water service is discontinued for non-payment of a bill, or if an employee of the utility is required to go to the residence of a consumer for the purpose of discontinuing service for non-payment of a bill, a nonrefundable service fee as established by the board shall be assessed against said consumer. The utility will not resume water service until the bill and service fee have been paid to the utility by the consumer. This service fee shall be charged regardless of whether water is actually cut off. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-32. - Complaints/adjustments. 
(a)  If a consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in writing, to the utility at the office of the utility before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not be prejudicing his claim. 
(b)  Settlement of claims and adjustments of bills are subject to the following additional provisions: 
(1)  Any consumer who fails to notify the utility in writing within 30 days after the date of said bill of any irregularities or errors that may be in said bill shall waive any right or claim for correction or refund under said bill. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer. If the meter is found to be malfunctioning, no charge will be made. However, if the meter is found not to be malfunctioning, the consumer will be required to pay a fee as established by the board. Said fee will be added to the next month's bills. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by any person other than the utility's representative, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount which is the average of the three previous months. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XIII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-33. - Procedures for termination of water service. 
(a)  The general manager of the utility, and his designees, are hereby authorized to terminate water services to customers of the utility who fail to pay their water bills as required by this article. 
(b)  The following procedures shall be followed prior to termination of water services: 
(1)  The utility, through its employees, shall forward to each consumer, at the billing address provided by the customer, bills for water services provided. All water bills shall be due on the date set forth on the bills. 
(2)  If there is a past due amount shown on the bill, then notice of the cutoff date will be shown on the bill. 
(3)  If a consumer with a past due balance has not paid the current bill by the due date, the utility will attempt to notify the customer of the pending cutoff date. 
(4)  If payment is not received by 4:30 p.m. on the tenth day after the due date of the bill, the utility's personnel may terminate service to the customer at any time after said date. 
(5)  The general manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized to direct personnel of the utility to terminate water services without notice to any customer that the general manager has reason to believe is obtaining water through fraudulent means, has issued a check that has been returned to the utility marked "Insufficient Funds," or is attempting to abscond without the payment of water bills due. 
(6)  If the customer does not provide access to the meter so that service may be restored, and the utility is required to make an additional service call to restore service, an additional fee per service call as established by the board will be assessed and added to the customer's water bill. 
(7)  If service has been discontinued for non-payment, a customer can re-establish service by paying the total amount due that utility, together with any other applicable service call fees, charges and penalties. Payment must be received in the office of the utility located in the planning and zoning offices in Pembroke and Richmond Hill, by 12:00 noon on normal business days for same day restoration of service. Service will be restored the following business day for payments received after 12:00 noon. 
(8)  If a customer disputes the amount of the bill, the customer may request a hearing. A request for hearing may be made as follows: 
a.  In writing addressed to the general manager and mailed to the utility. 
b.  In writing addressed to the general manager and delivered to the utility. 
c.  By contacting the general manager or the manager of the billing department of the utility, by telephone, during normal business hours. 
A hearing date and time will be set. The general manager, or his designee, shall conduct the hearing and determine the amount due on the bill. The amount determined to be due on the water bill at the hearing shall be paid by 4:30 p.m. on the following business day. If the water bill is not paid by said date and time, water service shall be terminated. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XIV; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-34. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water service is discontinued either by written notice from the consumer to the utility, or by acts of the utility, the utility shall apply the refundable deposits to the balance of the bill owed by the consumer and refund the difference, if any exists, to the consumer. 
(b)  The utility reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of utility's rules. 
(3)  Emergency repairs. 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the utility's control. 
(5)  Legal processes. 
(6)  Direction of public authorities. 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident, actions of others or acts of God. 
(8)  When a property owner fails to maintain the water system on the property or the improvements located thereon, in compliance with the International Plumbing Code, as adopted by the county. 
(c)  The utility reserves the right to terminate the services granted by the utility for any reason other than those stated above by giving the subscriber ten days' written notice of the date of termination, and further providing the subscriber with a right to hearing prior to termination of the service. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XV; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-35. - Plans and specifications for construction of water lines. 
The utility shall have the right to specify the requirements, plans and specifications for the construction of water lines in the county. All water lines constructed by any consumer, owner or developer shall be constructed according to the plans and specifications established by the utility for the construction of water lines in the county. No water line shall be covered without first being inspected and approved by the utility/authority. At a minimum, all water improvements shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable requirements. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XVI; Ord. of 7-10-2007; Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 30-36. - Allocation of water services. 
(a)  The utility shall have the right from time to time, if necessary, to allocate water to the consumer under specific rules and regulations in effect now or that may later be adopted by the utility and the county. 
(b)  When it becomes necessary to impose bans, restrictions or curtailments of water usage, the general manager of the utility shall have the authority to do so and to name those restrictions and the time and duration of said restrictions as defined by priority in the water conservation plan and the drought contingency plan of the county water and sewerage utility. The general manager shall be responsible for widely publicizing said restrictions. 
(c)  Any consumer, person, firm or corporation who uses water in violation of the restrictions imposed by the general manager will be cited. When a citation is issued and if found guilty, the violator will be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment as may be set from time to time by the magistrate court of the county. 
(d)  The magistrate court of the county shall have jurisdiction to hear, try and dispose of citations that are issued for said violations. The citations shall be issued by the county code enforcement officer or a representative of the utility. Said citation(s) shall require the appearance of the violator in the magistrate court of the county to answer said charge or charges. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XVIII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-37. - Amendment to article. 
Since special circumstances frequently occur which require changes, amendments or modifications to this article, this article may be amended without notice upon the approval of said changes, amendments or modification by the utility and the county. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XIX; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-38. - Rules and/or policies. 
The utility is authorized to develop, implement, and administer such rules, regulations, and policies as are necessary for the construction, maintenance and operation of the water facilities of the county, including, but not limited to, achieving and maintaining compliance with the rules, regulations and policies of all federal or state agencies having jurisdiction over same. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XX; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-39. - Enforcement of article. 
The utility shall enforce the terms of this article through the administrative procedures hereinbefore set out or through legal actions in a court of law. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXI; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-40. - Prohibition against tampering with authority and county property and providing punishment therefor. 
(a)  Any consumer, person, firm or corporation who without the authorization of the utility: 
(1)  Connects onto a water line of the utility; 
(2)  Disconnects a water line from a water line of the utility; 
(3)  Connects onto a water meter of the utility; 
(4)  Disconnects a water meter of the utility; 
(5)  Moves, removes, changes, or alters the location of a water meter; 
(6)  Changes, alters, or damages any water meter or water line so as to prevent proper registration of water passing through said water meter or line; 
(7)  Obtains water; 
(8)  Prevents any other person from obtaining water; 
(9)  Obstructs or otherwise interferes with the reading or maintenance of any water meter; 
(10)  Obstructs or otherwise interferes with any water line, fire hydrant, pumping station or any appurtenances to water facilities of the county; 
(11)  Creates a hazardous or unsafe condition to the water facilities of the county; 
shall be issued a citation and, if found guilty, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(b)  Any customer, person, firm, corporation or legal entity who, without authorization from the utility, takes water from any fire hydrant, designated fire line, or other unmetered line, shall be issued a citation and, if found guilty, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(c)  Any customer, person, firm, corporation, or legal entity who, without authorization from the utility, draws water from a fire hydrant, designated fire line, or other unmetered line, shall pay to the utility the value of any water used, a hydrant fee as established by the board, as well as any consequential damages suffered by the utility. 
(d)  Any customer, person, firm, corporation, or legal entity which the utility has to take legal action against for violation of any part of this section shall reimburse the utility all costs, legal expenses, attorneys' fees, and expenses associated with the collection thereof that are incurred by the utility as a result of the collection or the enforcement of this section. 
(e)  All consumers, persons, firms, or corporations who are charged with having violated this section shall be issued a citation by the county code enforcement officer, or a representative of the utility. Said citation shall require the appearance of the violator in the magistrate court of the county to answer said charges. 
(f)  Any customer, person, firm, or corporation who violates the terms of this section and does not pay the fees or fines assessed above within 30 days of the unauthorized use of the water or facilities of the utility, shall have said fee or fine added to their water bill if a billing account exists. Also, a fi. fa. shall be issued by the clerk of the utility and filed upon the public records of the county and the county of the residence of the customer, person, firm, or corporation who violated this section, with the same being collected as other fi. fas. are authorized to be collected under the terms of this section. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-41. - Services provided to property located outside the county. 
Any fees, rates, or charges assessed by the utility for properties outside the boundaries of the county shall be 150 percent of the fees, rates, or charges assessed by the utility for properties located inside the boundaries of the county. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXIII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Secs. 30-42—30-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION 

Sec. 30-71. - Installation of backflow prevention device required. 
All consumers shall have in place a backflow prevention device of the type, design, and specifications set forth in the county's engineering and design standards. Purchase, installation and inspection of the backflow prevention device shall be at the expense of the property developer/owner. 
(Code 1996, § 30-1701; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-72. - Designation as high, medium or low risk consumer; monthly surcharge. 
(a)  The utility is authorized to categorize and designate consumers as high, medium or low risk consumers. Said designation shall be made by the backflow prevention program manager, based upon his evaluation of the consumers property's use and potential for contamination of the public water supply. 
(b)  The utility is authorized to charge each high-risk consumer of the system an amount not to exceed the amount as established by the board monthly as a surcharge to maintain and administrate the cross connection and backflow prevention program. 
(Code 1996, § 30-1702; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-73. - Type of backflow prevention device required; approval of devices. 
The backflow prevention device shall be of the following types and installed in the following manner: 
(1)  Low and medium risk consumers. The low or medium risk consumer or property owner shall provide a double check valve (DCV) backflow prevention device in a size to match that of the required service meter. 
a.  Specifications. The DCV checks shall have replaceable seats, capture springs and the device assembly shall include a full-port ball valve on the inlet and outlet sides, with a union or swivel coupling nut between the device and each valve. Unions or swivel nuts must be integral with the device or valves. Devices shall have three ball valve test cocks in the vertical position fitted with brass or plastic threaded plugs. A fourth vertical test cock shall be provided on the upstream side of the inlet shutoff valve. All components of the assembly, including ball valve handles and assembly bolts, shall be equal in corrosion resistance to bronze or stainless steel in order to resist electrolysis. Access to both checking devices shall be by top and/or side entry for maintenance and repair of all interior parts. Valve handles, except T-type, shall turn up to close and in board (90 degrees) to open. 
b.  Installation. The DCV backflow prevention device shall not be buried in earth, but models with ready access to both checks may be installed in meter boxes, pits or vaults, provided ball valve test cocks seated with threaded plugs are used. All components of a DCV installed below ground should be resistant to electrolysis. A resilient seat shutoff valve should be near the inlet and outlet side of the device, and three approved test cocks provided on the device. Test cocks below ground shall be chlorinated before use. 
c.  Sample approved devices. 
1.  Hersey Model # FDC/Unions. 
2.  Watts Model # U-007-QT. 
(2)  High risk consumers. The high risk consumer or property owner shall install a reduced pressure zone (RPZ) backflow prevention device. 
a.  Specifications. The RPZ shall be of a size to match that of the required service line or meter. The RPZ assembly shall consist of a pressure differential relief valve located between two positive seating check valves. The relief valve shall function automatically by sensing the pressure differential across the first check valve and discharge the backflow to the atmosphere should the check valve become damaged or fouled. The relief and check valves shall have replaceable seats, and the check valves provided with capture springs. A full-port ball valve in sizes through two inch, and resilient-seat OS & Y gate valve in sizes over two inch shall be on the inlet and outlet sides of the device, with a union, swivel coupling nut, or flanges between the device and each valve. Unions and swivel nuts must be integral with the device or valves. The device shall be provided with three ball valve test cocks and a fourth test cock shall be provided on the upstream side of the inlet shutoff valve. Sizes through two inch shall have all test cocks in the vertical position. Test cocks on all assemblies shall be provided with brass or plastic threaded plugs, and relief valve vent-ports shall have suitable connections for an air gap. When a meter or other device with bronze strainer, integral or attached, is not immediately upstream of the backflow preventer, a bronze strainer shall be provided between the inlet shutoff valve and the RPZ on sizes through two inch. All components of the assembly, including ball valve handles and assembly bolts, shall be equal in corrosion resistance to stainless steel. Assess to both checking devices shall be by top and/or side entry for maintenance and repair. 
b.  Installation. The RPZ backflow prevention device shall not be buried in earth but shall be installed above ground in a structure that permits positive drainage, has freeze protection, and is located as close as practical to the outlet side of the meter. In lieu of above-ground installation, the RPZ may be installed immediately inside the facility, provided no intervening connections exist between the meter and the device. Where relief valve discharge could cause water damage, it shall be piped via an air gap at the relief valve vent-port to a floor drain. 
c.  Sample approved devices. 
1.  Hersey Model Nos. FRP II-U; 6 CM; 6CM-RPDA. 
2.  Watts Model Nos. U-009-QT; 9090SY; 909DDC. 
(Code 1996, § 30-1703; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-74. - Time for compliance; authorization for installation services by the utility. 
(a)  Upon application for new water service from the utility, a consumer shall be categorized as a low, medium, or high risk consumer and shall install the designated backflow prevention device required for that category prior to receipt of water services. 
(b)  Existing high risk consumers shall install the designated backflow prevention device within 30 days of the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(c)  Existing low and medium risk consumers shall install the designated backflow prevention device within 60 days of the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(d)  The utility is authorized to provide service for the installation of backflow prevention devices in compliance with all applicable standards and requirements. Installation shall be at the expense of the property owner. 
(Code 1996, § 30-1704; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-75. - Inspection of backflow prevention devices required; maintenance and submission of records by property owner. 
(a)  All backflow prevention devices shall be maintained in proper working order. Reduced pressure zone (RPZ) devices shall be tested immediately after installation and not less than annually thereafter. Double check valve devices (DCV) in use by low or medium risk consumers shall be inspected and tested immediately after installation and at not less than five-year intervals following installation. 
(b)  The backflow prevention device shall be tested by a nationally recognized testing laboratory in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Double check valve device: ASSE standard 1015, and shall bear the ASSE seal. 
(2)  RPZ: ASSE standard 1015, and shall bear the ASSE seal. 
(3)  Synthetic (i.e., rubber or nylon) components within a backflow prevention device shall be replaced not less than every five years. 
(c)  Each consumer and owner of property which receives water services from the utility shall maintain written records of the location, testing, and maintenance of each backflow prevention device on his property. Said records shall be provided to the utility upon written request by the backflow prevention program manager. 
(d)  High risk consumers shall submit backflow prevention device inspection and test reports annually to the backflow prevention program manager, or more frequently upon written request. Said report shall be submitted within 14 days of completion of the inspection or written request. 
(e)  The utility is authorized to suspend water service to the consumer's premises in the event backflow prevention device inspection and test reports are not provided as required. 
(Code 1996, § 30-1705; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-76. - Entry upon premises for purposes of inspection. 
The utility shall be authorized to conduct inspections to determine compliance with this division at the discretion of the program manager. Agents and employees of the authority shall be authorized to enter the premises of the consumer without notice during daylight hours for the purpose of inspection and testing of the backflow prevention device. 
(Code 1996, § 30-1706; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-77. - Installation of thermal expansion device. 
An auxiliary release valve, or expansion chamber, shall be installed where water is heated and stored in a consumer's water system, or a branch of the system, which has been closed by the installation of a backflow prevention device. Said auxiliary release valve or expansion chamber shall be installed to limit thermal expansion of the heated water to not more than 80 psi static (no-flow) pressure at any fixture on the system. 
(Code 1996, § 30-1707; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-78. - Lawn sprinkler or irrigation systems. 
(a)  Lawn sprinkler or other irrigation systems, when connected to the utility water system, shall include adequate provision for drainage and backflow prevention. 
(b)  Where chemicals, pesticides, fertilizer, or other additives are utilized with a sprinkler system, said system shall have an approved reduced pressure zone (RPZ) backflow prevention device. 
(Code 1996, § 30-1708; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-79. - Penalties for failure to comply with division. 
(a)  In the event a backflow prevention device is found not to be in compliance with those standards set forth in section 30-73, the property owner or consumer shall cause said device to be repaired or replaced so as to meet the standards set forth in section 30-73 within five days of written notice by the utility. In the event the backflow prevention device is not repaired or replaced within five days after written notice by the utility, the utility is authorized to suspend water service to the consumer's premises without further notice until such time as the device is repaired or replaced such as to be in compliance with section 30-73. 
(b)  Violation of this division by the consumer or the property owner shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1996, § 30-1709; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Secs. 30-80—30-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SYSTEM 

Sec. 30-100. - Abbreviations and definitions for sewerage systems. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 

 
  
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXIV; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-101. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  Purpose and policy. 
(1)  This article regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains; private sewage disposal; the installation and connection of building sewers and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewer system; and the removal, transportation and disposal of scavenger wastes; and provides penalties for the violation thereof and establishment of fees and other matters, in the county. 
(2)  Objectives of this article are: 
a.  To prevent introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge. 
b.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system (protect the environment). 
c.  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system. 
d.  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system. 
(b)  Georgia Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. All subdivisions developed in the county which utilize on-site systems shall be regulated, designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the current Georgia Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  It shall be the developer's responsibility for design, engineering, and installation of the system, unless service is provided by the BCS&WU). 
(2)  A predevelopment review shall be required and approved by the county health department prior to the submission of any subdivision application greater than four lots. 
(3)  The county shall have the first right of refusal to provide sewer service to any development in the county service delivery area. 
(4)  A high intensity soil study shall be conducted in accordance with section 290-5-26-.14(2) of the Georgia Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, with the exception of the topographic map, which shall be submitted with one-foot contour intervals along with the subdivision grading plan which provides proposed grading contours for both the primary and secondary drainage field locations in compliance with the county plot plan checklist for each of the proposed lots. 
(5)  The developer shall be required to satisfy the applicable conditions of any county reuse plan in effect at the time of subdivision approval. 
(6)  A final inspection by the county health department shall be required at the time a certificate of occupancy is requested for the structure. 
(7)  PUDs are excluded. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXV; Ord. of 7-10-2007; Ord. of 6-19-2012) 
Sec. 30-102. - Sewer construction and service responsibility. 
The construction, operation and maintenance of all sanitary sewer lines under the county's jurisdiction are the responsibility of the county sewer and water utility. All existing and future sanitary sewer lines installed in the county and all areas served by the sanitary sewer lines are within the jurisdiction of BCS&WU, except those areas within the corporate limits of municipalities, unless arranged by prior agreement or ordinance. The manager supervises all resources of the BCS&WU to effectively carry out the responsibilities of constructing, operating and maintaining the sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXVI; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-103. - Contracting. 
BCS&WU shall be expressly authorized and empowered to contract for a period not exceeding 50 years with any public agency, public corporation, city, town, county or authority, and they with BCS&WU for water, sewer or other activities and transactions as such subdivisions are by law authorized, and any and all contracts concerning water and sewage heretofore so entered into by BCS&WU are expressly ratified and approved. That contract may be extended for an additional period if changes in the law occur during the contract running period. This authorization shall be cumulative of all other powers authorized and delegated to BCS&WU and other governmental subdivisions, cities, towns and counties by other laws of whatever kind and nature; and this enactment shall not limit or restrict such power or authority in any way. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXVII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-104. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged and maintained in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the health office. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(b)  No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tank unless he shall hold a valid permit for such work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of such a permit pending an inspection and approval of the site and location of the proposed work. Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered, and enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer. 
(c)  The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with the recommendations of the state department of human resources. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 21,780 square feet with an approved public or private water system. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(d)  No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved, nor in any place where the health officer deems that use of same to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(e)  At such time as public sewer becomes available within 1,000 feet of the property served by a private wastewater disposal system after the adoption date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days after notice from the county health officer due to a malfunctioning system which can no longer be repaired and/or function in compliance with state regulations. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(f)  Any lot or tract of land five acres or greater in size that is located within 1,000 feet of a public sewer that is subdivided after the adoption date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived in order to create lots less than five acres in size shall be required to make a direct connection to the system, with the exception of any lot(s) or remainder thereof which is five acres or greater in size. This condition shall apply to all of the newly created lots as well as the remainder, regardless of distance from the sewer system. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge, into any manhole, catch basin or other opening, into the BCS&WU wastewater system, or any system connected with and discharging into the sewer system, the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewage or other similar matter or material, except as provided in section 30-115(d)(1). 
(h)  Premises with private wastewater disposal systems that do not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within 30 days from the receipt of written notification from the health officer. 
(i)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXVIII; Ord. of 7-10-2007; Ord. of 10-8-2013) 
Sec. 30-105. - Sewer service charges. 
(a)  General. A charge is hereby levied on users of the county sewer and water utility's POTW for the total cost of operation and maintenance of such works, including replacement. The system of charges shall be established, maintained and annually reviewed and revised to ensure that each recipient of wastewater treatment services pays his proportionate share of the total cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement. In setting said rates, factors such as strength, volume and delivery flow rate characteristics shall be considered by BCS&WU and included as the basis for the user's contribution to ensure proportional distribution of total operation, maintenance and replacement costs to each user or class of user. BCS&WU shall review user charges annually, and revise them periodically to reflect actual treatment works total operations, maintenance and replacement cost. Sewer user service charges and rates shall be set for the purpose of generating sufficient revenue to offset the costs of all treatment works operations, maintenance and replacement costs. 
(b)  Service charge determination. Sewer user service charges shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The said sewer user service charge shall be based upon the quantity of water used by the said premises or facility therein or thereon as the same is measured by a water meter or meters therein used, or as otherwise currently established. 
(2)  Said sewer user service charge shall be established by a formula consisting of the fraction of the "total operation, maintenance and replacement cost per unit time" over the "total volume contribution for all users per unit time" multiplied by the "volume contribution from the user per unit of time." 
(3)  Said sewer user service charge shall consist of a charge per 1,000 gallons of water consumed, including adjustments thereto. 
(4)  Water used from private sources shall be metered, and that portion of the sewer user service charge for the portion of sewerage shall be computed accordingly. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXIX; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-106. - Other water sources. 
In the event a lot, parcel of land, premises or facility discharging wastewater, industrial waste, water of other liquids, either directly or indirectly, into BCS&WU/A's wastewater system, or which ultimately enters the sewer system, is supplied, in whole or in part, with water from wells or any source other than BCS&WU, then such wells other source of supply shall be registered with BCS&WU, and if the water from said well or other supply is not measured by a water meter, the owner or occupant shall, at his own cost, install and maintain a meter on said supplies in such a location and in such a manner as is satisfactory to BCS&WU. These meters shall serve as a control for the establishment of the sewer service charge and shall be read monthly or bimonthly by agents of BCS&WU. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXX; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-107. - Wastewater not discharged to POTW. 
Where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the manger that a significant portion of the water as measured by the water meter or meters does not enter the wastewater system, then the manager may require or permit the installation of additional meters or other devices as may be deemed necessary to establish that portion that does not enter the wastewater system, and the correct meter flow will be used for billing of the sewer user service charge. All such additional facilities will be provided by the owner of the premises concerned or other interested parties at no expense to BCS&WU. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXI; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-108. - Termination of service. 
If the payment of the sewer user service charge and/or the industrial waste surcharge is allowed to go into default by the customer, BCS&WU may take appropriate action to terminate the customer's water and sewer service, until such time as all sums due for sewer service, including penalties, are paid in full. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-109. - Industrial waste surcharge. 
(a)  All persons discharging industrial waste into the public sewers shall be charged and assessed a surcharge, in addition to any sewer service charges, if these wastes have a concentration greater than the following "normal" concentrations: 
(1)  A five-day, 20-degree Celsius biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 225 mg/l; 
(2)  A total suspended solids (TSS) of 225 mg/l; 
(3)  A total Kjehldahl nitrogen (TKN) of 40 mg/l; 
(4)  A total phosphorus of six mg/l; or 
(5)  Any other pollutants in excess of the "normal" level of such pollutants. 
(b)  The amount of such surcharge shall reflect the cost incurred by BCS&WU in handling the excess pollutants. This surcharge shall include a proportionate share of the following: fixed charges for maintenance, operations and replacement of the sewerage system to include sewers, plants, pumping stations and other necessary systems including depreciation and other incidental expenses. 
(c)  Surcharge determination. When the BOD, TSS, TKN, or phosphorus of the water or waste accepted for admission to BCS&WU's wastewater system exceeds the values of these constituents for "normal" wastewater the excess concentration shall be evaluated in terms of "normal" wastewater and be subject to a surcharge on the amount derived in accordance with the following formula: Amount of surcharge = B1 (B) + S1 (S) + N1 (N) + P1 (P) + X1 (X) V. 
(1)  B1 = total operation, maintenance and replacement cost for treatment of a unit of BOD. 
(2)  B = concentration of BOD from the user above the base level. 
(3)  S1 total operation, maintenance and replacement cost for treatment of a unit of TSS. 
(4)  S = concentration of suspended solids from the user above the base level. 
(5)  N1 = total operation, maintenance and replacement cost for treatment of a unit of TKN. 
(6)  N = concentration of TKN from the user above the base level. 
(7)  P1 = total operation, maintenance and replacement cost for treatment of a unit of phosphorus. 
(8)  P = concentration of phosphorus from the user above the base level. 
(9)  X1 = total operation, maintenance and replacement cost for treatment of a unit of any pollutant. 
(10)  X = total contribution of any pollutant from the user above the base level. 
(11)  V = volume contributed from the user per unit time. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXIII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-110. - Annual review and billing. 
The rates of surcharges shall be reviewed annually by BCS&WU in order that the above factors may correctly represent current treatment cost, and may be modified at any time. Industrial waste surcharges provided for herein shall be prepared and rendered with the regular water and sewerage bill. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXIV; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-111. - Flow measurement. 
The volume of flow used to compute industrial waste surcharges shall be based upon metered, estimated or prorated water consumption as shown in the records of meter reading maintained by BCS&WU. In the event that a person discharging waste into the public wastewater system produces evidence to the manager that a significant portion of the total annual volume of water used for all purposes does not reach the public sewer system, an estimated percentage of total water consumption to be used in computing charges may be agreed upon between the manager and the persons discharging industrial waste into the sewer. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXV; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-112. - Disputes. 
In the event that an analysis of waste determined by the sampling and gauging of waste from a person or industry by BCS&WU is disputed, a program of re-sampling and gauging, with subsequent chemical determinations, may be instituted as follows: 
(1)  The person or industrial user interested must submit a request for re-sampling and gauging of their waste to BCS&WU by letter and bind themselves to bear the expenses incurred by BCS&WU in the re-sampling and gauging and subsequent chemical determination of the waste. 
(2)  The chemist or engineer employed by the company or person responsible for the request submitted to BCS&WU must confer with BCS&WU's representative in charge of gauging and sampling. They will establish the length of the rerun and the methods to be employed to determine the flow and to sample the flow. 
(3)  The chemist or engineer engaged by the person or industry may be present during the gauging and sampling operation and also in the laboratory during the chemical determination of the analysis. 
(4)  The results of the analysis, determined from the quantity and quality of the flow, shall be considered an analysis of record and shall be used to establish current billing procedures. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXVI; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-113. - Building sewers and connections. 
The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the BCS&WU jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of BCS&WU is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities herein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provision of this article, within 30 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer, provided that, where no sewer is available, septic tanks and other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health officer may be used. 
(1)  Connections. No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the manager. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that in turn is connected directly or indirectly to the public sanitary sewer unless such a connection is approved by BCS&WU. 
a.  A separate and independent building sewer and connection shall be provided for every building unless otherwise approved. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each residential unit of multi-unit residences unless otherwise approved. 
b.  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of building sewers shall be borne by the owner. The owners shall indemnify BCS&WU for any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
c.  All building sewers and connections shall be the responsibility and property of the landowner; and BCS&WU shall have no ownership in the same and no responsibility for maintenance of the same. 
d.  All such connection shall be made gas-tight and watertight. 
(2)  Building sewer permits. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits, one for residential and commercial service, and the other for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the BCS&WU. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the manager. A permit fee and an amount currently set by BCS&WU at the time the application is filed for residential and commercial service, or as currently set for an industrial building sewer connection, shall be paid to BCS&WU at the time the application is filed. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the building inspector of the county when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the building inspector or his representative. Water and sewer service shall not be instituted until all fees levied by BCS&WU are paid and the county building inspector approves the connection. 
(3)  Applicable codes. The size, materials of construction, methods of construction, slope, and alignment of all water and wastewater facilities construction shall conform to the technical codes and specifications described below. To the extent that any conflicting provisions exist in the below-described technical codes and specifications, the provisions of the earliest mentioned document shall prevail. 
a.  The plumbing code in effect in the county as it presently exists or may be amended. 
b.  The building code in effect in the county as it presently exists or as it may be amended. 
c.  The International Residential Code as adopted by the county. 
d.  The current Standards for Residential and Commercial Development in Bryan County as it presently exists or as it may be amended. 
e.  County cross connection or backflow prevention program if in effect in the county as it presently exists or as it may be amended. 
f.  Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, latest edition (for wastewater system construction). 
g.  American Water Works Association Standard Specifications C-100 through C-900, latest editions (for water system construction). 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXVII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-114. - General sewer use requirements. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the county, or the area under the jurisdiction of BCS&WU, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow, to any open drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this article. 
(1)  Prohibited discharge standards. 
a.  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
b.  Special prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
1.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Celsius, using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
2.  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
3.  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension; 
4.  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
5.  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 
6.  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
7.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
8.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the manager. 
c.  Other prohibitions. The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to the public sanitary sewers to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limbs, public property, or constitute a nuisance. BCS&WU may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In determining acceptability, BCS&WU will consider the quantity of subject waste in relation to the flows and velocities in the sewers, materials or construction of the sewer, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, the toxicity of the pollutant, its persistence, degradability, and other pertinent factors. The limitations and restrictions on the materials or characteristic of the wastes or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without written approval of the manager or his designated representative are as follows: 
1.  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
2.  Wastewater that imparts color, which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes, and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating BCS&WU's NPDES or LAS permit; 
3.  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, except in compliance with the applicable state or federal regulations; 
4.  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, de-ionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the manager; 
5.  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
6.  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the manager in a wastewater discharge permit; 
7.  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
8.  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW or in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l; 
9.  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 200 mg/l; 
10.  Wastewater causing two readings on an explosive hazard meter at the point of discharge into the sewer, or at any point in the POTW, of more than ten percent, or any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter; 
11.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the wastewater plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge to the receiving waters; 
12.  Water or wastes containing taste- and odor-producing contaminants in such quantities that after treatment of sewage these contaminants impart their taste and odor to receiving water; 
13.  Any contaminant that is harmful to the operation or efficiency of wastewater treatment plants, or the health and welfare of the residents of the county; 
14.  Ground paper products shall be prohibited from discharge to the sanitary sewer; 
15.  Discharges of materials or substances that would cause the effluent quality from wastewater treatment plant to violate state and federal standards. 
d.  If any water or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which contain the substances identified in subsections (1)a through c of this section, and which may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the manager may: 
1.  Reject the wastes; 
2.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
3.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
4.  Require surcharge payment to cover additional cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. 
If the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows is allowed, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of BCS&WU. An owner or operator of any source to which the pretreatment standards are applicable shall comply with 40 CFR 403, as the same may be from time to time amended or replaced. 
e.  Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(2)  National categorical pretreatment standards. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. 
a.  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant is wastewater, BCS&WU may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
b.  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, BCS&WU shall impose an alternative limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
c.  A user may obtain a variance from categorical pretreatment standards if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
d.  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
e.  When BCS&WU's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by national categorical pretreatment standards, BCS&WU may apply to the approval authority for modification of these specific limits. The term "consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of a pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in 95 percent of the samples taken when measured according to procedures set forth in 40 CFR 403, section 403.7(c)(2). BCS&WU may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403, section 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the state environmental protection division is obtained. 
(3)  State pretreatment standards. State pretreatment standards located at chapter 391-3-6.08 of Georgia Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control are hereby incorporated. 
(4)  Local limits. 
a.  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits (mg/l): 

 
  
b.  The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The manager may impose limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration based limitations above. 
(5)  Right of revision. BCS&WU reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(6)  Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The manager may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXVIII; Ord. of 7-10-2007; Ord. of 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 30-115. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 30-114 with the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or BCS&WU, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to BCS&WU for review and approval before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from that responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to BCS&WU under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, BCS&WU may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  BCS&WU may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(3)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(4)  When required by BCS&WU, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meter and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of waste by BCS&WU and its employees. Such structure when required shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by BCS&WU. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his own expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(5)  Each significant industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Additionally, any user that handles hazardous wastes, any priority pollutant as shown on the EPA list, or any prohibited materials shall, upon request of the manager, provide proof of protection from accidental discharge of hazardous wastes, priority pollutants or prohibited materials. Facilities to prevent the accidental discharge or prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. 
(c)  Accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two years, BCS&WU shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge slug control plan. BCS&WU may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, BCS&WU may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the manager of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 30-118(f); and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(d)  Hauled wastewater. 
(1)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by BCS&WU, and at such times as are established by BCS&WU. Such waste shall not violate section 30-109 or any other requirements established by BCS&WU. Septic tank waste haulers are required to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(2)  The manager shall require haulers of waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The manager may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The manager also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(3)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by BCS&WU. No load may be discharged without prior consent of BCS&WU. BCS&WU may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. BCS&SW may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(4)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(e)  Groundwater remediation sites. 
(1)  Groundwater remediation site wastewater may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by BCS&WU, and at such times as are established by BCS&WU. Such waste shall not violate section 30-109 or any other requirement established by BCS&WU. The manager shall require groundwater remediation sites to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(2)  BCS&WU also may prohibit the discharge of groundwater remediation site wastewater. The discharge of groundwater remediation site wastewater is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(3)  No wastewater may be discharged without prior consent of BCS&WU. The manager may collect samples of the discharge to ensure compliance with applicable standards. 
(f)  Food service facility grease management program. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this program is to minimize the introduction of fats, oils, and greases into the BCS&WU wastewater collection system. The main components of the program are the proper sizing, installation, and maintenance of grease interceptors. The administrative and inspection requirements of food service facilities are established herein as well. 
(2)  General criteria. 
a.  Installation requirements for new food service facilities. All proposed or remodeled (means expanded service) food service facilities inside the BCS&WU wastewater service area shall be required to install an approved, properly operated and maintained grease interceptor. All interceptor units shall be installed outdoors of the food service facility building unless the user can demonstrate to BCS&WU that an outdoor interceptor would not be feasible. All interceptor units shall be of the type and capacity approved by the county and BCS&WU. 
b.  Prohibited discharges. Domestic wastewater shall not be discharged to the grease interceptor unless specifically approved, in writing, by BCS&WU. 
c.  Requirements for existing food service facilities. All existing food service facilities inside the BCS&WU wastewater service area are expected to conduct their operations in such a manner that grease is captured on the user's premises and then properly disposed. Existing food service facilities will be handled under BCS&WU grease management program in the following manner: 
1.  BCS&WU will periodically inspect each food service facility on an as needed basis to ensure that each facility is complying with the intent of the grease management program. The as needed inspection shall be determined by the BCS&WU. 
2.  Each food service facility in the vicinity of the problem area will be inspected. The facilities' grease control practices and the adequacy of their grease control interceptor/equipment will be assessed. Maintenance records will also be reviewed. 
3.  Following the inspections, BCS&WU will send written notice to the inspected food service facilities, containing a summary of the policy requirements, and the results of the inspection. The inspections will typically result in one or more of the following actions: 
(i)  Facilities equipped with an appropriate and adequately sized grease interceptor which are meeting the intent of the grease management program through effective grease control practices will be commended for their compliance. 
(ii)  After notice and an opportunity to be heard, facilities not in compliance shall be issued a letter of violation, and if such facility fails to achieve compliance it shall be required to develop and submit to BCS&WU a proposed plan designed to achieve compliance through improved housekeeping and/or increased maintenance and pumping of the existing grease interceptor/equipment. 
(iii)  Facilities that are not successful in achieving compliance with the intent of the grease management program through improved housekeeping and increased maintenance and pumping on the existing grease interceptor/equipment will be required to install the necessary interceptor/equipment to bring the facility into compliance. 
d.  Waste minimization plan. Food service facilities shall develop and implement a waste minimization plan pertaining to the disposal of grease, oils, and food particles. Educational materials are available from BCS&WU's environmental compliance regarding the minimization of these wastes. 
e.  Floor drains. Only floor drains which discharge or have the potential to discharge grease shall be connected to a grease interceptor. 
f.  Location. Each grease interceptor shall be installed and connected so that it is easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted grease at any time. Grease interceptors required under this article shall be installed outdoors of the food service facility. The best location is in an area outside of an exterior wall, but upstream from the domestic wastewater drain line(s). A grease interceptor may not be installed inside any part of a building unless approved in writing by BCS&WU. The user bears the burden of demonstrating that an outdoor grease interceptor is not feasible. 
(3)  Design criteria. 
a.  Construction of interceptors. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the county plumbing standards, and outdoor units shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention. All alternative grease removal devices or technologies shall be subject to the written approval of BCS&WU. Such approval shall be based on demonstrated removal efficiencies of the proposed technology. 
b.  Access. Outdoor grease interceptors shall be provided with two manholes terminating one inch above finished grade with a cast iron frame and cover. All grease interceptors shall be designed and installed to allow for complete access for inspection and maintenance of inner chamber(s) as well as viewing and sampling of wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
c.  Load-bearing capacity. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the grease interceptor shall be designed to have adequate load-bearing capacity (example: vehicular traffic in parking or driving areas). 
d.  Inlet and outlet piping. Wastewater discharging to the grease interceptor shall enter only through the inlet pipe or the interceptor. The inlet pipe bottom tee branch shall extend one foot below liquid level. The outlet pipe bottom tee branch shall be submerged to two-thirds of the liquid depth. Each grease interceptor shall have only one inlet and one outlet pipe. 
e.  Interceptor sizing. 
1.  Outdoor grease interceptors shall not have a capacity of less than 1,500 gallons nor exceed a capacity of 3,000 gallons. No matter what the calculated capacity, using the following formulas, the minimum interceptor size shall be 1,500 gallons. If the calculated capacity using one of the following formulas exceeds 3,000 gallons, then multiple units in series shall be installed. The size of a grease interceptor shall be approximated by the following methods and grease interceptor size shall be the larger of the two results. 
(i)  Interceptor capacity (gallons) = (S) x (25) x Hr/12). 
S = Number of seats. 
Hr = Maximum hours of daily operation (including preparation and clean up time). 
(ii)  Interceptor capacity (gallons) = (Sum of fixture flows) x (20). 

 
  
2.  Under-sink or in-line grease interceptor requirements shall meet Plumbing and Drainage Institute Standard PDI - G101. 

 
  
Grease interceptor designs represent minimum standards for normal usage. Installations with heavier usage require more stringent measures for which the user is responsible and shall pay the costs to provide additional measures if required by BCS&WU. BCS&WU reserves the right to evaluate interceptor sizing on an individual basis for facilities with special conditions, such as highly variable flows, high levels of grease discharge, or other unusual situations that are not adequately addressed by the formula. 
(4)  Grease interceptor maintenance. 
a.  Pumping. All grease interceptors shall be maintained by the user at the user's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludges and solids. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the interceptor from which the waste was removed or any other grease interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be disposed, is strictly prohibited. 
b.  Pumping frequency. Outdoor grease interceptors must be pumped out completely a minimum of once every three months. Under-sink or in-line grease interceptors must be pumped/cleaned out completely a minimum of once every month. Grease interceptors may need to be pumped more frequently as needed to prevent carryover of grease into the sanitary sewer collection system. Pumping frequency may be extended past the minimum period if it can be demonstrated by the user and approved by BCS&WU. 
c.  Pump out order. When the oil and grease concentrations exceed BCS&WU's maximum discharge limits and/or the combined depth of bottom and top solids exceeds 33 percent of the total depth of the trap, BCS&WU will issue a pump out order to the user. The user shall have seven days from receipt of the order to comply. Where an emergency exists, a written or verbal warning shall be given to the user, and the user will have 24 hours to comply. 
d.  Disposal of interceptor pumped material. All waste removed from grease interceptor shall be recorded on a proper manifest form. Also, all waste removed from grease interceptor must be disposed at a facility approved by BCS&WU to receive such waste in accordance with the provisions of this program. In no way shall the pumped material be returned to any private or public portion of the sanitary sewer collection system. Responsibility for waste removed from or found in a grease interceptor or waste improperly disposed of shall be placed upon the private company generator food service facility owner. 
e.  Additives. Any additive(s) placed into the grease interceptor or building discharge line system on a constant, regular, or scheduled basis shall be reported to BCS&WU. Such additives shall include, but are not limited to, commercially available bacteria or other additives designed to absorb, consume, or treat fats, oils, and grease. The use of additives shall in no way be considered as an alternative technology or a substitution for maintenance procedures required herein. 
f.  Chemical treatment. Chemical treatments such as drain cleaners, enzymes, acids, and other chemicals designed to dissolve, purge, or remove grease shall not be allowed to enter the grease interceptor. 
(5)  Administrative requirements. 
a.  Initial data acquisition. All food service facilities will be asked to complete a data sheet to establish the grease interceptor database. The BCS&WU database will be updated with additional or modified information after each yearly inspection. 
b.  Administrative fees. No fee will be charged for an annual inspection by BCS&WU. However, if the user's grease interceptor is not in compliance with this section, a re-inspection fee as established by the board will be charged for each inspection thereafter until compliance is achieved. 
c.  Inspection and entry. Authorized personnel of BCS&WU, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall have the right to enter upon all properties subject to this program, at any time and without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or record review, as part of this program. 
d.  Record retention and reporting. All users must keep a record of any cleaning or maintenance of their grease interceptor. The following records must be kept on-site at the food service facility for a period of two years: 
1.  Manifests are required for all grease interceptors and shall contain the following information: 
(i)  Food service facility (generator) information, including name, address, volume pumped, date and time of pumping, and generator signature verifying the information; 
(ii)  Transporter information, including company name, address, license plate number, permit number, driver name, and driver signature verifying transporter information; and 
(iii)  Receiving information, including facility name, address, date and time of receiving, EPD permit number, and signature verifying receipt of the waste. 
Manifests must be mailed, faxed, or electronically submitted to BCS&WU environmental compliance within 14 days of interceptor maintenance. 
A manifest may not be required for under-sink or in-line grease interceptors, if user can demonstrate to BCS&WU a valid reason not to use one. 
2.  Maintenance logs are required for all under-sink and in-line interceptors. This log shall include the date, time, amount pumped or cleaned, hauler, disposal site, and signature. The log shall be kept in a conspicuous location for inspection. This log shall be made immediately available to health officer or BCS&WU representative upon request. 
(6)  Enforcement. Enforcement of these regulations shall be in accordance with the provisions of the BCS&WU enforcement response plan. Failure to comply with this program will be grounds for penalty imposition and/or discontinuance of service. Additionally, failure to comply may result in the health officer revoking the food service permit. 
(g)  Oil, grease, and grit interceptors. Oil, grease, and grit interceptors shall be provided when they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, oil, and sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interceptor units shall be of the type and capacity approved by BCS&WU. 
(1)  Requirements. 
a.  Any user who discharges a wastewater which contains greater than the quantity of oil and grease regulated in section 30-109; and provided that the excess oil and grease is floatable and can be effectively removed in an oil/grease interceptor, then said user will be required to install an oil/grease interceptor. This includes all facilities that have a potential to discharge petroleum-based products to the sanitary sewer such as vehicle maintenance facilities. 
b.  All users whose wastewater discharge is associated with large quantities of grit, sand, or gravel shall be required to install a sand interceptor or trap. All car/truck wash systems shall be required to install sand traps. 
(2)  Design criteria. 
a.  All oil, grease, and grit interceptors used in conjunction with facilities other than food service establishments shall have a capacity that will provide not less than ten minutes nor more than 30 minutes retention time as the peak eight-hour flow rate. Flow through velocities shall not exceed one foot per second at the peak eight-hour flow rate. No oil/water separator or sand/grit interceptor shall be smaller than 750 gallons or larger than 3,000 gallons. If the calculated capacity exceeds 3,000 gallons, then multiple units in series shall be installed. 
b.  All oil, grease, and grit interceptors shall have two access ports that will allow for inspection, sampling, and cleaning. 
(3)  Maintenance. 
a.  All oil, grease, and grit interceptors shall be maintained by the user at his expense, and in continuous efficient operation at all times. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured materials, and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal that are subject to review and inspection by BCS&WU. 
b.  All oil, grease, and grit interceptors shall be pumped out and cleaned at a minimum when 50 percent of the retention capacity is filled with oils and/or solids. The frequency of removal may be increased by BCS&WU or the user to ensure that no overflows of oil, grease, or sand into the wastewater system ever occur. 
(4)  Records. If the owner contracts for the cleaning, removal, or hauling of collected materials with a currently licensed waste disposal firm, then a manifest must be available from the company hauling the waste away. Under no circumstances shall the collected materials ever be returned to the wastewater system. BCS&WU may require a user to submit periodic reports about the cleaning, removal, or hauling of collected materials from the separator or interceptor. Such records shall be kept on-site for a period of three years and be made available upon request. 
(5)  Inspection. An inspection by BCS&WU may be conducted on all oil, grease, and grit interceptors and shall require the owner to correct any deficiencies immediately at his own expense. 
(h)  Garbage grinders. BCS&WU reserves the right to require any user to cease operation of a garbage grinder and permanently remove such equipment as necessary. 
(i)  Best management practices plan. The manager may require a user to develop and submit for review a best management practices (BMP) plan to control discharges to the wastewater system. The user shall implement the provisions of the BMP plan on a timely basis and shall exercise due diligence in pursuit thereof. The BMP plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
(1)  Purpose and objective(s) of the plan; 
(2)  Description of strategies to minimize/prevent the introduction of pollutants into the user's discharge and to minimize waste generation; 
(3)  Description of best management practices (options) available to the user to control accidental spillage, leaks and drainage; 
(4)  Description of best available or practicable control technologies available for this specific application; 
(5)  Description of the overall facility, including site plan; 
(6)  Description of the waste handling, treatment and discharge disposal facilities, including flow diagrams and process schematics; 
(7)  Description of operating and maintenance procedures; 
(8)  Inventory of raw materials and a list of waste sources; 
(9)  Description of employee training programs, continuing education programs and participation; 
(10)  Description of documentation, including records keeping and forms; 
(11)  Description of monitoring activities; and 
(12)  Information log of facility personnel, organization chart, emergency phone numbers, contact persons and maintenance or service representatives. 
(j)  Pollution prevention plans. The manager may require a user to develop and submit a pollution prevention (P2) plan including an implementation timetable for review. The user shall implement the P2 plan on a timely basis once each plan has been approved. The P2 plan shall be developed in accordance with EPA and EPD guidelines, and shall contain the following elements, at a minimum: 
(1)  Description of strategies to minimize/prevent the introduction of pollutants into the user's discharge, and/or housekeeping of oil storage areas; 
(2)  Description of routine preventive maintenance and schedule of activities; 
(3)  Description of spill prevention techniques and response procedures; 
(4)  Description of employee training program and participation in pollution prevention measures, preventive maintenance, response procedures and documentation; 
(5)  Description of recordkeeping and reporting protocols, including forms; 
(6)  Description of the overall facility, including a site plan, process schematics and plumbing diagrams; 
(7)  Description of waste handling, treatment and discharge facilities, including flow diagrams and process schematics; 
(8)  List of sources of wastes and locations for their introduction into the discharge; 
(9)  Inventory of raw materials, chemicals, intermediate products and final products on-site; 
(10)  Information log of facility personnel, organization chart, emergency phone numbers, contact persons and continuing educational requirements; 
(11)  Compilation of applicable permits; and 
(12)  Timetable for implementation of any necessary changes or additions to the user's procedures or facilities. 
(k)  Medical wastes. 
(1)  Hospitals, clinics, medical/dental practitioner offices, convalescent and nursing homes, medical/dental laboratories and funeral homes shall dispose of medical wastes, pathological wastes, laboratory wastes, contaminated medical wastes and wastes from expired humans (corpses) in accordance with the latest edition of guidelines that are published by the EPA, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the public health department or other appropriate federal and state agencies. 
(2)  Toxic, biological or contaminated wastes which are not addressed by the aforementioned guidelines shall not be discharged to the wastewater collection system without written permission from the manager. 
(3)  Hospitals, clinics, medical/dental practitioner offices, convalescent and nursing homes, medical/dental laboratories and funeral homes shall prepare and maintain a biomedical waste plan. The biomedical waste plan shall be available for review by the manager. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXIX; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-116. - Wastewater discharge permit application. 
(a)  Wastewater analysis. When requested by the manager, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The manager is authorized to prepare a form from this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(1)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the manager, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to subsection (c) of this section may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(2)  BCS&WU may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(3)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in section 30-121. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after said date, apply to the manager for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the manager. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permitting new connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit that proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater permit must submit a permit application, which includes, but is not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 30-118(a)(2); 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum, per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the manager to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(f)  Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXX; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-117. - Wastewater discharge permit issuance process. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit contents. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification of BCS&WU in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, without limitations, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the manager to ensure compliance with the article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permit appeals. The manager shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition BCS&WU to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If BCS&WU fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the county superior court, within 30 days of BCS&WU's final administrative action. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permit modification. BCS&WU may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to BCS&WU's sewer, BCS&WU personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant or variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct topographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permits; or 
(9)  To select a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit transfer. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 90 days' advance notice to BCS&WU and BCS&WU approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to BCS&WU must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
a.  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
b.  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
c.  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(2)  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of the facility transfer. 
(f)  Wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
(1)  BCS&WU may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
a.  Failure to notify BCS&WU of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
b.  Failure to provide prior notification to BCS&WU of changed conditions pursuant to section 30-118(e); 
c.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
d.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
e.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
f.  Refusing to allow BCS&WU timely access to the facility premises and records; 
g.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
h.  Failure to pay fines; 
i.  Failure to pay sewer service charges; 
j.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
k.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
l.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
m.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(g)  Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 30-116(e), a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(h)  Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. No person or governments residing or operating outside the limits of the county shall discharge or cause to be discharged any materials into the sanitary sewer system of the county without an inter-jurisdictional agreement or the prior approval of the county sewer and water utility. 
(1)  If another jurisdiction, or user located within another jurisdiction, contributes wastewater to the POTW, BCS&WU/A may enter into an inter-jurisdictional agreement with the contributing jurisdiction. 
(2)  Prior to entering into an agreement, BCS&WU shall request the following information from the contributing jurisdiction: 
a.  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing jurisdiction; 
b.  An inventory of all users located within the contributing jurisdiction that are discharging to the POTW; and 
c.  Such other information as BCS&WU may deem necessary. 
(3)  An inter-jurisdictional agreement shall contain the following conditions: 
a.  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to adopt a sewer use ordinance, which is at least as stringent as this article, and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 30-114(4). Requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to BCS&WU's ordinances or local limits; 
b.  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
c.  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing jurisdiction; which of these activities will be conducted by BCS&WU; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing jurisdiction and BCS&WU (this is only valid if the contributing jurisdiction has an approved program); 
d.  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to provide BCS&WU with access to all information that the contributing jurisdiction obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
e.  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing jurisdiction's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for monitoring the contributing jurisdiction's discharge; 
g.  A provision ensuring BSC&WU access to the facilities of users located within the contributor's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by BCS&WU; and 
h.  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the inter-jurisdictional agreement. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXXI; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-118. - Report requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the manager a report which contains the information listed in subsection (2) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the manager a report which contains the information listed in subsection (2) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  The user described above shall submit the following information: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with the procedures set out in section 30-119(a). 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection (b) of this section. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 30-116(f). 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (a)(2)g of this section: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the manager no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the manager. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
(1)  Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the manager a report containing the information described in subsections (a)(2)d through h of this section. 
(2)  For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 30-116(f). 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency of no more than 12 times but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 30-116(f). 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required, using the procedures prescribed in section 30-119(b), the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify BCS&WU of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system that might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. 
(1)  BCS&WU may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 30-116(e). 
(2)  BCS&WU may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 30-117(d) in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(f)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the manager of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (f)(1) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(g)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to BCS&WU as BCS&WU may require. 
(h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the manager within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if BCS&WU monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if BCS&WU samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(i)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, and estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during the calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection (e) of this section. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections (a), (c), and (d) of this section. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (i)(1) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the manager, the EPA regional waste management waste division director and state hazardous waste authority of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(j)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(k)  Confidential information. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the manager's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the manager, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(l)  Electronic reporting. The manager may allow reports, including monitoring information, to be submitted on electronic media or electronically using the Internet. In such cases, the user shall acquire the necessary software as approved by the manager, at their own expense. The manager may require an original report, signed and certified, using conventional methods in addition to the electronic format. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXXII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-119. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with the procedures approved by the EPA. 
(b)  Sample collection. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (b)(2) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, BCS&WU may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged; in addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(3)  All sampling and analysis done for compliance purposes must be accompanied by proper chain-of-custody documentation. 
(c)  Right of entry, inspection and sampling. BCS&WU shall have the right to enter the premises of any user as permitted by law to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the manager ready access to all or part of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the manager will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The manager shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quantity shall be calibrated at least biannually to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the manager access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)  Search warrants. If the manager has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of BCS&WU designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from the magistrate court of the county. 
(e)  Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user of BCS&WU, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXXIII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-120. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
BCS&WU shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the county where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in BCS&WU's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completion of construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) that will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXXIV; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-121. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(1)  Notification of violation. When a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the manager may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within five days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(2)  Increased self-monitoring. BCS&WU may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to increase the self-monitoring frequency for any or all parameters. The user will be responsible for all sampling, analyses, and reporting under an increased self-monitoring order. 
(3)  Consent order. BCS&WU may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (a)(5) and (6) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(4)  Show cause hearing. BCS&WU may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 20 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(5)  Compliance orders. When a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, BCS&WU may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(6)  Cease and desist orders. 
a.  When a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or when the user's past violations are likely to recur, BCS&WU may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
1.  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
2.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
b.  Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(7)  Administrative fines. 
a.  When BCS&WU finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, BCS&WU/A may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be addressed for each day during the period of violation. 
b.  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 20 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at the rate allowed by law, not to exceed a rate of 18 percent per annum. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
c.  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for BCS&WU to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, BCS&WU/A may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. BCS&WU may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(8)  Emergency suspensions. 
a.  BCS&WU may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. BCS&WU may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
1.  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, BCS&WU may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. BCS&WU may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection (a)(9) of this section are initiated against the user. 
2.  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsection (a)(4) or (9) of this section. 
b.  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(9)  Termination of discharge. 
a.  In addition to the provisions in this section, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
1.  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
2.  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
3.  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
4.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
5.  Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 30-115. 
b.  Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (a)(4) of this section why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by BCS&WU shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(10)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(b)  Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(1)  Injunctive relief. When a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the manager may petition the superior court of the county through BCS&WU's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The manager may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(2)  Civil penalties. 
a.  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to BCS&WU for a maximum civil penalty of $10,000.00 per violation, per day, and a minimum of $1,000.00. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
b.  The manager may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by BCS&WU. 
c.  In addition to the above-described penalties and damages, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5 can be used to abate any public nuisance resulting from a violation of this article. 
d.  In addition to the above-described penalties and damages, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-52 grants the department of natural resources the power to fine violators up to a maximum of $50,000.00 per day. 
e.  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
f.  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(3)  Criminal prosecution. 
a.  A user who willfully and negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
b.  In addition to the above-described criminal penalties, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-53 imposes misdemeanor penalties up to $25,000.00 per day and imprisonment up to one year. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXXV; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-122. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. 
(1)  For the purpose of this subsection (a), the term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (a)(3) of this section, are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with the applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 30-114(1)a or the specific prohibitions in section 30-114(1)b.3 through 7 if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limits exist, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when BCS&WU was regularly in compliance with its NPDES or LAS permits, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(c)  Bypass. 
(1)  For the purposes of this subsection: 
a.  The term "bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
b.  The term "severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities that causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources that can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (c)(3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  Other regulations regarding bypass include: 
a.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the manager, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
b.  A user shall submit oral notice to the manager of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it became aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The manager may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  Exceptions may include. Bypass is prohibited, and the manager may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXXVI; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-123. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Pretreatment charges and fees. BCS&WU may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating BCS&WU pretreatment program that may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(5)  Other fees as BCS&WU may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable to BCS&WU. 
(b)  Hardship variances. Any person or user, upon written application to the manager, who shows, in the case of the activity being conducted or operated, that compliance with a section of this article should either be impossible or would constitute an undue hardship because of time limitations, may be granted a variance. The variance, granted by the manager, shall be for a reasonable time. The manager may grant a variance on the condition that the person receiving it submit plans for the installation of pretreatment facilities to the manager within six months from the date of issuance of the variance. A variance shall not be granted under the provisions of this section where the person applying therefor is causing a nuisance or other injury to the public. Any variance granted under the provisions of this section shall not relieve the person receiving the variance from any liability or penalties imposed by law for the commission or maintenance of a public nuisance. 
(c)  Recovery of costs incurred. BCS&WU shall have the right to bill the user for recovery of costs incurred when said user is determined to be in violation of the regulations in this sewer use article. 
(Code 1996, ch. 30, art. XXXXVII; Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 101-1. - Application of chapter 1. 
The provisions of chapter 1 apply to this subpart. 
Sec. 101-2. - Permit to disturb burial place in course of land development; review of plans for reinterment. 
(a)  No known burial place of any human remains shall be disturbed for the purposes of developing any land unless a permit is first obtained from the governing authority of the county wherein the burial place is located. The governing authority shall not issue a permit unless it first reviews the plans of the applicant for the permit for the proper reinterment of the remains in order to determine that suitable arrangements for reinterment have been made and that proper reinterment will be accomplished. If the governing authority does not believe that the plans are adequate to ensure proper reinterment, no permit shall be issued. 
(b)  Any person who fails to comply with subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 14-101) 
Secs. 101-3—101-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 101-23. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the planning commission is to assist in guiding and accomplishing a coordinated and harmonious development of the county which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development therefor. 
(Code 1996, § 4-201) 
Sec. 101-24. - Membership. 
The planning commission shall consist of five to ten members who shall be residents of the county, appointed by the county commissioners. The terms of the members shall be for four years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the county commissioners, who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges and after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1996, § 4-202) 
Sec. 101-25. - Organization, rules, staff, and finances. 
(a)  The planning commission shall elect the chairman from its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for re-election. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the county. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be public records. 
(b)  The planning commission may employ such services as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency and planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The employment of such services and the expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the county commissioners. 
(Code 1996, § 4-203) 
Sec. 101-26. - Powers and duties. 
The planning commission is an advisory body only. 
(Code 1996, § 4-204) 
Chapter 103 - BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Building and housing, O.C.G.A. title 8. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 103-1—103-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State building code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 103-19. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the state minimum codes. Hereinafter all of the codes shall be referred to as the "technical codes." 
(Code 1996, § 11-101; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-20. - Code remedial. 
(a)  General. These technical codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural, strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the technical code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan under the requirements of the technical code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the county nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Code 1996, § 11-102; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-21. - Scope; applicability. 
(a)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, the latest edition, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(c)  Electrical. The provision of the National Electrical Code, the latest edition, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(d)  Gas. The provisions of the International Gas Code, the latest edition, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumers' gas piping, gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories. 
(e)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, the latest edition, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems. 
(f)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, the latest edition, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewage system. 
(g)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, the latest edition, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(h)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, the latest edition, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(i)  The International Residential Code. The latest edition, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every one- and two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such dwelling. 
(j)  The Associated Codes and Standards. The following codes, the latest editions, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they are copied fully herein: International Residential Code (Appendix G, "Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs"); International Residential Code (chapter 3, Building Planning and Construction, section R322, Flood Resistant Construction; chapter 4, Foundation, section R4031.7.3, Foundation Elevation, and section R406, Foundation Waterproofing); International Property Maintenance Code; and the International Existing Building Code. 
(Code 1996, § 11-103; Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 10-13-2011) 
Sec. 103-22. - Federal and state authority. 
The provisions of these codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of these codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its rights as provided by law. 
(Code 1996, § 11-104; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-23. - Appendices. 
Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(Code 1996, § 11-105; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-24. - Referenced standards. 
Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(Code 1996, § 11-106; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-25. - Maintenance. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Code 1996, § 11-107; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-26. - Department of planning and zoning. 
The department of planning and zoning ("department") is hereby established and shall be composed of a director and sufficient staff to perform the purpose as previously stated. The expenditures of this department, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for this purpose by the county board of commissioners. The director, hereafter known as the building official, shall be appointed by the county board of commissioners in conformance with qualifications and procedures specified by the county personnel policy. 
(Code 1996, § 11-108; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-27. - Restrictions on employees. 
An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this Code, shall not have financial interest in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflicts with the interests of the department. 
(Code 1996, § 11-109; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-28. - Records. 
The department of planning and zoning shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1996, § 11-110; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-29. - Liability. 
Any officer or employee, or member of the department charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not hereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the county until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Code 1996, § 11-111; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-30. - Reports. 
The department of planning and zoning shall file a report annually covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. Said report may incorporate a summary of the decisions of the board of appeals during said year. 
(Code 1996, § 11-112; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-31. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, mechanical, gas or plumbing system without requiring the entire structure, building, electrical, mechanical, gas or plumbing system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes, provided that the new alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing systems shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed (i.e., from residential to commercial or from single-family to multifamily), the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state as historic buildings, when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  Notice. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for notification to all potential buyers of homes which exist in a potentially hazardous flood zone. 
(Code 1996, § 11-113; Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 10-13-2011) 
Secs. 103-32—103-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 103-51. - General. 
The building official or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building official or his designee is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(Code 1996, § 11-201; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-52. - Right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these technical codes, provided that, if such building or premises is occupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 11-202; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-53. - Stop-work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, or placed in a conspicuous location on the property and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to issuing a stop-work order. 
(Code 1996, § 11-203; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-54. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this Code, in any case where there has been a false statement or misrepresentation of the material facts in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violations of Code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the Code. 
(Code 1996, § 11-204; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-55. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the standard unsafe building abatement code. 
(Code 1996, § 11-205; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-56. - Requirements not covered by codes. 
Any requirement necessary for the strength, stability or proper operations of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Code 1996, § 11-206; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-57. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate, including, but not limited to, certification by a structural engineer registered by the state as a P.E. (professional engineer). 
(Code 1996, § 11-207; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-58. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent found to be violating a provision of the technical codes, or failing to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of this Code is committed or continued shall be considered a separate violation, for which a citation or other such penalty as allowed under state law shall be issued. 
(Code 1996, § 11-207; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Secs. 103-59—103-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 103-90. - Permit application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(1)  Building size requirements. 
a.  A building permit shall be required for all buildings of greater than 120 square feet. 
b.  Buildings under 120 square feet are exempted from the requirement of a building permit unless they are attached to a permanent foundation, in which case a building permit will be required. 
c.  In conforming lots within the A-5 (agricultural) zone only, "pole barns" (structures consisting of a roof supported by pillars) of any size do not require the issuance of a general building permit, unless the structure shall include electricity or plumbing, in which case only the electrical and/or plumbing permit shall be required. Pole barns may include exterior walls only, provided the walls are not load-bearing elements. Pole barns may have floors other than bare earth, provided that the load-bearing members of the structure are not connected to the floor. Pole barns must comply with all applicable state and building and technical codes. 
(2)  Fence permits. Fences enclosing swimming pools per code will be included in the estimated cost of the pool installation and reflected in the pool permit fee. Otherwise, a fence permit will be required. 
(3)  Well permits. Well houses of smaller than 120 square feet will be reflected in the pool permit fee. If the applicant wishes to install a well house of larger than 120 square feet, then a building permit (and engineered drawings) will be required as part of the application. 
(4)  Additional permits. Additional permits that may be issued include: 
a.  Dock permits. 
b.  Electrical permits. 
c.  Plumbing permits. 
d.  Mechanical permits. 
e.  Well permit. 
f.  Fence permit. 
g.  Roofing permit. 
h.  Culvert permit. 
i.  Sign permit. 
j.  Demolition permit. 
(b)  Temporary structures. A special building permit for a limited time shall be obtained before the erection of temporary structures such as construction sheds, seats, canopies, tents and fences used in construction work or for temporary purposes such as reviewing stands. Such structures shall be completely removed upon the expiration of the time limit stated in the permit. 
(c)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(d)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(e)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(f)  Application time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless the department has already issued a permit. The building official may allow up to two extensions for a period of not more than 90 days each, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Code 1996, § 11-301; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-91. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the permit application. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, specifying the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data, where the building official requires such data to be prepared by an architect or engineer, shall be affixed with the official seal of the architect or engineer. 
(c)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where there is a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems, and will also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(d)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(e)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage area must be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantity per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. The building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits for rated assemblies with their hourly rating location of liquid-tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Code 1996, § 11-302; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-92. - Engineered/manufactured metal buildings. 
(a)  Permanent structures. All permanent metal buildings shall be engineered to comply with chapter 12 of the standard building code for wind load requirements in the county. Plans submitted for review shall be accompanied by an engineered foundation plan. 
(b)  Portable structures. All portable metal buildings shall be tied down/anchored sufficiently to meet the county wind load requirements. 
(Code 1996, § 11-303; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-93. - Examination of documents. 
(a)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws regarding egress, construction and general arrangement, and shall be accompanied by the drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes regarding strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided that the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, a certification that the particular system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Code 1996, § 11-304; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-94. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws and ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal, when the applicant requests, shall be in writing and shall contain the reasons for refusal. 
(c)  Public right-of-way. The building official shall not issue a permit for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the application for building permit has been reviewed by the planning and zoning department for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in chapter 32 of the building code. 
(Code 1996, § 11-305; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-95. - Contractors responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state and local rules and regulations concerning them. Where the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before the contractor is permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with a copy of his state and local license and a signed certification of intent to perform the work. 
(Code 1996, § 11-306; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-96. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. 
(b)  Time limitations on permits. A permit shall be valid for one year. Two extensions of time, for periods not more than six months each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension(s) shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. The building official shall document in writing the approval of such extension(s). If a written request for an extension is not made in writing within 30 days after the expiration date, the permit becomes void. Every permit shall become void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 12 months after its issuance, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of more than 12 months. Upon written request from the owner in cases where, due to unusual circumstances (economic hardship, lack of resources, personnel/family issues, etc.), the completion of a structure has been delayed beyond the two maximum permit periods, the building official may extend the building permit period beyond two years in order to complete the inspection(s) required to issue a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations to supervise such work. In addition, the architect or engineer shall be responsible for complying with the permit, providing copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and, upon completion, making and filing with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are approved by the building official. 
(d)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." The building official shall retain one set of drawings so reviewed and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1996, § 11-30; Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 103-97. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the county board of commissioners have been paid. Likewise, an amendment to a permit shall not be released until any additional fee relating to the amendments has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)  Accounting. The department of planning and zoning shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing an application, in accordance with the fee schedule as established by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of buildings, alterations, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Code 1996, § 11-308; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-98. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system for which an application has been received. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (f) of this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy is issued by the building official. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official, upon 24 hours' advance notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 

 
  
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. The building official shall provide written release only after an inspection has been made of successive steps in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, gas, fire protection or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, gas, electrical, or fire protection work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(j)  Violation and penalty. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the technical codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits of, and as provided, by state laws. 
(Code 1996, § 11-309; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-99. - Certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection, etc., systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(b)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, etc., systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
(c)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(Code 1996, § 11-310; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-100. - Service utilities. 
(a)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(b)  Temporary service. Temporary service will be allowed for the following purposes only: 
(1)  The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems in commercial establishments only. 
(2)  Temporary electrical power and lighting installations (building saws) shall be permitted during the period of construction, remodeling, maintenance, repair, or demolition of buildings, structures, equipment, or similar activities. 
(3)  Temporary electrical power and lighting installations shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 90 days for holiday decorative lighting, carnivals, and similar purposes. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the buildings, structures or systems regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. In the case of temporary services, temporary wiring shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction or purpose for which the wiring was installed. 
(d)  Sanitation provisions. Adequate sanitation will be required for each job site. 
(Code 1996, § 11-311; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-101. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the planning and zoning department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the owner of the building is responsible for conspicuously posting on each story of the structure, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official in the plan. The safe floor loads shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. The owner of the building shall be responsible for maintaining such plates, and shall promptly replace the plates if they are lost or defaced. 
(Code 1996, § 11-312; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-102. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Code 1996, § 11-313; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-103. - Construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
The county board of commissioners may create a construction board of adjustment and appeals. If and when such board is created, it shall adhere to the provisions set forth by the International Building Code for such board. In the absence of such board, the board of commissioners shall perform this function. 
(Code 1996, § 11-314; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 103-104. - Automatic update of building codes. 
At the time the state adopts a new code or a supplement, revision or amendment to an existing code, the county building code ordinance shall be deemed automatically amended to include the latest provision of such code. It being the intent of the board to require compliance with the latest code editions as amended from time to time, no formal amendment process shall be required. Nothing herein shall be construed to require construction, for which a permit has already been issued, to comply with such supplements or amendments unless such supplement or amendment specifically states that it is intended to apply to construction in progress. 
(Code 1996, § 11-315; Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Chapter 105 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 105-1. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the flood prevention review board's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 105-9. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V-30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before November 14, 1983. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before November 14, 1983. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. The term "freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after November 14, 1983, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after November 14, 1983, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after November 14, 1983. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. The term "permanent construction" does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any chapter requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be: 
a.  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
b.  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(4)  For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Code 1996, § 6-506; Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-2. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 15 days, or both, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1996, § 6-502(H); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
Sec. 105-3. - Statutory authorization. 
Article IX, section II of the Constitution of the state and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the board of commissioners of the county does ordain as provided in this chapter 
(Code 1996, § 6-501(A); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-4. - Finding of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of unincorporated Bryan County are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood height and velocities. 
(Code 1996, § 6-501(B); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-5. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Code 1996, § 6-501(C); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-6. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1996, § 6-501(D); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-7. - Territorial applicably. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the county board of commissioners. 
(Code 1996, § 6-502(A); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-8. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 6-502(D); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-9. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated March 2, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS, supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county, dated March 2, 2009, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(c)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located in the planning and zoning offices in Richmond Hill and Pembroke. 
(Code 1996, § 6-502(B); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-10. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Code 1996, § 6-502(C); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-11. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1996, § 6-502(E); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-12. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1996, § 6-502(F); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-13. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1996, § 6-502(G); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Secs. 105-14—105-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 105-45. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The county engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 6-503(A); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-46. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the county engineer on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of sections 105-71(2) and 105-73(2); 
d.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of section 105-75(5); and 
e.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed where a structure is subject to the provisions applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after placement of the lowest horizontal structural members. Any regulatory floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.  The county engineer shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Code 1996, § 6-503(B); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-47. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the county engineer shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344; and require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with this chapter, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 105-46(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with sections 105-46(2) and 105-73(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 105-46(1)c and 105-71(2) or 105-73(2). 
(8)  Obtain design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of section 105-75(5). 
(9)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(10)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(11)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(12)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this subsection. 
(13)  Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter in the office of the county engineer which shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 1996, § 6-503(C); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-48. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  The flood prevention review board as established by the county board of commissioners shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the county engineer in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the flood prevention review board may appeal such decision to the county superior court as provided by state law. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the flood prevention review board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor, and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The county engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Agency Management upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the flood prevention review board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 6-505; Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Secs. 105-49—105-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 105-70. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully-enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. (Not applicable in coastal high hazard areas.) 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Code 1996, § 6-504(A); Ord. of 1-6-2009; Ord. of 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 105-71. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, or A with estimated BFE, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. 
a.  Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 105-70(4). 
b.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 105-47(6). 
(3)  Pre-existing homes. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for notification to all potential buyers of homes which exist in a potential hazardous flood zone. 
(4)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles where base flood elevation data are available. 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved: 
1.  On individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood; 
must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an either existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  Meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 105-9 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (5)(a) of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 6-504(B); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-72. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 105-9, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not be delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 105-9, then the county engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the provisions in subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 105-70(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The county engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Code 1996, § 6-504(C); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-73. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 105-9, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 105-71. 
(Code 1996, § 6-504(D); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-74. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 105-9 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 105-70(4). The county engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 105-46(1)c and d. 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Code 1996, § 6-504(E); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-75. - Coastal high hazard areas (V-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 105-9 are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas (V-zones). These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave action and storm surge, therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide; 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be elevated on piles, columns, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water so that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal structural members (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation level. All space below the lowest supporting member shall remain free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls. Open wood lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action and in accordance with subsection (6) of this section; 
(3)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be securely anchored on pilings, columns, or shear walls; 
(4)  All pile and column foundations and the structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the combined effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components, both non-structural and structural. Water loading values shall equal or exceed those of the base flood. Wind loading values shall be in accordance with the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the county; 
(5)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in subsections (2) through (4) of this section; 
(6)  All space below the lowest horizontal supporting member must remain free of obstruction. Open wood lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action without causing structural damage to the supporting foundation or elevated portion of the structure. The following design specifications are allowed: 
a.  No solid walls shall be allowed; 
b.  Material shall consist of open wood lattice or mesh screening only; and 
c.  If aesthetic open wood lattice work or screening is utilized, any enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises; 
(7)  Prior to construction, plans for any structures having open wood lattice work or decorative screening must be submitted to the county engineer for approval; 
(8)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to any structure shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor except with open wood lattice work or decorative screening, as provided in this section; 
(9)  There shall be no fill used as structural support. Non-compacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes, provided the fill will wash out from storm surge (thereby rendering the building free of obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. The county engineer shall approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect, and/or soil scientist, which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully considered: 
a.  Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction; 
b.  Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave deflection to adjacent properties; and 
c.  Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping; 
(10)  There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, which would increase potential flood damage; and 
(11)  The placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes) shall be prohibited, except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, provided the anchoring standards of subsection (4) of this section are met. 
(Code 1996, § 6-504(F); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-76. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivision and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Code 1996, § 6-504(G); Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 105-77. - Standard for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or in the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Code 1996, § 6-504(H); Ord. of 1-6-2009; Ord. of 10-13-2011) 
Chapter 107 - MANUFACTURED HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Factory built buildings and dwelling units, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 107-1—107-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MANUFACTURED HOME STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Factory built buildings and dwelling units, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq. 

Sec. 107-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the unincorporated area of the county. 
Building inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections, the county building official or any of his assistants. 
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this article, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
Guarantee of condition bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by section 107-21(1)a and b reasonably portray or represent the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the county. 
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. The term "install" includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction means the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
(Code 1996, § 11-401; Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 107-20. - Conditions. 
All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying there were constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. (the HUD code), and shall be installed in accordance with applicable state standards. 
Code 1996, § 11-402; Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 107-21. - Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. 
A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
(1)  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
a.  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by law; 
b.  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that the home meets the minimum health and safety standards of section 107-22; 
c.  A $150.00 refundable guarantee of condition bond or $150.00 refundable cash deposit; and 
d.  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (4) of this section. 
(2)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. The applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(3)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this article have been met. 
(4)  Fee. A permit and inspection fee as established by the board shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the county to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow-up inspection. The applicant shall be charged a fee as established by the board for each additional follow-up inspection that may be necessary. 
(5)  Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the building inspector may, at his discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the county. 
Code 1996, § 11-403; Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 107-22. - Minimum health and safety standards. 
All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(1)  HUD code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 USC 5401-5445 (the HUD code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD code. 
(2)  Installation. Manufactured homes shall be installed by a competent licensed professional installer and shall be installed according to the manufacturer's installation instructions. Manufactured homes shall comply with the International Building Code. 
(3)  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(4)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(5)  Skirting. Manufactured homes being erected for occupancy shall be fitted with approved commercial skirting. Approved commercial skirting includes any skirting material which is manufactured for that purpose, and any masonry. 
(6)  Wind speeds. All manufactured homes must be designed to withstand wind speeds of 100 miles an hour (Wind Zone II) in accordance with HUD regulations 24 CFR 3280 and 3282. Wind Zone I homes are not permitted in any area of the county. Existing and registered manufactured homes that are designed to withstand wind speeds of 100 miles an hour may be moved within the county. 
(7)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(8)  Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Un-vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(9)  Electrical systems. Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to ensure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
(10)  Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(11)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(12)  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(13)  Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
Code 1996, § 11-404; Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 107-23. - Conversion of structure. 
No DCA-regulated manufactured home may be converted from residential to commercial or other nonresidential uses. 
Code 1996, § 11-405; Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 107-24. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(c)  The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension has been issued in writing by the building inspector. 
Code 1996, § 11-406; Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 10-5-2010) 
Chapter 109 - SIGNS 

Sec. 109-1. - Definitions and interpretations. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animated sign means any sign that uses movement or change of light to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
Banner means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is securely mounted to a pole or a building. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. 
Banner (commercial) means any banner containing a commercial message. 
Banner (noncommercial) means any banner not containing a commercial message. 
Beacon means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Building marker means any sign indicating the name of a building, date, and/or incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
Building sign means any sign attached to any part of a building, in contrast to a freestanding sign. 
Canopy sign means any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Changeable copy sign means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. 
Commercial message means any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
Common signage plan, in a commercial zone of B-2 or greater intensity, means a legally enforceable, county-approved master signage plan delineating the size, design and location of all signs on two or more contiguous properties and granting the properties a 25 percent increase in total square footage for signage in the applicable zone. 
Flag means any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
Freestanding sign means any sign supported by structures or supports which are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. 
Incidental sign means a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "No Parking," "Entrance," "Loading Only," "Telephone" and other similar directives. A sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the lot on which the sign is located is not incidental. 
Marquee means any permanent roof-life structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Marquee sign means any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee. 
Master signage plan, in a commercial zone of B-2 or greater intensity, means a county-approved plan delineating all signs by size, design and location on a parcel. A common signage plan is a master signage plan affecting two or more contiguous properties with additional advantages. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
Outdoor advertising sign means any structure or portion thereof, situated on private premises, on which lettered, figured, or pictorial matter is displayed for advertising purposes, except for the name and occupation of the user of the premises or the products primarily sold or manufactured on the premises or noncommercial messages, and having an area of 100 square feet or more. Any signboard carrying a message excepted in this definition that also carries extraneous advertising of 100 square feet or more shall be considered an outdoor advertising sign. 
Pennant means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
Portable sign means a sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, but not including trailer signs (as herein defined); signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu or sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of business. 
Projecting sign means any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
Residential sign means any sign located in a district for residential uses. 
Roof sign means any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
Roof sign, integral, means any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal structure of any design, such that no part of the sign exceeds vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
Sign means any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
Sign setback line means an imaginary line created by this chapter to establish an easily determined setback from any public thoroughfares for the placement of certain temporary signs. The sign setback line shall be 15 feet from the back of the street curb edge of pavement or stabilized shoulder. 
Streamer means the same as a pennant for purposes of this chapter. 
Suspended sign means a sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
Temporary sign means any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted. 
Trailer sign means any sign designed to be transported by means of wheels, whether or not the wheels remain attached, located on the ground and permanently attached thereto, and which is usually a two-sided sign and including any single- or double-surface painted or posted panel type sign, or any variation thereof. 
Wall sign means any sign attached parallel to but within six inches of a wall; painted on the wall surface of or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface. 
Window sign means any sign, picture, symbol, or combination, thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
(Code 1996, § 29-104; Ord. of 2-1-2005; Ord. of 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 109-2. - Purpose. 
Sign regulations achieve public safety rationales not achieved by provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted by the county. Without a sign ordinance, signs can pose a clear danger to public safety. It has been long recognized that sign controls are needed to promote traffic safety and avoid traffic accidents. Signs can distract motorists by impairing visibility. Traffic safety is improved by restricting the size, height, and locations of signs. Signs, if unregulated, can confuse motorists by mimicking traffic safety signals and signs. 
(1)  Unregulated signs may negatively affect the character of communities and the value of buildings. For example, blighted signs and antiquated signs and sign structures (i.e., the pole with a blank structure for a sign face) can contribute to an overall image of blight and a reduction of property values in declining areas if not addressed and removed via sign controls. Unregulated signs can reduce the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public because they compete with public purpose signs and reduce their visibility and effectiveness. Unregulated signage in special character areas would almost assuredly neutralize any public plan and investments to improve streetscapes. 
(2)  Sign regulation serves the interests of the business community. Unregulated competition among businesses where individual business signs are not adequately visible results in too many signs and a point of diminishing returns. Sign regulations help to maintain the scenic heritage and unique character of the community by implementing uniformity of standards and quality in signs. Signs substantially influence the appearance of the community, and sign regulation is essential to the community's long-term economic viability. Sign controls improve visual character. 
(3)  This chapter is adopted to serve substantial public interests by correcting and avoiding multiple problems that would occur without the regulation of signs and advertising devices. The regulations contained herein are not more extensive than necessary to serve the substantial public interests identified in this statement of purpose. 
(Code 1996, § 29-101; Ord. of 2-1-2005) 
Sec. 109-3. - Intent. 
It is not the intent of this chapter to apply regulation to signs because of a disagreement with the message that they convey, to foreclose important and distinct mediums or expression for political, religious, or personal messages, or to suggest the county should regulate the content of signs in any manner. It is, however, the intent of this chapter to regulate the time, place, and manner of sign placement in a manner sufficient to meet the public purposes articulated in section 109-2. 
(Code 1996, § 29-102; Ord. of 2-1-2005) 
Sec. 109-4. - Applicability. 
(a)  A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained within the planning jurisdiction of the county only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The effect of this chapter as more specifically set forth herein shall: 
(1)  Establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial, residential and industrial areas that are subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this chapter. 
(2)  Exempt certain signs as specifically provided. 
(3)  Provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances in the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Permit signs which fully comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 29-103; Ord. of 2-1-2005; Ord. of 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 109-5. - Exempt signs. 
Signs exempt from this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation or ordinance. 
(2)  Any sign that is not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the lot or parcel on which such sign is located. 
(3)  Works of art that do not include a commercial message. 
(4)  Holiday signs with no commercial message. 
(5)  Private street name and traffic control signs on private property, such as "STOP," "YIELD" and similar signs, the face of which meet county transportation standards, and of which contain no commercial messages. 
(6)  "NO Trespassing," "NO Hunting," "NO Fishing," "NO Loitering," and like signs not exceeding one square foot in area. 
(7)  Incidental signs as defined by this chapter. 
(8)  Identification signs for approved home occupations, provided that only one unlighted sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, may be permitted on any lot. 
(9)  A temporary sign placed in a residential district. 
(Code 1996, § 29-108; Ord. of 2-1-2005) 
Sec. 109-6. - General requirements. 
The following regulations shall apply to all signs: 
(1)  No sign shall be erected, maintained, constructed, modified, replaced, structurally altered, or relocated unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this chapter. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, no sign shall be erected, constructed, modified, replaced, structurally altered, or relocated within the county without prior issuance of a permit. 
(2)  Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and shall not be permitted to become dilapidated. 
(3)  All signs in areas adjacent to the rights-of-way of roads of the state highway system, which roads are also a part of the interstate and primary systems of highways within the state, are subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 46, art. 3, pt. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq.) As such, they shall comply with all provisions of such statute and shall meet all requirements and obtain all necessary permits under said code. However, in instances where the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(4)  The creation, construction or maintenance of freestanding signs in areas adjacent to and/or visible from secondary, primary and interstate highway system rights-of-way shall be limited to: BN Neighborhood Business, B-1 Neighborhood Commercial, B-2 General Commercial, C-1 Interchange Commercial, I-L and I-1 Industrial Districts. 
(5)  No signs, except as otherwise specified, shall exceed the standard building height limit of the district in which they are located. 
(6)  Any sign which advertises an activity, business, product, or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six months of the discontinuance of said activity. 
(Code 1996, § 29-105; Ord. of 2-1-2005; Ord. of 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 109-7. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  No signs whatsoever, except government-maintained traffic signs and signals and informational signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
(b)  Signs painted or attached to natural features (such as trees or rocks), telephone poles, utility poles, or fence posts are prohibited. 
(c)  Signs within 300 feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument, are prohibited. 
(Code 1996, § 29-106; Ord. of 2-1-2005) 
Sec. 109-8. - Permitting procedures. 
(a)  Permits to construct or modify signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the county without first having obtained a building permit, if required by the International Building Code as adopted by the county, for said sign. The applicant for a building permit shall submit with his application such materials as specified by the building inspector, including (but not limited to) a sketch or print drawing to scale showing pertinent information, such as wind pressure requirements and display materials, in accordance with the following requirements and procedures. 
(b)  Permits for new sign or for sign modification. An application for construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for modification of an existing sign shall be accompanied by a copy of the previously approved sign permit including detailed drawings to show the dimension, design, structure, and location of each particular sign, to the extent that such details are not contained on a master signage plan or common signage plan then in effect for the lot. One application and permit may include multiple signs on the same lot. 
(c)  Inspection. The county shall inspect each lot for which a permit for a new sign, or for modification of an existing sign, is issued. If construction or modifications have not started within six months of the date of issuance, the permit shall lapse and become void. If construction is complete and in full compliance with the chapter and electrical codes, the county shall affix to the premises a permanent symbol identifying the sign(s) and the applicable permit, by the number or other reference. If construction is substantially complete, but not in full compliance with this chapter and applicable codes, the county shall give the owner or applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse and become void. If the construction is completed, the county shall affix to the premises the permanent symbol as described above. 
(d)  Temporary sign permits. Temporary signs shall be allowed only upon the issuance of a temporary sign permit, which shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  No permit is required for temporary political signs and banners in accordance with this chapter, however temporary political signs and banners are still bound by the safety elements of this chapter, including placement and traffic visibility requirements and limitations. 
(2)  A temporary sign shall not be erected, placed or maintained on the thoroughfare side of the sign setback line (15 feet from the edge of pavement). 
(3)  In addition to other setback requirements, temporary signs shall be located such that, at any intersection ingress/egress point, the traffic visibility shall not be impaired. 
(4)  Temporary signs shall not exceed 16 square feet, with the exception of a sign located at a construction project. If the temporary sign is located on property that faces more than one street, one temporary sign may be allowed for each frontage. Each such sign shall be located not closer than 15 feet to a street right-of-way. 
(5)  A temporary sign located at a construction project may not exceed 40 square feet. Such signs may be displayed from the beginning of the construction project through the completion of the project. 
(Code 1996, § 29-107; Ord. of 2-1-2005) 
Sec. 109-9. - Regulations for specific types of signs. 
(a)  Home occupation signs. One non-illuminated professional or business sign not exceeding two square feet in area is permitted. 
(b)  Signs of work under construction. One non-illuminated sign, not exceeding 40 square feet in area, displaying the name of the building, the contractor, the architects, the engineer, the owners, the financial, selling and development agencies is permitted upon the premises of any work under construction, alteration, or removal. Such sign shall be removed from the site within 30 days after the completion of the project. 
(c)  Temporary subdivision signs. Temporary signs announcing a land subdivision development, and not exceeding 40 square feet in combined area per development, are permitted on the premises of the land subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced not less than 300 feet apart. They shall be removed in 12 months. 
(d)  Private directional signs. In addition to temporary subdivision signs, signs indicating the location and direction of premises available for, or in process of, development, but not erected upon such premises, and having inscribed thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder, or agent may be erected and maintained, provided: 
(1)  The size of any such sign is not in excess of six square feet, and not in excess of four feet in length; and 
(2)  Not more than one such sign is erected on each 500 feet of street frontage within the development. 
(e)  Roof signs integral. Not more than one sign structure may be erected on the roof of any one building. No roof sign structure shall extend above the highest portion of the roof. 
(f)  Wall signs. Signs on the walls of a building (including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs and projecting signs) shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Signs on the front surface of a building. The total area of signs on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed 25 percent of the front surface of the building, so long as the figure does not exceed the total amount of sign area permitted within the zoning district where the sign or signs are to be located. 
(2)  Signs on the side and rear surface of a building. The total area of signs on a side or rear surface of building shall not exceed 50 percent of the exterior side or rear surface of the building respectively, so long as this figure does not exceed the total amount of sign area permitted within the zoning district where the sign or signs are to be located. 
(3)  Combined sign area. The combined sign area on the front, side and rear surface of a building must not exceed the total sign area permitted within the zoning district where the sign or signs are to be located. 
(g)  Projecting signs. Wall signs attached flat against a wall, parallel to the wall face, may extend not more than 24 inches from the wall. 
(h)  Signs attached at angle. Signs attached at an angle to a wall (including a 90-degree angle) may extend outward from the wall of a building not more than five feet. 
(i)  Illuminated signs. Illumination devices shall be so placed, so designed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast into any residential district, sleeping rooms in any district, or into the eyes of an automobile or vehicular driver. 
(j)  Outdoor advertising signs. All signs visible from the travel lanes of major thoroughfares and interstate rights-of-way shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Uniform size. The outside measurements of all such signs shall be 12 feet in height and not greater than 50 feet in length, with or without trim (600 square feet). 
(2)  Illumination. All illuminated outdoor advertising signs shall use base-mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated and deactivated by photo-electric cells. Additional lighting, including, but not limited to, neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited. 
(3)  Height above highway/interstate grade. All outdoor advertising signs shall be a minimum of ten feet above adjacent highway/interstate pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. Sign structures shall not exceed 30 feet in height, except in a commercial interchange zone where the maximum height shall be 80 feet. Two signs in the same location (back-to-back, over and under, or "V" formation) shall be the same height above the highway/interstate's surface. 
(4)  Protrusions prohibited. Protrusions beyond the face of the sign are prohibited, with the exception of aprons. 
(5)  Zones where permitted. Outdoor advertising signs are only permitted in zones C-I, I-L, and I-1, as noted in section 109-10(g). 
(6)  Spacing. Outdoor advertising sign locations shall be no less than 500 feet apart measuring from the two closest points, regardless of the dimensions of the lots on which they stand. 
(7)  Distance from right-of-way/property lines. Outdoor advertising signs shall be no less than 15 feet from the right-of-way line, and 15 feet or a distance equal to the height of the sign, whichever is greater, from all other property lines. 
(8)  Locations limited per quadrant. A maximum of three outdoor advertising sign locations shall be permitted within 3,000 feet of any interchange per interchange quadrant (where the intersection of two highways creates four quadrant sections) provided that the spacing and lot requirements can be met. 
(9)  Other than signs located within 3,000 feet of any interchange. General advertisement signs adjacent to interstate highways and visible from the main traveled way of I-16 are prohibited, except for right-of-way logos on standards furnished by the department of transportation of the state. Logos shall be defined as an easily read and identifiable symbol such as Shell Oil, Exxon Oil, Holiday Inn or independent company trademarks of a size to be approved by the department of transportation of the state. This does not apply to signs that meet the criteria referenced in section 109-10(g) or for properties appropriately zoned. 
(10)  Marsh and historic area locations. No outdoor advertising sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of a marshland area or any area of designated historic interest. 
(Code 1996, § 29-10; Ord. of 2-1-2005; Ord. of 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 109-10. - Signs permitted in specific zoning districts. 
(a)  Signs permitted in A-5, AR 2.5, and AR 1.5 zoning districts: 
(1)  For permitted home occupations in these zones, one non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area. 
(2)  For uses other than dwellings, a single illuminated or non-illuminated freestanding sign or bulletin board not exceeding 20 square feet in area. Such sign shall be set back not less than 15 feet from the street right-of-way line unless attached to the front wall of a building which is closer to the right-of-way line. 
(3)  Temporary subdivision signs and private directional signs, under the provisions set forth in section 109-9(c) and (d). 
(4)  All other signs not expressly permitted in this section are prohibited. 
(b)  Signs permitted in AR-1, R-30, R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts: 
(1)  For permitted home occupations in these zones, one non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area. 
(2)  For uses other than dwellings, a single freestanding institution or identification sign or bulletin board not exceeding six square feet in area. 
(3)  Temporary subdivision signs and private directional signs, under the provisions set forth in section 109-9(c) and (d). 
(4)  All other signs not expressly permitted in this section are prohibited. 
(c)  Signs permitted in R-4 districts: 
(1)  One non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area mounted flat against the wall of a building in which there is conducted a permitted home occupation. 
(2)  Up to two signs, not to exceed a combined total sign area of 64 square feet, per mobile home park. Where a mobile home park abuts a federal primary or interstate highway, only one sign, not to exceed a total sign area of 100 square feet per mobile home park. 
(3)  All other signs not expressly permitted in this section are prohibited. 
(d)  Signs permitted in BN districts: 
(1)  Temporary subdivision signs as provided in section 109-9(c) and private directional signs as provided in section 109-9(d). 
(2)  One freestanding sign per commercial lot on the street on which the establishment fronts. The maximum size of a sign for any business establishment shall not exceed 25 square feet. 
(3)  Integral roof signs are permitted as defined in section 109-9(e). 
(4)  All other signs not expressly permitted in this section are prohibited. 
(e)  Signs permitted in B-1 or O districts: 
(1)  Temporary subdivision signs as provided in section 109-9(c), private directional signs as provided in section 109-9(d), roof signs integral as provided in section 109-9(e), wall signs as provided in section 109-9(f), and projecting signs as provided in section 109-9(g). 
(2)  The number of freestanding signs shall be limited to one on the street the establishment fronts. The maximum size of a sign for any business establishment shall not exceed 64 square feet. 
(3)  All other signs not expressly permitted in this section are prohibited. 
(f)  Signs permitted in a B-2 district. Subject to the filing of a common signage plan or master signage plan (section 109-11), the following are permitted in a B-2 district: 
(1)  Temporary subdivision signs as provided in section 109-9(c), private directional signs as provided in section 109-9(d), roof signs integral as provided in section 109-9(e), wall signs as provided in section 109-9(f), projecting signs as provided in section 109-9(g), and signs attached at an angle to a wall as provided in section 109-9(h). 
(2)  The number of freestanding signs shall be limited to one on the street on which the establishment fronts. The maximum combined area of signage on any lot shall not exceed 240 square feet. 
(3)  All other signs not expressly permitted in this section are prohibited. 
(g)  Signs permitted in C-I, I-L or I-1 districts: 
(1)  Temporary subdivision signs as provided in section 109-9(c), private directional signs as provided in section 109-9(d), roof signs integral as provided in section 109-9(e), wall signs as provided in section 109-9(f), projecting signs as provided in section 109-9(g), signs attached at an angle to a wall as provided in section 109-9(h), illuminated signs as provided in section 109-9(i), and outdoor advertising signs as provided in section 109-9(j) are permitted in commercial and industrial districts. 
(2)  On any occupied lot in a commercial or industrial district, no more than two freestanding signs, and no more than four signs of any and all types, having a total combined area of not more than 800 square feet visible sign area when viewed from any single vantage, and being located no closer than 500 feet apart, shall be permitted. 
(3)  Commercial or industrial uses located on or adjacent to major streets or controlled access thoroughfares in commercial or industrial districts may include in addition to their total permitted sign area one business identification pylon sign which shall be erected on their property. The sign shall be erected so that no portion of the sign shall be less than 15 feet back from the street right-of-way and may not exceed 80 feet in height. 
(4)  Roof and wall signs shall in no case exceed the requirement of section 109-9(e) and (f). 
(5)  Signs in these zones may be illuminated. 
(6)  All outdoor advertising signs visible form the interstate highways shall be located in an interchange commercial (CI) zoning district only and are subject to the limitations of section 109-9(j). 
(h)  Signs permitted in PUD districts. Only those signs incorporated into the plans for planned unit developments approved by the planning commission and county commission and meeting the design criteria set forth in section 109-9 are permitted in planned unit development districts. 
(Code 1996, § 29-110; Ord. of 2-1-2005; Ord. of 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 109-11. - Master and common signage plans. 
For property zoned for moderate or higher levels of commercial activity (B-2, C-I, I-L, or I-1), property owners shall have the option of filing a master or common signage plan, which shall obtain in preference over the limitations otherwise in effect in these zones. Subject to approval by the county, master or common signage plans may allow more square footage, a greater number, a greater height, or a structural design at variance with the chapter. Where a master signage plan has been approved, no permit shall be issued for an individual sign requiring a permit unless it conforms to the plan as approved by the county. Common signage plans shall be deemed to be master signage plans affecting and agreed to by two or more adjoining property owners. 
(1)  Master signage plan. For any lot zoned B-2, C-I, I-L or I-1 on which the owner proposes to erect signs requiring a permit which are at variance with the chapter, the owner shall submit to the county a master signage plan containing the following: 
a.  An accurate plot plan of the lot at such scale as the county may reasonably require. 
b.  Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas on such lot. 
c.  Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual signs, the height of signs, and the number of freestanding signs allowed on the lot(s) included in the plan under this chapter and a general description of the design of all signs which are proposed to be erected or installed on the property. 
d.  An accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed location of each present and future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not, except that incidental signs and signs not regulated by this chapter need not be shown. 
(2)  Common signage plan. If the owners of two or more contiguous (disregarding intervening streets and alleys) lots file with the county for such lots a common signage plan conforming with the provisions of this section, a 25 percent increase in the maximum total sign area shall be allowed for each included lot. This bonus may be allocated within each lot as the owners elect (e.g., if total sign area permitted is 100 square feet for two lots, owner may allocate 25 additional square feet of signage to one lot while keeping the other lot within allowed limits). 
a.  Provisions of common signage plan. The common signage plan shall contain all of the information required for a master signage plan (as defined herein) and shall also specify standards for consistency among all signs on the lots affected by the plan with regard to: 
1.  Color scheme; 
2.  Lighting; 
3.  Location of each sign on the buildings; 
4.  Materials used; and 
5.  Sign proportions. 
b.  Limit on freestanding signs under common signage plan. The common signage plan, for all lots with multiple uses or multiple users, shall limit the number of freestanding signs to a total of one for each street on which the lots included in the plan have frontage (notwithstanding lots which may contain an intervening street) and shall provide for shared or common usage of such signs. In any instance where the properties included within a common signage plan may contain an intervening street, such properties shall be treated as a unified lot. The maximum height of the freestanding signs permitted shall be 30 square feet. 
(3)  Other provisions of master or common signage plans. The master or common signage plan may contain such other restrictions as the owner(s) of the lots may reasonably determine. 
(4)  Consent. The master or common signage plan shall be signed by all owners or their authorized agents in such form as the county shall require. 
(5)  Joint processing. A master or common signage plan shall be included in any development plan, site plan, planned unit development plan, or other official plan required by the county for all proposed commercial development and shall be processed simultaneously with such other plans. 
(6)  Amendment. A master or common signage plan may be amended by filing a new master or common signage plan that conforms with all requirements of the ordinance then in effect. In general, amendments shall be reviewed and acted upon by the county; provided, however, that any amendment of a common signage plan which affects those items governed by subsection (2)a of this section (provisions of common signage plan) shall be acted upon in a like procedure to the original plan. 
(7)  Existing signs not conforming to master or common signage plan. When a master or common signage plan is filed for a property on which existing signs are located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into conformance all signs not conforming to the proposed amended plan or to the requirements of this chapter as in effect on the date of submission. 
(8)  Binding effect. After approval of a master or common signage plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained on the property referenced by the plan, except in conformance with such plan and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this chapter. In case of any conflict between the provisions of such plan and any other provision of this chapter, this chapter shall have precedence and control. 
(Code 1996, § 29-111; Ord. of 2-1-2005) 
Sec. 109-12. - Computations and design, construction and maintenance. 
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height: 
(1)  Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the wiring, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall. 
(2)  Computation of area of multi-faced signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. 
(3)  Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the bottom of the lowest point of the sign face. Normal grade shall be construed to be the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade of the sign is lower than the grade of the adjacent public street, normal grade shall be construed to be the grade of the adjacent public street. The term "adjacent public street" shall mean the street providing approved vehicle access to the property and which does or would bear the street address for the property. 
(4)  Computation of maximum total permitted sign area. Lots may not exceed the maximum sign area allocation that is specified for the zoning district. 
(5)  Design, construction, and maintenance. All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Except for banners, flags and temporary signs conforming in all respects with the requirement of this chapter, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure. 
b.  Every sign, including, but not limited to, those signs for which permits are required, shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, and sound structural condition. 
1.  To prevent rust, peeling, flaking, fading, or rotting, all signs and supports shall be painted, unless anodized or similarly treated. 
2.  Broken panels, missing letters, defective illumination, torn fabric, flaking or peeling paint and other damage to a sign, shall be replaced or repaired. 
3.  If determination is made by the county that any sign is unsafe, not secure, in violation of any applicable law or a public danger, notice of such violation shall be given to the property owner and/or occupant where such sign is located. The property owner and/or occupant shall have 30 days from the date of said notice to remove, repair, or remedy said violation. 
c.  No sign shall be allowed in the public right-of-way except the following: 
1.  Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices. 
2.  Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company. 
3.  Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities. 
4.  Awning, projecting, and suspended signs projecting over a public right-of-way when permitted with a permit. 
(Code 1996, § 29-112; Ord. of 2-1-2005) 


Chapter 111 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

Sec. 111-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as the "Bryan County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Code 1996, § 6-401; Ord. of 10-13-2009) 
Sec. 111-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) includes sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the coastal soil and water conservation district. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodable material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the Georgia General Permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 111-4(c). 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface of an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 111-3(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality, which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavating or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater is a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" ("manual") published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodable material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the coastal soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia . " 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., in the rules and regulations for water quality control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative coverage; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Code 1996, § 6-402; Ord. of 10-13-2009) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3. 
Sec. 111-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.). In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; and the construction of farm buildings; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 111-4(c)(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Code 1996, § 6-403; Ord. of 10-13-2009) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
Sec. 111-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  Other requirements. Land disturbing activities shall comply with the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.); 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this subsection, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table yearround; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.) shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  a.  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280 et seq.) and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except: 
1.  Where the state director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment; 
2.  Where otherwise allowed by the state director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8; 
3.  Where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286; 
4.  For maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; 
5.  Where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; 
6.  On the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure; and 
7.  For the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
b.  No land disturbing activity shall be conducted within any such buffer and a buffer shall remain in its current, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed, except as otherwise provided by this subsection. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation so long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time so long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat. 
c.  The buffer requirements of this subsection (17) shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. The buffer shall not apply to: 
1.  Any land disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; or 
2.  Any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015, if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to December 31, 2015, and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
(d)  Exceeding minimum requirements. Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Injury to other property. The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Code 1996, § 6-404; Ord. of 10-13-2009) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6. 
Sec. 111-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the areas surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the department of planning and zoning to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the department of planning and zoning and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 111-4(b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 111-4(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required by subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 111-4(b) and (c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary, and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by section 111-4(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons, and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Code 1996, § 6-405; Ord. of 10-13-2009) 
State Law reference— Permits and plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 et seq. 
Sec. 111-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The department of planning and zoning will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.). 
(c)  The department of engineering and inspections/planning and zoning shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The districts or the commission, or both, shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission, or both, may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Code 1996, § 6-406; Ord. of 10-13-2009) 
Sec. 111-7. - Penalties and inspections. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 111-5(b)(6). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Code 1996, § 6-407; Ord. of 10-13-2009) 
State Law reference— Penalties, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-15. 
Sec. 111-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection of any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirement developed by the commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said subsection. 
(Code 1996, § 6-408; Ord. of 10-13-2009) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Sec. 111-9. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the board of appeals within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 6-409; Ord. of 10-13-2009) 
Sec. 111-10. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Code 1996, § 6-410; Ord. of 10-13-2009) 
Chapter 113 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 113-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alternative tower structures means clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission towers, manmade trees (without accessory buildings/structures), and similar natural or manmade alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas and towers. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunications, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic radiation. 
Co-location means the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower or alternative tower structure. 
Department means the county department of planning and zoning. 
Erected includes the words "constructed," "located" or "relocated." 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Geographic antenna placement area means the general vicinity within which the placement of an antenna is necessary to meet the engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting need. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners of the county or other governmental entity controlling affected real property. 
Guy tower means a tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
Height, when referring to a tower or other structure, means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower structure of appurtenance. 
Lattice tower means a tower that has open-framed supports on three or four sides and is constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Map or zoning map means the zoning map of the county. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower constructed of a single pole, without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Parcel includes the word "plot" or "lot." 
Pre-existing towers and antennas means structures as set forth in section 113-26. 
Scenic views are those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the county comprehensive plan. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telecommunication towers, manmade trees (with accessory buildings/structures) and other similar structures. 
Used or occupied include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
Visual quality is the appropriate design, arrangement, and location of tower structures in relation to the built or natural environment to avoid abrupt or severe differences. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 201; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the county, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunications facilities with the county so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote the county as a proactive county in the availability of wireless telecommunication service. To that end, this chapter shall: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities to serve the residents and businesses of the county; 
(2)  Protect the county's built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities; 
(3)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape, screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(4)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antennae failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures and antennae; 
(5)  Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the county; 
(6)  Maximize and encourage use of alternative telecommunication tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single use towers; and 
(7)  Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications facilities in areas which are not likely to adversely impact property values, aesthetics or the health or safety of the populace. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 101; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Secs. 113-3—113-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 113-23. - District height limitations. 
Except as set forth in section 113-24 the requirements of this chapter shall govern the location of telecommunications and wireless commercial towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of, 50 feet. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 301; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-24. - Governmental exemption. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to governmental facilities and structures. Private facilities and structures proposed for placement on governmentally-owned property shall not be exempt. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 302; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-25. - Amateur radio, receive-only antennas. 
This chapter shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is 70 feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator from the operator's residence, or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 303; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-26. - Pre-existing towers and antennas. 
(a)  Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall not be required to meet the provisions of this chapter, other than the requirements of the Federal Government and Buildings Codes and Safety Standards. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this chapter as "pre-existing towers" or "pre-existing antennas." 
(b)  If an additional antenna is co-located upon a pre-existing tower after adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, then fencing and landscaping requirements of sections 113-34 and 113-35 shall be met as part of permitting processing. If any non-economic hardships exist in meeting the requirements of sections 113-34 and 113-35, the request to waive the requirement must be submitted in writing and shall be approved or disapproved by the director of planning and zoning. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 304; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-27. - Pre-existing antenna on existing structures. 
Any antenna located on any existing structure (i.e., existing towers, water tanks, buildings, utility poles, street lights, etc.) is exempted from this chapter. Any monopole tower and antenna 100 feet or less in height, located in an electrical substation is exempted from this chapter. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 305; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-28. - Principal or accessory use. 
A tower and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary structure, and is considered an accessory use if it is located on a lot or parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structure. An existing use or structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning district requirements, including, but not limited to, setback, buffer and other requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or tower may be located on a leased area within such lot or parcel. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 401; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-29. - Inventory of existing sites. 
(a)  To facilitate the co-location of antennas, each applicant seeking to locate a new tower, alternative tower structure or antenna, or modify any such existing structure, shall provide to the department an inventory of its existing towers or alternative tower structures and inventory of facilities. Applicants seeking to erect an amateur radio tower or antenna shall be exempt from this provision. 
(b)  The inventory shall include all such structures that are within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; within a municipality located in the county; or within one-quarter mile of the boundary line of the county and shall include specific information about the location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, tower type and general suitability for antenna co-location of each tower, and other pertinent information as may be required by the department. The department may share such information with other applicants or organizations seeking to locate towers or antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; provided, however, that the department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 402; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-30. - Co-location—Design requirements. 
The board of commissioners of the county encourage co-location of antennas and especially building new towers with design capable of holding multiple co-locations. In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all towers, except amateur radio towers, shall be designed to accommodate the co-location of cellular telecommunication antennas according to the following: 
(1)  For towers up to 150 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least two providers. 
(2)  For towers greater than 150 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least four or more providers. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 403; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-31. - Same—Availability of suitable existing structures. 
No new tower, except amateur radio towers, shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the department and the board of commissioners that no existing tower or existing alternative tower structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of one or more of the following: 
(1)  That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within the geographic antenna placement area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  That existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(3)  That existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and related equipment. 
(4)  That the applicant's proposed antenna(s) would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna(s) on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(5)  That the cost or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(6)  That the applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 404; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-32. - Aesthetics. 
The guidelines set forth in this section shall rule the design and construction of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this chapter. 
(1)  Towers and/or antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. If federal or state regulations require, telecommunication facilities shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or other required finish. 
(2)  At all tower sites, the design of all buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and building environment. 
(3)  For antennas installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical ground equipment shall be of a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive. 
(4)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing body shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding area and views. The lighting shall be dimmed or changed to red lights from sunset to sunrise. 
(5)  No signage or other identifying markings of a commercial nature shall be permitted upon any tower or alternative tower structure within the county. No signs other than those required by the FCC or other governing authority with jurisdiction over the tower site are permitted. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 405; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-33. - Setbacks and separations. 
(a)  No tower shall be located any closer than the height of the tower to any property line. 
(b)  Guy towers and lattice towers shall not be located any closer than 500 feet or three times the height of the tower, whichever is greater, to any habitable residential structure. Provided, further, that no anchor point of a guy wire shall be located closer than 25 feet to any property line. 
(c)  The setback requirements herein shall not apply to any building related to the operation or maintenance of the tower; provided, however, that all other setbacks contained in the zoning ordinance of the county shall apply to buildings related to the operation or maintenance of the tower. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 406; Ord. of 1-9-2001; Ord. of 11-13-2001) 
Sec. 113-34. - Security fencing/anti-climbing devices. 
(a)  All towers and supporting equipment shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Fencing shall be of chain link, wood or other approved alternative. This requirement may be waived by the planning director if it is deemed that this would produce negative visual clutter or obstruct a view corridor. 
(b)  All fences shall be maintained all the time. 
(c)  For guy towers, each guy anchor shall also be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height with fence line set back at least ten feet from the guy anchor. 
(d)  Amateur radio towers and antennas, or receive-only antennas, shall not be subject to the provisions of this section unless required by the board of commissioners through the conditional use permit. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 407; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-35. - Landscaping. 
(a)  Where adequate vegetation is not present, tower facilities shall be landscaped with a landscaped strip of plant materials which effectively screens the view of the tower compound. Landscaped strips shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and located outside of the fenced perimeter of the compound. 
(b)  The landscaped buffer area shall consist of materials of the evergreen variety sufficient to provide screening that will minimize the visual impact. Said evergreen plantings shall be of a variety capable of growing to a height of at least ten feet within ten years of planting. 
(c)  All required landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure good health and vitality. 
(d)  The use of existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. 
(e)  Camouflaged towers designed to look like trees shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(f)  The applicant may submit for approval alternative landscaping plans that meet the purpose of this section to limit the visual impact of towers. In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirements may be reduced or waived by the director of planning and zoning. 
(g)  Amateur radio towers and antennas, or receive-only antennas, shall not be subject to the provisions of this section unless required by the board of commissioners through conditional use permit. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 408; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-36. - Federal and state requirements. 
All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the federal or state government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more or less stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal or state agency. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 409; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-37. - Building code and safety standards. 
To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee of a tower or alternative tower structure shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspections, the department concludes that a tower fails to comply with all applicable codes and standards, or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon receipt of written notice by the owner, permittee or lessee of the tower, said party shall have 15 days to bring the tower in compliance with such standards. If the owner, permittee, or lessee fails to bring the tower into compliance within 15 days, the governing authority may remove the tower at the owner's, permittee's, or lessee's expense. Prior to the removal of any tower, the department may consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee for repair of substandard towers, and may grant a reasonable extension of the above-referenced compliance period. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 410; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-38. - Change of ownership notification. 
Upon the transfer of ownership of any tower, alternate tower structure, or lot upon which such a structure has been erected, the tower permittee shall notify the department of planning and zoning of the transaction in writing within 30 days. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 411; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-39. - Advertising. 
There shall be no advertising permitted on the tower or tower site. The tower shall not contain any signs for the purposes of advertising. Nameplates for the purposes of self-identification shall not be considered advertising. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 412; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-40. - Local government co-location requirements. 
All new towers and existing towers, if applicable, shall consider co-location, installation of communication facilities or any such related facilities for local government use, emergency use purposes, and be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 413; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Secs. 113-41—113-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITTED USES 

Sec. 113-69. - General. 
The uses listed in this article are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require administrative review or approval of a conditional use permit. However, all such uses shall comply with requirements of this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 501; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-70. - Co-location of antennas required. 
Applicants for the erection of a tower or placement of an antenna shall be required to co-locate upon an existing tower or alternative tower structure. An exception to co-locate shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area utilizing the tower inventory maintained by the department, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 113-30. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 502; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-71. - Permitted uses. 
If it is adequately demonstrated that antenna co-location, as required in section 113-69, is not possible for a given geographic antenna placement area, the following uses are permitted: Constructing a new tower, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, in the following zoning districts is permitted: 
(1)  In I-1 (general industrial district), and I-L (light industrial district) zoning districts, telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as use by right. Telecommunication towers are permitted as use by right up to a height of 180 feet following design review and approval by the director. Telecommunications towers greater than 180 feet in height shall require a conditional use permit. An additional 30 feet may be allowed by right for towers which provide proof of three or more companies/providers locating on the same tower. 
(2)  In B-1 (neighborhood commercial district), B-2 (general commercial district), and C-I (interchange commercial district), antennas shall be allowed as a use by right on existing structures. Monopole towers up to a height of 70 feet shall be permitted. New towers and antennas greater than 70 feet in height shall be allowed if permitted by a conditional use permit approved by the board of commissioners following design review by the director. 
(3)  In A-5 (agricultural district), telecommunication towers are permitted as a use by right up to height of 180 feet, provided meeting setback of distance of equal to the height of the tower from all habitable buildings or structures, public rights-of-way, and property lines of any adjacent property. Setback regulations for monopole tower, guy tower and lattice tower set in section 113-33 shall apply. 
(4)  Except as set forth in this section or listed elsewhere, telecommunication facilities shall not be permitted in AR-2.5 (agricultural residential district), AR-1.5 (agricultural residential district), AR-1 (agricultural residential district), R-30 (residential district), R-1 (single family residential district), R-3 (multi-family residential district), R-4 (manufactured housing park), BN (neighborhood business district), WP (waste management district), WB-1, WB-2, WB-3 (waterfront business and commercial district), PUD (planned unit development) and DM-1 (dunes and marshland districts) nor within 1,500 feet of a river corridor as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 or as so delineated under the county comprehensive land use plan, whichever distance is greater. Telecommunication facilities shall be allowed only if the applicant provides evidence that such placement is a technological necessity in order to for the applicant to be in compliance with federal law; upon such evidence, such use shall be allowed if approved with the conditional use permit by the board of commissioners following design review by the director. 
(5)  Telecommunications facilities outside the guidelines listed above may only be built upon approval of a conditional use permit except for variances to the zoning ordinance setbacks for a specific zoning district which shall be presented to the zoning board of appeals unless the request is part of a conditional use permit which is presented to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 503; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-72. - Preferred location sites. 
(a)  Publicly used structures. Publicly used structures are preferred locations throughout the county, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunication facilities. Therefore, telecommunications facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly used structures than when placed on commercial or residential structures. Publicly used structures include police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. 
(b)  Co-location sites. Any existing site on which a legal wireless telecommunications facilities is currently located shall be a preferred location site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site; however, that location which meets this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this chapter and co-location sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise deemed by the director of the governing authority to be visually obtrusive. 
(c)  Industrial and commercial structures. Wholly industrial and commercial structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, or service stations shall be preferred location sites particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roof line can and will be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunication system. 
(d)  Mixed-use buildings in planned unit development districts. Mixed-use buildings (housing above commercial or other nonresidential space) are also preferred location sites. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 504; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-73. - Public notice/appeal. 
(a)  At least ten days prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a tower as a permitted use, the department shall cause a sign to be posted on the property and the publication of a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the county. Said public notice shall state the nature of the application, street location of the proposal and height of the proposed structure. 
(b)  If during the public notice period an objection to the building permit application is raised, the validity of the application and all pertinent documentation shall be determined by the zoning board of appeals. The objection shall be placed on the first available agenda of regularly scheduled meeting following the expiration of the ten-day appeal period. The zoning board of appeals shall dispense with the objection by either: 
(1)  A determination that the application is valid and meets all applicable criteria of this article, which shall result in the issuance of building permit. 
(2)  A determination that the application is in error. Applications found to be in error must, as a result, be processed through the conditional use permit process set forth in article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 505; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-74. - Appeal of administrative determination. 
If a building permit application for a tower as a permitted use is determined by the department of planning and zoning to not meet all applicable criteria of this chapter, the building permit applicant may appeal the determination to the zoning board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals shall dispense with the objection by either: 
(1)  A determination that the application is valid and meets all applicable criteria of this chapter, which shall result in the issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  A determination that the application does not satisfy all applicable criteria of this chapter. Applications which do not satisfy all applicable criteria must, as a result, be processed through the conditional use permit process set forth in article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 506; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Secs. 113-75—113-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS 

Sec. 113-92. - General application requirements for all building and conditional use permits. 
Application for a building permit or conditional use permit for any telecommunication facility shall be made to the director. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit, conditional use permit or other permit or variance included in this chapter: 
(1)  Basic information: 
a.  Site plan to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped area, and adjacent land uses. 
b.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in section 113-34. 
c.  An impact statement fully describing the effects that the proposed telecommunications facility will have on the environment and surrounding area, including the impacts on adjacent residential structures and districts, impacts on structures and sites of historic significance and impacts on streetscapes and significant view corridors. The impact statement shall include a description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs and traffic noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. A plan showing visual impact on neighboring properties and beyond covering area at least five times of the height of the proposed facility. 
d.  Report from professional structural engineer licensed in the state, documenting the following: 
1.  Telecommunication facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed site; 
2.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
3.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure (i.e., engineer's statement that structure is built to meet or exceed International Building Code); 
4.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications tower(s) over 70 feet and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris; and 
5.  Setbacks for telecommunication tower(s) 70 feet and less shall not be closer to a residential structure than the height of the tower or closer to a residential property line than 40 feet, whichever is greater. 
e.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity. 
f.  The identity of community liaison officer to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
g.  The existing towers, tall structures, and related facilities located within the geographic service area should be identified on a map along with written justification as to the need for a new tower in place of an existing structure. 
(2)  A map indicating all existing towers, antennas, and related facilities sites located within the county and within a quarter mile of the county boundaries. 
(3)  The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the director, planning commission, board of commissioners, and/or zoning board of appeals to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(4)  The department shall respond to each application within 45 days of its receipt by either approving or denying the application. A 45-day extension of this review may be exercised by the department if such additional time is deemed necessary to adequately assess the request. If the department fails to respond to the applicant within a maximum of 90 days, the application shall be deemed to be approved. 
(5)  As part of any administrative approval, the department may administratively reduce setback requirements by up to ten percent to compensate for irregular shaped lots or parcels. 
(6)  If a request for administrative approval is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision to the zoning board of appeals. In such an instance, the zoning board of appeals may authorize such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice is done. Such variances may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the zoning board of appeals that the denial of the variance presents a significant detriment to the telecommunications service provider making application, and that the denial of the variance is insubstantially related to the public welfare. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 601; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-93. - Co-location of antennas required. 
Applicants for the erection of an antenna, except amateur radio operators, shall be required to co-locate upon an existing tower structure. An exception to co-location shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area utilizing the tower inventory maintained by the department, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 113-30. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 602; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-94. - Uses allowed by administrative approval. 
The following uses may be approved by the department after conducting an administrative review: 
(1)  Installation of an antenna on any alternative tower structure, and further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as such addition does not add more than 20 feet to the height of the existing structure. 
(2)  Installation of an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including a pre-existing tower, and further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet. 
(3)  Installation of a tower, where the property cannot meet the setback requirements within its own property lines. The applicant/property owner may provide a bona fide proof of approval/no objection from the adjacent or beyond property owner(s), to meet setback requirements. The request may be combined with section 113-92(5). 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 603; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Secs. 113-95—113-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT 

Sec. 113-117. - General. 
(a)  If the proposed location, height, setback, or other aspect of a tower or antenna cannot comply with the minimum requirements established in article III or IV of this chapter, then a conditional use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in any zoning district. 
(b)  The following provisions shall also govern the issuance of conditional use permit for telecommunication and personal wireless service towers and antennas: 
(1)  In granting a conditional use permit, the board of commissioners may impose conditions to the extent that it concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize adverse effects from the proposed tower on adjoining or nearby properties. 
(2)  All information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer or qualified industry expert. However, amateur radio antennas shall meet the requirements of the county construction code. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 701; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-118. - Applications; contents; fee. 
All applications for conditional use permits shall be submitted to the department of planning and zoning. Each application shall contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specification as set forth in article IV of this chapter. An application for conditional use permit shall not be accepted for processing without the information required in this article. An application fee shall be charged by the department in an amount stated in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 702; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-119. - Co-location of antennas required. 
Applicants for the erection of a tower or antenna, except amateur radio operators, shall be required to co-locate upon an existing tower structure. An exception to co-location shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area utilizing the tower inventory maintained by the department, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 113-30. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 703; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-120. - Public hearing. 
Before taking action upon the conditional use permit, the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the matter. At least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing, the board of commissioners shall cause the following notice requirements to be instituted by the department of planning and zoning: 
(1)  A sign shall be erected, in a conspicuous location, on or adjacent to the property under consideration. The sign shall state the time, place, location and purpose of the public hearing. 
(2)  A letter shall be sent by regular mail to all property owners of records of abutting parcels, and all residentially-zoned parcels lying in whole or in part within a distance of two times the height of the proposed tower as measured from its base, giving notice of the public hearing. Owners of records shall be as indicated by the county tax commissioners records. The letter shall state the same information as required for the sign. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 704; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-121. - Consideration in approval or denial of a conditional use permit. 
Any denial of a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The governing body shall consider the following factors in acting upon a conditional use permit application under the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  The height and setbacks of the proposed tower; 
(2)  The proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(3)  The nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)  The surrounding topography; 
(5)  The surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(6)  The design of the tower, with particular references to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(7)  The proposed ingress and egress; 
(8)  The availability of suitable existing tower or other structures for antenna co-location; and 
(9)  The impact of the proposed tower upon scenic views and visual quality of the surrounding area. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 705; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Secs. 113-122—113-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REMOVAL OF ABANDONED TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 

Sec. 113-141. - Removal of antennae and towers. 
(a)  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the county notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the county may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal or seek costs incurred through court action. The county may pursue all legal remedies available to it to ensure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by the county in taking action shall not in any way waive the county's right to take action. The county may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state, or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all the conditions of this chapter as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
(c)  Prior to commencement of construction of any telecommunications facilities, the owner shall post a surety bond in an amount of not less than the estimate cost of removal of tower and associated structures; which may be utilized by the county for cost of removal of the tower if abandoned, which bond shall be cumulative to any other remedy at law or as otherwise set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 801; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Sec. 113-142. - Application and permit fees. 
The following fees will be required of any applicant submitting an application: 
(1)  Administrative approval of new tower construction. An application for construction of a new tower up to a height of 210 feet in I-1 and I-L zoning districts, otherwise eligible for administrative approval, shall be as established by the board. 
(2)  Administrative approval of antenna location on tower or alternative tower structure. An application for location of an antenna on an existing tower or alternative tower structure (so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of the existing tower or structure), otherwise eligible for administrative approval, shall be as established by the board. 
(3)  Conditional use permit for construction of new tower. An application for construction of a new tower (including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna) not eligible for administrative approval shall be as established by the board. 
(4)  Conditional use permit for location of antenna on tower or alternative tower structure. An application for location of an antenna on an existing tower or alternative tower structure, not eligible for administrative approval, shall be as established by the board. 
(5)  Building permit fee. In addition to the application fees set forth herein, the applicable construction and utility inspection permit fees in effect at the time of the application for the permit shall apply. The foregoing permit fees shall be in addition to any and all other costs and expenses required by this section to be borne by the applicant. 
(Code 1996, ch. 25, § 803; Ord. of 1-9-2001) 
Appendix A - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF BRYAN COUNTY, GEORGIA 
Presented at a public hearing held by the Bryan County commission on the 18th day of May, 1995. 
Adopted by the board of commissioners of Bryan County at a meeting on the 6th day of June, 1995. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix is the county subdivision ordinance, being an ordinance adopted on November 7, 1995. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Regulations of Bryan County, Georgia." 
ARTICLE II. - ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
The commissioners of Bryan County, pursuant to the authority conferred by the provisions of article IX, section 2, paragraph 4 and article IX, section 2, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of Georgia of 1983, do ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections. 
ARTICLE III. - PURPOSES 
The various articles and sections of this ordinance are adopted for the following purposes, among others: 
(a)  To promote and protect the health, safety, prosperity, and welfare of the citizens of Bryan County. 
(b)  To conserve and protect the natural and scenic resources of Bryan County. 
(c)  To maintain the economic viability of the forestry and agricultural resources of Bryan County. 
(d)  To prevent the spread of blight and slums within Bryan County. 
(e)  To ensure that residential and commercial lots within Bryan County will be of such design, area, and width as will prevent health and sanitation problems. 
(f)  To prevent and reduce traffic congestion and traffic hazards within Bryan County. 
(g)  To provide buffers to protect property values and maintain the scenic beauty of Bryan County. 
(h)  To ensure that drainage systems for subdivisions within Bryan County are constructed so as to not adversely affect the natural drainage systems for surrounding properties. 
(i)  To reduce maintenance problems with roads, drainage and other subdivision improvements within Bryan County. 
(j)  To ensure the timely completion of subdivision improvements within subdivisions in Bryan County. 
(k)  To ensure that the taxpayers of Bryan County are not burdened with costs of completing subdivision improvements or correcting improperly constructed subdivision improvements, which costs should be the responsibility of private businesses. 
(l)  To prevent development in areas of Bryan County unsuitable for residential or commercial uses because of soils, wetlands or drainage characteristics. 
(m)  To ensure that all lots within Bryan County will be accessible to firefighting equipment and other emergency and service vehicles. 
(n)  To protect the investments of the buyers of lots within subdivisions. 
(o)  To preserve the environmental, historical and social heritage and character of Bryan County. 
(p)  To encourage the design of roads within subdivisions so that speeding within subdivisions will be reduced. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 400. - Administrative agency. 
The planning director shall administer this ordinance, approve or disapprove construction plans and final plats and recommend to the county commission approval or disapproval of preliminary plats. The planning director shall supervise the staff of the planning department, coordinate the input of the county attorney, county engineer, health department, engineering director and other agencies relating to this ordinance. The planning director shall also prepare such reports for the county commission as may be required under this ordinance or requested by the county commission and shall approve for recording plats of subdivisions as authorized herein. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 401. - Forms and applications. 
The planning director shall prepare standard applications, forms and other documents to be used by applicants seeking approvals under this ordinance. All applications or requests for approvals made in connection with this ordinance shall be made on the standard applications, forms and other documents prepared by the planning director. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 402. - Records. 
The planning director shall be responsible for maintaining all of the records of the planning department and planning commission, including, but not limited to, the minutes of planning commission meetings. Except as otherwise provided by Georgia law, all records of the planning commission shall be public records, available for inspection and copying in accordance with Georgia law. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
ARTICLE V. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Section 500. - Minimum design standards and improvements. 
In order that various purposes of this ordinance may be accomplished, all subdivisions shall be developed, improved and constructed in accordance with the minimum design standards set forth in this article V. All subdivision improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this ordinance and other applicable laws. 
Section 501. - Road frontages. 
Except where otherwise specified in this ordinance, the minimum required road frontage for a lot shall not be less than the minimum lot width at building line required for the zoning district within which the lot is situated, except that road frontage for exterior corner lots or lots abutting a cul-de-sac turn-around shall be at least 35 percent of the otherwise required road frontage and road frontage for exterior curve lots shall be at least 70 percent of the otherwise required road frontage. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 501.01. - Non-continuous road frontages. 
Where the road frontage of a tract which is an existing lot of record is not continuous ("non-continuous tract") and where the road frontage of any part of a non-continuous tract ("non-continuous part") does not meet the minimum road frontage as required by section 502, such non-continuous tract may still be subdivided, provided: 
(i)  The number of lots does not exceed the number of non-continuous parts; 
(ii)  The space and bulk of the lots meet the minimum requirements set forth in the Bryan County zoning ordinance; and 
(iii)  All of the road frontage of a non-continuous part is utilized as a lot. 
Section 502. - Roads. 
All lots must abut a road which meets the requirements of sections 502.01 through 502.05 herein. 
Section 502.01. - Roads to be constructed. 
All roads to be constructed in a subdivision must comply with the following provisions: 
(a)  General. All roads must be designed and constructed in accordance with the engineering standards. 
(b)  County maintained or approved private road system. All roads must be either: (i) accepted by the county commission as a county maintained road; or (ii) designated and approved as an approved private road system. 
(c)  Continuation of existing road pattern. The arrangement of roads in a subdivision shall provide for the alignment with, or the continuation of, or the appropriate projection of existing roads in surrounding areas. 
(d)  Road jogs. Road jogs or centerline offsets in the horizontal alignment of roads across intersections of less than 150 feet shall be prohibited. 
(e)  Intersections. The centerline of no more than two roads shall intersect at any one point. Roads shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no roads shall intersect any other road at less than 75 degrees. Curbed roads shall have a minimum tangent of 100 feet at intersections. 
(f)  Subdivisions on arterial roads. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial road, the county commission may require local roads, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(g)  Permanent dead-end roads. Dead-end roads, designed to be such permanently, except cul-de-sacs built pursuant to section 504, shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having an outside roadway diameter of not less than 100 feet, and a right-of-way diameter of not less than 120 feet. 
(h)  Temporary dead-end roads. Temporary dead-end roads shall only be allowed in connection with phased construction of subdivisions within a development according to an approved master plan. 
(i)  Road names. All roads within a subdivision shall be named in accordance with the 911 Manual. 
(j)  Road name markers. Road name markers which shall be constructed to county specifications shall be installed at all road intersections. 
(k)  Paving. All roads must be paved, except those roads exempt from paving pursuant to article XIII. 
(Ord. of 11-7-1995; Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 502.02. - Subdivisions abutting existing roads. 
Lots which are situated in subdivisions developed after the effective date of these regulations and which abut existing roads shall be permitted, provided such lots which abut the following roads have the following minimum road frontages: 
(a)  On existing State of Georgia or county maintained paved roads, the minimum road frontages vary as follows depending on the type of road as set forth in the road classification plan: 
(i)  On scenic parkways, 600 feet; 
(ii)  On major thoroughfares, 300 feet; 
(iii)  On arterial/connector roads, 250 feet; 
(iv)  On collector roads, lot width at building line as required by the zoning ordinance; and 
(v)  On local roads, lot width at building line as required by the zoning ordinance; 
(b)  On existing private roads, lot width at building line as required by the zoning ordinance. In addition to meeting the minimum road frontage requirements, lots abutting existing private roads shall be permitted only if such roads meet or are improved so that they meet all of the provisions of section 502.01; 
(c)  On existing unpaved approved private road systems, lot width at building line as required by the zoning ordinance. In addition to meeting the minimum road frontage requirements, lots abutting an existing unpaved approved private road system shall be permitted only if such roads are improved so that they meet all of the provisions of section 502.01; and 
(d)  On an existing paved approved private road system, lot width at building line as required by the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-7-1995) 
Section 502.03. - Lots with dual frontages. 
(a)  Lots which have road frontages both on an existing road and on a proposed road to be constructed are not subject to the minimum road frontages set forth in section 502.02, provided that: 
(i)  The only access to such lot is from the proposed road to be constructed; and 
(ii)  Buffers are provided on the existing road in accordance with section 514.02. 
(b)  Where a lot has road frontages on two or more existing roads, the minimum frontage requirements of section 502.02 shall be determined on the basis of the road providing access to the lot, provided that the plat clearly identifies which road shall be utilized for access to the lot. 
(Ord. of 11-7-1995) 
Section 502.04. - Recognized private access road (RPAR). 
Subdivisions of lots abutting an RPAR shall not be permitted. 
Section 502.05. - DOT approval. 
For subdivisions abutting a road maintained by the State of Georgia, DOT approval must be obtained for such subdivision's plan for access to such road. 
Section 502.06. - Tract with more than one existing dwelling or principal structure. 
(a)  Where more than one dwelling or principal structure legally existed on a tract at the effective date of these regulations, such tract may be divided into an individual lot for each such dwelling or principal structure without meeting the requirements of section 501 provided the planning director determines that the division meets such requirements as closely as possible. 
(b)  Whenever a variance from the minimum lot width at building line has been granted under the zoning ordinance, the requirements of section 501 shall be deemed satisfied. 
(Ord. of 11-7-1995) 
Section 503. - Guidelines for determining when additional widths are needed for collector and arterial roads. 
When the county engineer determines that a road or portion of road within a subdivision qualifies for classification as a collector or arterial road, an applicant shall provide a traffic study which estimates the average daily traffic volume for such road or portion thereof at maximum development. When the county engineer determines, based on such traffic study, that the road in question will serve an area larger than the proposed subdivision, the traffic study area boundaries shall be extended to encompass such larger area. Where the traffic study estimates the average daily traffic volume will exceed 2,500 vehicles per day, the county engineer may recommend to the county commission, and the county commission may require an increased pavement and right-of-way width. 
Section 504. - Cul-de-sacs. 
All cul-de-sacs as defined below must be designed and constructed as follows: 
(a)  Cul-de-sacs. A local road with a 60 foot right-of-way and a minimum 18-foot pavement width which does not exceed 600 feet in length ending with a permanent turn-around that is 80 feet in diameter with a 100-foot diameter right-of-way. The length of such road is measured from the point of intersection of the centerline of the intersecting road and the cul-de-sac to the center point of the cul-de-sac turn-around. 
(b)  Minor cul-de-sac. A local road with a 60-foot right-of-way and a minimum 18-foot pavement width which does not exceed 300 feet in length ending with a permanent turn-around that is 66 feet in diameter with a 100-foot diameter right-of-way. The length of such road is measured from the point of intersection of the centerline of the intersecting road and the cul-de-sac to the center point of the cul-de-sac turn-around. 
(c)  Alternative designs. A local road with a 60-foot right-of-way which does not exceed 300 feet in length may terminate in accordance with the examples shown below. 
Section 505. - Lanes. 
Lanes shall be provided in commercial and industrial zoning districts, except that the planning director, after recommendation by the county engineer, may waive this requirement if other definite and assured provisions are made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. All lanes must be designed and constructed in accordance with this ordinance and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 506. - Additional right-of-way. 
A proposed subdivision which includes a road that does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of this ordinance shall provide for additional right-of-way along either one or both sides of said road so that the minimum right-of-way required by this ordinance can be established. If the proposed subdivision abuts only one side of said road, then a minimum of one-half of the required extra right-of-way shall be required. 
Section 507. - Pedestrian ways. 
Pedestrian ways shall be required within subdivisions as follows: 
(a)  Subdivisions of ten or more lots or subdivisions which are part of a phased subdivision with ten or more potential lots shall provide pedestrian ways within the subdivision totaling a minimum of 200 square feet for each lot within the subdivision. 
(b)  The proposed locations and widths of pedestrian ways must be shown on preliminary plats. 
(c)  Except as modified under section 507(e), pedestrian ways shall be required as follows within subdivisions: 
(i)  On both sides of arterial roads within subdivisions; 
(ii)  On one side of arterial roads abutting subdivisions; 
(iii)  On one side of collector and marginal access roads within or abutting subdivisions; 
(iv)  Subdivisions adjacent to schools, parks or playgrounds must provide pedestrian ways from such subdivisions to the adjacent school, park or playground, unless prohibited by the governmental authority owning such facilities; and 
(v)  On one side of local roads or cul-de-sacs which exceed 300 feet in length. 
(d)  Pedestrian ways must be designed and constructed in accordance with the engineering standards. 
(e)  Upon written request of an applicant, the requirements of section 507(c) and (d) can be modified if an alternative pedestrian ways plan is approved by the pedestrian ways, recreation and buffer committee. In evaluating an alternative pedestrian ways plan, the pedestrian ways, recreation and buffer committee must consider the following: 
(i)  The health, safety and welfare of residents of and visitors to a proposed subdivision; 
(ii)  The purposes of this ordinance as set forth in article III; and 
(iii)  The anticipated patterns of pedestrian and vehicular movements within the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 508. - Lots. 
All lots shall comply with the following design standards: 
(a)  Road access. Each lot shall abut a road as required by section 502 herein. 
(b)  Lot lines. Side lot lines shall be as nearly as practical at right angles to straight road lines and radial to curved road lines. 
(c)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have sufficient width and depth to permit the establishment of appropriate building lines from both roads. 
(d)  Lot sizes. The area and dimensions of lots shall meet the greater of the minimum lot sizes set forth in this ordinance, the Bryan County zoning ordinance or other applicable laws. 
Section 509. - Block lengths. 
In order: (a) that there may be convenient access between various parts of a subdivision and between the subdivision and surrounding areas; and (b) to help prevent traffic congestion and traffic hazards, the length of blocks shall not exceed 1,800 feet. 
Section 510. - Easements. 
All easements within subdivisions must be designed in accordance with the engineering standards and must be shown on a final plat. The following types of easements shall be required within subdivisions: 
510.01.  Drainage. Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, the developer of such proposed subdivision shall offer the county a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way which shall conform substantially with the lines of such watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream and shall be of such additional width as deemed necessary for maintenance purposes by the county engineer. 
510.02.  County maintenance easement. Maintenance easements shall be provided when deemed necessary by the county engineer. All easements to the county shall, in addition to being shown on a final plat, be evidenced by a written easement agreement recorded in the clerk's office. 
510.03.  Utilities. Easements for utilities serving a proposed subdivision must be shown on the final plat. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 511. - Required water supply and sanitary sewerage. 
All subdivisions must provide water supply and sewerage disposal systems pursuant to the following requirements: 
511.01.  Public water and sewerage systems. 
(a)  Where a public water system is available and located within one mile of a proposed subdivision, of ten or more lots or subdivisions which are part of a phased subdivision with ten or more potential lots, the subdivision must be served by such public water system. 
(b)  Where a public sewerage system is available and located within one mile of a proposed subdivision, of ten or more lots or subdivisions which are part of a phased subdivision with ten or more potential lots, the subdivision must be served by such public sewerage system. 
511.02.  Private water and sewerage. 
(a)  Where, under section 511.01(a), a subdivision is not required to be served with public water, the subdivision must be served with a private water system designed and constructed in accordance with this ordinance and other applicable laws and approved as to such compliance by the health department and the county engineer. 
(b)  The requirements for sewer and water are now governed by chapter 30, Sewer and Water Ordinance of Bryan County. 
(c)  Prior to the submittal to the planning director of the final plat of a subdivision served by a private water system or private sewerage system, an applicant must submit to the planning director a trust indenture relating to each system, as required by section 1703. 
511.03.  Exemptions from requirement for private water and sewerage systems. 
(a)  Subdivisions of less than ten units with minimum lot sizes of one acre each are exempt from the requirement of section 511.02 for the requirement of a private water system, provided such subdivision meets the requirements of this ordinance and other applicable laws. This exemption shall not apply when the planning director determines that the proposed subdivision is part of a phased subdivision with ten or more potential units. 
(b)  The requirements for sewer and water are now governed by chapter 30, Sewer and Water Ordinance of Bryan County. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997; Ord. of 3-4-2008) 
Section 512. - Environmental site assessment ("ESA"). 
(a)  All applications for subdivision approval, except those described in section 512.(b), must be accompanied by an ESA for the property to be subdivided. 
(b)  No ESA shall be required for a subdivision with no subdivision improvements or a subdivision exempt from certain provisions of this ordinance pursuant to articles XIII, XIV and XV, if the owner of the land to be subdivided signs a sworn affidavit in a form prepared by the planning director that (i) the land to be subdivided has never been used as a landfill; and (ii) no environmentally dangerous situation exists on such land. 
(c)  No subdivision requiring an ESA shall be approved until the ESA has been reviewed and approved by the county engineer. Until such approval is given, no plat or construction plans shall be approved for any subdivision requiring an ESA until the ESA has been reviewed and approved by the county engineer. Until such approval is given, no work shall occur within the proposed subdivision. 
(d)  If during construction within a subdivision, a previously undiscovered landfill or other environmentally dangerous situation shall be discovered, the existence of such landfill or situation shall be immediately disclosed by the developer to the county engineer. In such situations, the county engineer may require a revised ESA for the subdivision and, if necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of residents of Bryan County, the county engineer may order that all construction be halted and all construction shall be so halted. After review of the revised ESA, the county engineer shall make a determination as to the necessity of revision to the construction plans and preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 513. - General suitability. 
513.01.  Soils. 
(a)  No lot(s) shall be approved where the health department determines that the soil conditions at the site of the septic tank absorption field serving a lot(s) are wetlands or classified as Soil Groups 5 or 6 in either the "Manual For Onsite Sewage Management Systems" of the environmental health section of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service (SCS) publication, known as Soil Survey of Bryan and Chatham County, Georgia (March 1974). 
(b)  The health department shall certify its findings under section 513.01(a), to the planning director. 
(c)  An applicant who disputes the determinations of the health department under section 513.01(a) shall have the right to retain a soils scientist to prepare an on-site soil mapping of the proposed lot(s). The health department will then reconsider his determinations under section 513.01(a) based on such soil mapping. 
(d)  When soil mapping of a lot has been performed, a copy of such mapping shall accompany the certification described in section 513.01(b). 
(e)  A dwelling or principal structure legally existing on the effective date of this ordinance which is served by a functioning sewerage disposal system shall be exempt from the requirements of this section provided that the health department issues a certificate of approval for such system. Plat of such lot(s) shall designate the boundaries of such soils. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997; Ord. of 11-7-1995) 
513.02.  Access. 
(a)  No proposed subdivision with an entrance on, or lots accessed from, an unpaved road shall be approved where the county commission makes a determination, based on the engineering standards, that such unpaved road is inadequate to serve the additional traffic to be generated by the proposed subdivision. 
(b)  Section 513.02(a) shall not apply to a subdivision of three lots or less, unless the planning director determines that the proposed subdivision is part of a phased subdivision with four or more potential lots. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
513.03.  Subdivision entrances and driveways. 
(a)  The county commission shall limit the number of entrances and driveways into a subdivision when the county engineer makes a determination, based on the engineering standards that the proposed entrances and driveways would adversely affect traffic congestion, pedestrian or vehicular safety or maintenance. 
(b)  Entrances and driveways to subdivisions shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the engineering standards. 
(c)  Entrances and driveways to subdivisions abutting state and federal roads shall also be designed and constructed in accordance with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(d)  When driveways and entrances are limited under this section 513.03, the approved locations of such driveways and entrances shall be shown on the final plat. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 514. - Buffers. 
Buffers established in dedicated buffer parcels shall be required along the following subdivision boundaries: 
(a)  Subdivisions of ten or more lots or subdivisions which are part of a phased subdivision with a potential for ten or more lots; 
(b)  Subdivisions of three or more lots which abut an arterial/connector road; 
(c)  Any subdivisions which abut a major thoroughfare or a scenic parkway; or 
(d)  Where a marginal access road is constructed to provide access to a subdivision, the buffers required by section 514 shall be situated between the existing road and the marginal access road. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004; Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Section 514.01. - Exemption. 
Section 514 buffers shall not be required on roads to be constructed within a subdivision. 
Section 514.02. - Width of buffers along roads. 
When required by section 502.03 or section 514, buffers along roads must be the following minimum widths: 
(a)  70 feet along a scenic parkway; 
(b)  50 feet along a major thoroughfare or an arterial road; and 
(c)  30 feet along all other existing roads. 
Section 514.03. - Width of buffers within subdivisions. 
The outer perimeter buffers around subdivisions shall be at least 30 feet in depth. Such buffers may be platted as part of the lot/parcel. The same buffer requirement applies to any parcel being zoned to a commercial, business or industrial use. The county engineer is authorized to modify or waive this requirement for I-L zones. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008) 
Section 514.04. - Entrances and driveways. 
Subdivision entrances and driveways permitted under section 513.03 may traverse the buffers required by section 514. 
Section 514.05. - Buffer requirements. 
(a)  Buffers required under section 502.03 or section 514 must consist of undisturbed vegetation (planted or natural); and 
(b)  Prior to approval of a final plat of a subdivision with buffers, the planning director must approve a plan submitted by the applicant for the preservation of the buffers. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Section 514.06. - Criteria for use of alternative buffer plan. 
Where any of the following conditions exist, an applicant can propose an alternative to the requirements of section 514.02 and section 514.04(a) ("alternative buffer plan"): 
(i)  Where natural conditions at the required buffer site are insufficient to provide natural visual separation, berms, screening or a landscape plan may be proposed to enhance the natural buffer; 
(ii)  Where soil conditions at the required buffer site cannot support natural vegetation necessary for visual separation, berms, screening or a landscape plan may be proposed in lieu of a natural buffer; 
(iii)  Where it is desirable for a required buffer to follow natural topographical contours to conform to wetlands or drainage ways, a plan may be proposed which reduces the minimum width of the buffer up to 25 percent, while maintaining the total area of the required buffer; or 
(iv)  In all business, commercial or industrial zoning districts, a landscaping plan may be proposed in lieu of a natural buffer. 
Section 514.07. - Consideration of an alternative buffer plan. 
Upon written request by an applicant, the requirements of section 514.02 and section 514.05(a) can be modified if an alternative buffer plan is approved by the pedestrian ways, recreation and buffer committee. In evaluating an alternative buffer plan, the pedestrian ways, recreation and buffer committee must consider the following: 
(i)  The health, safety and welfare of residents of and visitors to a proposed subdivision; 
(ii)  The existing site features of the required buffer location and the probability that the alternative buffer plan will preserve the appearance, character and value of the land proposed to be subdivided and surrounding properties; and 
(iii)  The purposes of this ordinance as set forth in article III. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Section 515. - Compliance with laws relating to rivers, streams or marshlands. 
Subdivisions abutting rivers or streams shall comply with all laws relating to the development of land adjacent to rivers, streams or marshlands. 
Section 516. - Flood damage prevention ordinance. 
All subdivisions shall comply with the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance of Bryan County and any other state or federal laws relating to flooding. All final plats must show the limits of flood zones and contain all matters relating to flooding or flood zones required by any applicable laws. 
Section 517. - Recreation. 
Subdivisions of ten or more lots or subdivisions which are part of a phased subdivision with ten or more potential lots must include the following for recreational purposes for the residents of such subdivision: 
(a)  A parcel designed for recreational purposes which is the greater of one-half acre or five percent of the total acreage of the land subdivided ("recreation tract"); 
(b)  No more than 20 percent of the recreation tract may be wetlands; 
(c)  The recreation tract must be accessible from within the subdivision, by all lots in the subdivision, by way of a public road, an approved private road system or a pedestrian way approved by the county engineer; and 
(d)  Prior to approval of the final plat of a subdivision which includes a recreation tract: 
(i)  The recreation tract must be improved by the applicant in accordance with the engineering standards; 
(ii)  The planning director must approve a plan submitted by the applicant for the continued maintenance of the recreation tract; and 
(iii)  Prior to the construction of 30 percent of the lots in any phase of a subdivision, the approved improvements must be completed and installed on the recreation tract for that phase. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997; Ord. of 2-14-2006) 
Section 517.01. - Modification of recreation requirement. 
Upon written request of an applicant, the requirements of section 517 can be modified if an alternative recreation plan is approved by the pedestrian ways, recreation and buffer committee. In evaluating an alternative recreation plan, the pedestrian ways, recreation and buffer committee must consider the following: 
(i)  The health, safety and welfare of the residents of the proposed subdivision; 
(ii)  The purposes of this ordinance as set forth in article III; and 
(iii)  The anticipated ages and family composition of the likely buyers of lots within the proposed subdivision. 
Section 518. - Exemption for utilities. 
The county commission can modify any provisions of article V in connection with facilities relating to the transmission of utilities, provided that: 
(a)  The use of the lot so created is permitted in the zoning district in which such lot is situated; 
(b)  The space and bulk requirements of the lot so created meet the minimum requirements for utilities as set forth in the Bryan County zoning ordinance; 
(c)  The county commission approves a buffer plan that provides visual screening from the lot so created and the road on which it is situated and adjoining properties; and 
(d)  The plat of the lot will be clearly marked "For Utility Purposes Only." 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 519. - Bryan County engineering design standards ("engineering standards"). 
(a)  The county commission has adopted an ordinance, entitled "Engineering Standards," which includes technical standards for plats, environmental site assessments, other engineering matters and minimum guidelines for the design and construction of subdivision improvements, including, but not limited to, roads, easements, pedestrian ways, subdivision entrances and driveways, recreational tracts, buffers, private water systems, private sewerage systems and drainage systems. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
ARTICLE VI. - AGREEMENT TO TRANSFER LOTS PRIOR TO APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT 

Section 600. - Transfer or agreement to transfer lots prior to approval of final plat. 
(a)  Until approval of a final plat pursuant to this ordinance, no party shall transfer or agree to transfer a lot within a proposed subdivision by any means, including, but not limited to, reference to a plat, sketch or drawing of such lot or by utilizing a metes and bounds description of such lot. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 600(a), prior to the approval of a final plat, a party can agree to transfer lots under any of the three following conditions: 
(i)  Where the lot to be transferred is at least ten acres in size; 
(ii)  Where the lot to be transferred is a combination or recombination of lots shown on a previously recorded plat; or 
(iii)  By entering into a written agreement either to reserve or purchase a lot within a proposed subdivision, provided that all of the following provisions are complied with: 
(1)  If a reservation agreement ("reservation agreement") is utilized, such agreement must be terminable at will by the potential purchaser and must contain a provision requiring the immediate refund of earnest money if requested by the potential purchaser; 
(2)  If a contract to purchase ("contract") is utilized, the contract must be contingent upon the recording in the clerk's office within six months of the date of the contract of the final plat of the subdivision in which the lot is situated and must contain a provision requiring the immediate refund of earnest money if such contingency is not satisfied; 
(3)  Any earnest money paid pursuant to a reservation agreement or contract is deposited in a federally insured trust account at a lending institution with an office in Bryan County, Georgia; 
(4)  The reservation agreement or contract must contain the following statement in type size 12 point or larger: 
"The Lot which is subject to this Reservation Agreement or Contract has not been approved by Bryan County, cannot legally be transferred until so approved and there is no assurance whatsoever that it will ever be approved by Bryan County. Any earnest money paid in connection with this Reservation Agreement or Contract may be lost and the Lot never conveyed to the party paying the earnest money. Any transfer of this Lot prior to approval of the Lot by Bryan County is a violation of the Bryan County Subdivision Regulations." 
ARTICLE VII. - REIMBURSEMENT OF CERTAIN FEES 

Section 700. - General. 
When, in connection with the review of a proposed subdivision, the county requires professional services beyond the capabilities of the planning department staff, the planning director shall notify the applicant seeking approval for such subdivision, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the county's need for such professional services, the names of the professionals intended to be retained by the county and the hourly rates for such professionals. If the applicant then continues to seek approval of his subdivision and the county utilizes professional services as described, the applicant shall reimburse the county for the costs of such professional services. The planning director shall require that the individuals or entities rendering such professional services submit to the planning department time records reflecting time spent and fees due at county approved rates. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 701. - Time of payment. 
The planning director shall forward to each applicant for subdivision approval, a statement of any fees to be reimbursed by such applicant to the county and, in accordance with section 1213(b), these fees must be paid to the county prior to the recording of a final plat. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED 

Section 800. - Reserved. 
Section 801. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - WARRANTY OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS DEDICATED TO COUNTY 

Section 900. - Establishment by county engineer of cost basis of subdivision improvements. 
Prior to the consideration of a preliminary plat by the county commission, the county engineer shall establish a monetary amount which is the cost of the subdivision improvements to be dedicated to the county ("cost basis"). The county engineer shall establish the cost basis after estimating cost figures for the construction and installation of comparable improvements and after considering cost figures supplied by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 901. - Warranty. 
No final plat shall be approved by the planning director unless, prior to such approval, the applicant delivers to the planning director a fully executed warranty which shall be in effect for a minimum of one year from date of final acceptance by the county. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2010; Ord. of 3-11-2014) 
Section 902. - Security of warranty. 
A warranty shall, at the option of an applicant, be secured by the one of the following: 
(a)  A letter of credit in the monetary amount which is 15 percent of the cost basis established by the county engineer under section 900; 
(b)  A maintenance bond; or 
(c)  A pledge in the monetary amount which is 15 percent of the cost basis established by the county engineer under section 900. 
Section 903. - Notification under warranty. 
If, during the term of a warranty, the engineering director determines that a subdivision improvement dedicated to the county is in need of repair or replacement, the engineering director shall notify the party responsible under the warranty of the required repair or replacement and specify the time within which such repair or replacement must be completed. 
Section 904. - Exception to notification under warranty. 
If the engineering director determines that the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the county require the immediate repair or replacement of a subdivision improvement dedicated to the county, the notice requirement under section 903 shall be waived and the county authorized to make such repair or replacement by any means it deems reasonable under the circumstances. In such event, the party responsible under the warranty, shall immediately reimburse the county for the costs incurred by the county in making such repairs or replacements. 
Section 905. - Defaults under warranty. 
(a)  Default under section 903. Upon failure of the party responsible under the warranty to make the repairs or replacements determined necessary by the engineering director within the time specified by the engineering director, the county shall have the right to make such repairs or replacements by any means it deems necessary and bill the party responsible under the warranty for the costs of such repairs or replacements, plus 100 percent of such costs as an administrative expense. If such party fails to pay such total amount to the county, the county shall draw on the letter of credit or pledge securing the warranty, and apply the amounts thereof to all sums due the county. In the event that the amount of the letter of credit or pledge is not sufficient to pay the sums due the county, the applicant shall immediately pay the balance to the county. 
(b)  Default under section 904. In the event the party responsible under a warranty fails to reimburse the county upon demand, the county shall draw on the letter of credit or pledge securing the warranty, and apply the amounts thereof to all sums due the county. In the event that the amount of the letter of credit or pledge is not sufficient to pay the sums due the county, the applicant shall immediately pay the balance to the county. 
ARTICLE X. - SKETCH PLAN 

Section 1000. - General. 
Applicants who intend to subdivide land into a subdivision or development of 25 or more units or who intend to develop a phased subdivision are encouraged, but not required, to submit a sketch plan to the planning director for review and comment and schedule a pre-development conference with the planning director prior to the submission of construction plans and preliminary plat. This pre-development conference is for informational purposes only, will not constitute approval of the proposed subdivision and in no way shall affect further consideration of the proposed subdivision by the planning director or the county commission. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
ARTICLE XI. - APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND PRELIMINARY PLATS FOR SUBDIVISIONS WITH SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 1100. - Minimum standards. 
All construction plans and preliminary plats must conform to the engineering standards and must include the items and certifications listed in the appendix to this ordinance entitled "Required Items and Certifications." 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1101. - No improvements until approval of construction plans and preliminary plat. 
Until the construction plans and preliminary plat have been approved by the county commission, an applicant shall not grade, scrape, or otherwise open or extend a street or cause any construction or land clearing to begin within a proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1102. - Filing construction plans, preliminary plat and other required items. 
An applicant seeking approval of construction plans and a preliminary plat shall submit an application and the following documents to the planning director: 
(a)  Copies of all recorded plats relating to applicant's acquisition and subsequent divisions of the land proposed to be subdivided; 
(b)  Seven full size copies of the proposed construction plans and preliminary plat; 
(c)  One 11-inch by 17-inch copy of the proposed construction plans and specifications and proposed preliminary plat; 
(d)  A jurisdictional wetlands delineation of the land to be subdivided or a letter from a soils scientist certifying that no wetlands exist on the land to be subdivided. The limits of any wetlands shall be surveyed and included on the preliminary plat; 
(e)  A mapping of soil types prepared by a soils scientist for the land to be subdivided; 
(f)  A land disturbing activity permit issued pursuant to the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance of Bryan County, or a completed application for such permit, along with all supporting material; 
(g)  A topographical survey of the land to be subdivided by a licensed surveyor or an engineer showing topography at vertical intervals of not more than one foot and a certificate from a licensed surveyor or engineer stating that drainage from the land to be subdivided will not affect adjacent property owners. If the proposed work will affect adjacent property owners by changing the flow of water to or from their property, an agreement or easement shall be provided; and 
(h)  An environmental site assessment of the land to be subdivided. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1103. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1104. - Action on construction plans and preliminary plat by county commission. 
Except where an extension of time is requested or agreed to in writing by an applicant, the county commission shall have 60 days from the date of the submission of the construction plans and preliminary plat and the other documents described in section 1102 to approve or disapprove such construction plans and preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1105. - Review of construction plans, preliminary plat and other required documentation. 
The planning director shall review the construction plans and preliminary plat and any other documents he deems necessary to determine the compliance of the construction plans and preliminary plat with this ordinance and other applicable laws. The planning director shall be responsible for obtaining the review of the documents described in section 1102 from the following individuals and departments: 
(a)  The health department, the county engineer and when required by law or regulation, the EPD, shall review the proposed water supply and sewerage disposal systems and determine compliance with this ordinance and other applicable laws; 
(b)  The engineering director shall review the construction plans and preliminary plat and determine the conformity of proposed road alignments with existing roads, the road classification plan and proposed public roads; 
(c)  The county engineer shall review the construction plans and preliminary plat and such other documents as he deems necessary and determine the compliance of the construction plans and preliminary plat with this ordinance and other applicable laws; and 
(d)  If deemed necessary by the planning director, review and comment from any consultants or other professionals retained by the county. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1106. - Report of planning director. 
The planning director shall, after reviewing the documents described in section 1102, prepare and submit to the county commission a report which shall include the following: 
(a)  The findings of the planning director as to the compliance of the construction plans and preliminary plat with this ordinance and other applicable laws; and 
(b)  Written statements from the individuals, consultants, professionals or departments named in section 1105 as to the compliance of the construction plans and preliminary plat and other documents with this ordinance and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1107. - County commission approval or disapproval of construction plans and preliminary plat. 
If the county commission determines that the proposed design of a subdivision shown on the construction plans and preliminary plat complies with this ordinance and other applicable laws, it shall approve such construction plans and preliminary plat. If the county commission finds that the proposed design of a subdivision shown on the construction plans and preliminary plat does not comply with this ordinance and other applicable laws, it shall disapprove such construction plans and preliminary plat. When the county commission disapproves construction plans and a preliminary plat, it shall note the reasons for such disapproval in its minutes. Notwithstanding the noting of such reasons for disapproval in the minutes of the county commission, an applicant must meet all provisions of this ordinance and other applicable laws to later obtain approval by the county commission of construction plans and preliminary plat. The approval of construction plans and preliminary plat by the county commission shall be evidenced by a written approval executed by the chairman and clerk of the county commission. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1108. - Time limit on approval of construction plans and preliminary plat. 
The approval by the county commission of construction plans and preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of 36 months from the date of approval, provided that, within such 36-month period, the final plat of the property to be subdivided pursuant to such construction plans and preliminary plat is recorded in the clerk's office. If the final plat is not recorded in the clerk's office within the 36-month period, then the prior county commission approval of the construction plans and preliminary plat shall be void and the applicant shall have no rights whatsoever as a result of the prior approval of construction plans and preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
ARTICLE XII. - APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT FOR SUBDIVISIONS WITH SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 1200. - Requirement for completion of certain subdivision improvements. 
No final plat shall be submitted to the planning director or approved by the planning director until the following subdivision improvements within or serving the proposed subdivision have been completed: roads, private water system, drainage system, and private sewerage system. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1201. - Approval of final plat prior to completion of all subdivision improvements. 
If, at the time of submission of a final plat to the planning director, the subdivision improvements described in section 1200 have been completed, but other subdivision improvements have not been completed, a final plat can be approved by the planning director if, prior to the consideration of the final plat by the planning director, the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Payment of a non-refundable letter of credit administrative fee of $50.00; 
(b)  The county engineer establishes the monetary amount sufficient to pay all costs of the subdivision improvements not completed at the time of submission of the final plat to the planning director. The county engineer shall establish this monetary amount by considering cost figures for the construction or installation of comparable improvements and cost figures supplied by the applicant; 
(c)  A letter of credit commitment in the amount established by the county engineer pursuant to section 1201(b) is delivered to the planning director; and 
(d)  The requirement for a letter of credit for pedestrian ways is qualified herein. Completion of sidewalks shall be governed by the provisions of appendix (a), paragraph 1, subparagraph (33). Pedestrian ways in all subdivision areas other than on specific house lots are subject to the letter of credit requirements contained in this ordinance as well as the provisions pertaining to noncompliance found at section 1201.01. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997; Ord. of 8-19-2010) 
Section 1201.01. - Noncompliance. 
If the uncompleted subdivision improvements are not completed and approved by the county within 12 months from the date of approval of the final plat by the planning director, then the county shall draw on the letter of credit issued pursuant to section 1201(c) and complete such subdivision improvements. The applicant shall then reimburse the county for all costs incurred by the county, plus 100 percent of such costs as an administrative expense. In the event that the amount of the letter of credit is not sufficient to pay the total amount due the county, the applicant shall immediately pay the balance due to the county. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1202. - Final plat requirement. 
The final plat shall conform to O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, as amended, known as "The Georgia Plat Act," any additional requirements as prescribed in this ordinance and other applicable laws and the engineering standards. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1203. - Items to be shown on final plat. 
The items and certifications listed in the appendix to this ordinance entitled "Required items and certifications," and any other matters required by this ordinance must appear on the final plat. The final plat must also clearly indicate whether subdivision improvements are dedicated to the county or remain private subdivision improvements. 
Section 1204. - Submitting final plat to planning director. 
An applicant seeking approval of a final plat shall file the original and ten 11-inch by 17-inch copies of the proposed final plat with the planning director. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1205. - Action on final plat by planning director. 
Except where an extension of time is requested or agreed to in writing by an applicant, the planning director shall have 15 days from the date of submission of a final plat to him to approve or disapprove a final plat. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1206. - Review and approval of final plat. 
The planning director shall review the final plat and such other documents he deems necessary to determine compliance of the final plat with this ordinance and other applicable laws and shall be responsible for obtaining the review of the final plat from the following individuals and departments: 
(a)  The health department or the EPD and the county engineer shall review the water supply and sewerage disposal system and determine that the water supply and sewerage disposal facilities have been constructed and completed in accordance with the approved construction plans and preliminary plat; 
(b)  The engineering director shall determine that all subdivision improvements required to be completed by this ordinance (except for water supply and sewerage disposal systems) have been so completed in accordance with the approved construction plans and preliminary plat; 
(c)  The county engineer shall determine the compliance of the final plat with the approved construction plans and preliminary plat and with this ordinance and other applicable laws and shall, upon request by the planning director, review and inspect the construction or installation of any subdivision improvements; 
(d)  If deemed necessary by the planning director, review and comment from consultants or other professionals retained by the county; 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1207. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1208. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1209. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1210. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1211. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1212. - Planning director approval or disapproval of final plat. 
If the planning director finds that the requirements listed below have been met, he shall approve the final plat. If the planning director finds that any of the requirements listed below have not been met, he shall disapprove the final plat, and note the reasons for such disapproval in his records. 
(a)  That all of the requirements of this ordinance and other applicable laws have been met; 
(b)  That the final plat conforms to the approved construction plans and preliminary plat; 
(c)  That all subdivision improvements requiring completion under section 1200 have been completed; 
(d)  That all other subdivision improvements have either been completed or the executed letter of credit described in the commitment required under section 1201(c) has been delivered to the county; 
(e)  That all subdivision improvements are either dedicated to the county or remain private subdivision improvements; 
(f)  That any subdivision improvements dedicated to the county: 
(i)  Must be clearly noted on the final plat with the following statement: "The undersigned fee simple owner of all the real estate depicted on this plat, and identified as owned by the undersigned, does hereby dedicate and transfer to the Bryan County board of commissioners all streets, street rights-of-way and necessarily attendant drainage facilities and easements for the streets, all as shown on this plat"; 
(ii)  Must be covered by a fully executed warranty which is secured as required under section 902; and 
(iii)  Must be insured under a commitment from a title insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia, committing such company to issue, at no cost to the county, a title insurance policy in an amount determined by the planning director to be the fair market value for real estate tax purposes of the real property portion of the subdivision improvements, insuring for the county, fee simple title, with no exceptions, to such subdivision improvements; 
(g)  That any private subdivision improvements: 
(i)  Meet the requirements for private subdivision improvements under article XVII; and 
(ii)  Are covered by fully executed maintenance agreements or trust indentures which have been approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1213. - Recording of final plat, deeds of dedication and easements. 
(a)  Within five days of the approval of the final plat by the planning director, he shall prepare and deliver to the applicant a statement indicating: (i) the cost to record the final plat and, if applicable, all deeds of dedication and easements; and (ii) the balance of any fees due the county in connection with the proposed subdivision. 
(b)  Upon payment of the costs and fees outlined in section 1213(a), the planning director shall sign the final plat and accept any applicable deeds of dedication or easements and shall then record the final plat and any applicable deeds of dedication and easements in the clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
ARTICLE XIII. - EXEMPTIONS FOR DIVISIONS OF PROPERTY INTO NO MORE THAN THREE LOTS WITH A NEW ROAD 

Section 1300. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article XIII is to provide property owners who are not professional developers with a simplified approval process for certain minor divisions of property such as the conveyance of lots among family members. 
Section 1301. - Exemption. 
Subdivisions which qualify for approval under this article XIII are exempt from the following provisions of this ordinance: 
(a)  The requirement of section 502.01(k) that the road providing access to the lots be paved, provided said road intersects with an existing public road and is designated as an approved private road system by the county administrator pursuant to section 1701.01; 
(b)  The requirement for an ESA pursuant to section 512, provided the affidavit described in section 512(b) is properly signed and delivered to the planning director; 
(c)  The fees outlined in the appendix to this ordinance entitled "Schedule of Fees," provided that the applicant pays an alternative processing fee of $250.00; and 
(d)  The requirement of chapter 19 [appendix C] that the road be constructed within a minimum right-of-way (ROW) width of 60 feet may be reduced, provided that said road can be constructed in accordance with all of the engineering standards in Section 907. The total ROW reduction shall be limited to only the amount required to construct adequate shoulders and drainage, but in no case shall the dedicated right-of-way width be less than 40 feet. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997; Ord. of 11-7-1995; Ord. of 8-14-2012) 
Section 1301.01. - No further subdivision. 
Lots abutting an approved private road system established under this article XIII cannot be further divided unless such divisions meet all the requirements of article V, including road paving. In addition, lots abutting an approved private road system constructed utilizing the exemption provided in section 1301(d) cannot be further divided, nor can the road be extended to provide access to other lots or subdivisions. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2012) 
Section 1302. - Qualifications. 
This article XIII is applicable only if all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The proposed subdivision consists of no more than eight lots and a remaining tract; 
(b)  The minimum average lot size shall be no less than five acres for the entire tract for any tract consisting of more than three lots and a remaining tract; 
(c)  The land to be divided existed as an existing lot of record on the effective date of this ordinance and has not been subdivided since the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2014) 
Section 1303. - Required items. 
An applicant seeking approval of a subdivision under this article XIII shall submit an application and the following documents to the planning director: 
(a)  Copies of all recorded plats relating to the land proposed to be divided. 
(b)  An ESA or the affidavit described in section 512(b). 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Five copies of the proposed final plat prepared in accordance with section 1202 and section 1203. 
(f)  A land disturbing activity permit issued pursuant to the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance of Bryan County, or a completed application for such permit, along with all supporting material. 
(g)  A topographical survey of the land to be divided by a licensed surveyor or an engineer showing topography at vertical intervals of not more than one foot and a certificate from a licensed surveyor or engineer stating that drainage from the land to be divided will not affect adjacent property owners. If the proposed work will effect adjacent property owners by changing the flow of water to or from their property, an agreement or easement shall be provided. 
(h)  Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997; Ord. of 3-2-2004) 
Section 1304. - [Perpetual conservation land trust or easement.] 
Notwithstanding section 1301.01, land tracts subject to a perpetual conservation land trust or easement may be divided into tracts of no less than 200 acres as long as the property remains in the perpetual conservation land trust or easement. Each subdivided tract shall not have more than three primary residences. No activities or uses prohibited by the perpetual conservation land trust or easement shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2011) 
Section 1305. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1306. - Determination of soil types by planning director. 
Upon receipt of the items described in section 1303, the planning director must determine, based on the Bryan County soil survey maps and the national wetlands inventory maps, that no wetlands or hydric soils exist on the lots created. If the planning director cannot make such a determination, the applicant must then provide one of the following to the planning director: 
(a)  A soil mapping of the lots prepared by a soils scientist, which mapping shows no hydric soils present on the lots; or 
(b)  A jurisdictional wetlands delineation of the land to be subdivided. The limits of any wetlands shall be surveyed and included on the final plat. 
Section 1307. - Review of proposed final plat, and other required documentation. 
The planning director shall review the proposed final plat and any other documents deemed necessary to determine the compliance of the proposed final plat with this ordinance, and other applicable laws. The review of the following individuals must also be obtained: 
(a)  The health department shall review the proposed water supply and sewerage disposal system and determine compliance with this ordinance and other applicable laws. 
(b)  The engineering director shall review the proposed final plat and determine the conformity of proposed road alignment with existing roads, the road classification plan and proposed public roads. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  If deemed necessary by the planning director, review and comment from any consultants or other professionals retained by the county may be obtained. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997; Ord. of 3-2-2004; Ord. of 3-4-2004) 
Section 1308. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1309. - Planning director disapproval or approval of proposed final plat. 
The planning director shall determine whether or not the proposed design of a subdivision shown on the proposed final plat complies with this ordinance and other applicable laws. If the plat complies, the director shall sign the proposed final plat which can then be recorded in the clerk of superior court's office. If the planning director finds that the proposed design of a subdivision shown on the proposed final plat does not comply with this ordinance and other applicable laws, then such plat shall be disapproved and reasons noted for such disapproval in the records. Notwithstanding the noting of such reasons for disapproval in the records of the planning director, an applicant must meet all provisions of this ordinance and other applicable laws to later obtain approval by the planning director of proposed final plat. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2004) 
Section 1310. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2004) 
Section 1311. - Commencement of work. 
Upon receipt of the approval described in section 1309, the applicant may proceed with the installation of the road in accordance with the Bryan County engineering standards, article 9, section 907. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2004) 
Section 1312. - Inspection. 
The department of engineering and inspections shall inspect the construction of the road to ensure that it is constructed and in compliance with the engineering standards. A building permit will not be issued until the road is built and approved. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2004) 
Section 1313. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2004) 
Section 1314. - Reporting. 
At the regular meeting of the county commission each month, the planning director shall submit a report to the county commission, which report includes copies of all final plats approved under article XIII during the preceding month. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1315. - Attempted dedication of road. 
No road in a subdivision approved under article XIII can be dedicated to or accepted as a public road by the county commission. 
Section 1316. - Statement on plat. 
The following statement must be printed on the final plat of a subdivision approved under article XIII in type size 12 point or larger: 
"NO DEDICATION OF ROAD" 
The final plat shall also include the following statement: 
"No Building Permits will be issued until the road is built according to standards described in Article 9, Section 907 of the Bryan County Engineering & Design Standards." 
(Ord. of 3-2-2004) 
Section 1317. - Family conveyance exemption. 
The provisions of sections 1306, 1411.01(f) and (g), 1412.02(e) and 1508.02(e) shall not apply when an applicant certifies to the planning director that the applicant's intended division of land is only for conveyance to a family member and will be directly conveyed to the designated eligible family member. Such certification shall be in a standard form approved by, and include any attachments required by, the planning director. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
ARTICLE XIV. - ABBREVIATED APPROVAL PROCESS FOR SUBDIVISIONS OR LOTS WITH NO SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 1400. - General. 
Final plats of the subdivisions or lots described in this article XIV can be recorded in the clerk's office provided the proposed subdivisions or lots meet the requirements of this article XIV and comply with all other applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 1401. - Required signatures on final plat. 
Final plats which meet the requirements for approval under this article XIV must be signed by the planning director prior to recording in the clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1402. - Procedure for approval. 
The planning director shall review final plats and other documents submitted for approval under this article XIV and, based on such review, either disapprove or approve such final plats. 
Section 1403. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1404. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1405. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1406. - ("ESA"). 
Provided the affidavit required under section 512(b) is delivered to the planning director, no ESA shall be required for a subdivision or a lot with no subdivision improvements. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1407. - Reporting. 
At the regular meeting of the county commission following the approval of a final plat by the planning director under section 1402, the planning director shall submit a report of such approval, which report shall be made part of the minutes of the county commission and shall include the following: 
(a)  A copy of the approved final plat; and all plats filed by the applicant pursuant to section 1404(a); and 
(b)  The certification of the planning director indicating each condition required for approval and the compliance by the applicant with each such condition. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1408. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1409. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1410. - Selection and designation of type of approval. 
An applicant seeking approval under article XIV must designate the type of approval requested for each lot situated within a proposed subdivision. If approval of a subdivision or a lot is granted under article XIV, the final plat of such subdivision or lot shall clearly label each lot as to the type of approval granted for such lot. 
Section 1411. - Types of approval. 
The following types of approval are available under article XIV: 
1411.01.  Full approval. The planning director can approve for recording a final plat of a subdivision or lot(s) with no subdivision improvements, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The final plat is prepared in accordance with this ordinance and other applicable laws and shows the entire tract proposed for subdivision; 
(b)  The area and dimensions of the lot(s) created meet the greater of the minimum lot sizes set forth in this ordinance, the Bryan County zoning ordinance or other applicable laws; 
(c)  The lots created meet the requirements of article V; 
(d)  If required under section 512, an ESA is provided; 
(e)  Health department approval is obtained for the proposed subdivision or lot(s); 
(f)  The planning director determines that, based on the Bryan County soil survey maps and the national wetlands inventory maps, no wetlands or hydric soils exist on the lot(s) created; and 
(g)  If the planning director cannot make the determination described in section 1411.01(f), the applicant must provide one of the following to the planning director prior to approval: 
(i)  A soil mapping of the lot(s) prepared by a soils scientist, which mapping shows no hydric soils present on the lot(s); or 
(ii)  A jurisdictional wetlands delineation of the land to be subdivided. The limits of any wetlands shall be surveyed and included on the final plat. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
1411.02.  Limited approval for lots ten acres or greater with designated buildable area. The planning director can approve for recording a final plat of a lot(s) of at least ten acres each, with no subdivision improvements, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The final plat is prepared in accordance with this ordinance and other applicable laws and shows the entire tract proposed for subdivision; 
(b)  The area and dimensions of the lot(s) created meet the greater of the minimum lot sizes set forth in this ordinance, the Bryan County zoning ordinance or other applicable laws; 
(c)  The lot(s) created meet all the requirements of article V, except section 513.01; 
(d)  If required under section 512, an ESA is provided; 
(e)  Within the boundaries of each proposed lot(s) a contiguous area of at least 2.5 acres shall be surveyed and clearly labeled on the final plat: "Buildable Area." The buildable area must meet the following conditions: 
(i)  The requirements of section 513.01 are met; 
(ii)  Health department approval is obtained; and 
(iii)  The planning director determines that, based on the Bryan County soil survey maps and the national wetlands inventory maps, no wetlands or hydric soils are present within the buildable area. If the planning director cannot make such a determination, the applicant must provide one of the following to the planning director prior to approval: (a) a soil mapping of the buildable area prepared by a soils scientist, which mapping shows no hydric soils present on the buildable area; or (b) a jurisdictional wetlands delineation of the buildable area which shows no wetlands within the buildable area. 
(f)  Building permits can be obtained only for construction within the area identified as "buildable area" and the following statement must be printed on the final plat in type size 12 point or larger: 
BUILDING PERMITS ALLOWED ONLY WITHIN AREAS IDENTIFIED "BUILDABLE AREA" 
The recording of this Plat is approved by the Planning Director for the limited purpose of establishing the external boundary lines and dimensions shown on the Plat and identifying areas for which Building Permits may be obtained. No approval is given with respect to any other matter. By reference to this Plat, Building Permits can be obtained only for the areas identified as "Buildable Area." 
(g)  Any lot(s) shown on the final plat which do not meet the requirements of section 1411.01 or do not include areas identified as "buildable area" must be clearly labeled as "Building Permits not allowed." 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1412. - Exemption from requirement that final plat show entire tract. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 1411.01(a) or 1411.02(a), a remaining tract is not required to be shown on the final plat if the conditions of either section 1412.01 or section 1412.02 are met. 
1412.01.  Remaining tract with habitable dwelling. 
(a)  A habitable dwelling is situated on the remaining tract; 
(b)  If the habitable dwelling is served by an on-site water or sewerage disposal system then such system(s) must be situated on the remaining tract; 
(c)  The area and dimensions of the remaining tract meet the greater of the minimum lot sizes set forth in this ordinance, the Bryan County zoning ordinance or other applicable laws; and 
(d)  The remaining tract meets the minimum required road frontage under section 501 and section 502.02. 
1412.02.  Remaining tract with no habitable dwelling. 
(a)  No habitable dwelling is situated on the remaining tract; 
(b)  The remaining tract is at least five acres in size; 
(c)  The area and dimensions of the remaining tract meet the greater of the minimum lot sizes set forth in this ordinance, the Bryan County zoning ordinance or other applicable laws; 
(d)  The remaining tract meets the minimum required road frontage under section 501 and section 502.02; and 
(e)  The planning director determines, based on the Bryan County soil survey maps and the national wetlands inventory maps, that there exists on the remaining tract a contiguous area of at least 2.5 acres on which no wetlands or hydric soils are present, or, if the planning director cannot make such a determination, the applicant either (a) obtains a jurisdictional wetlands delineation on the 2.5 acre area; or (b) delivers to the planning director an on-site soil map of the 2.5 acre area prepared by a soils scientist, which map shows no hydric soils present within the 2.5 acre area. 
ARTICLE XV. - SPECIAL APPROVAL PROCESS FOR A SUBDIVISION OR LOTS WITH NO SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS AND NO REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING PERMITS 

Section 1500. - General. 
Final plats of the subdivisions or lots described in this article XV can be recorded in the clerk's office upon the approval of the planning director, provided the proposed subdivisions or lots meet the requirements of this article XV and comply with all other applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 1501. - Time of approval. 
The planning director shall either approve or disapprove final plats submitted under article XV within ten days from the date of submission, except: 
(a)  Where an extension of time is requested or agreed to in writing by an applicant; or 
(b)  Where an ESA is required pursuant to section 512. In such case, disapproval or approval by the planning director shall be made within ten days from the date of acceptance and approval of the ESA by the county engineer. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1502. - Required signature on final plat. 
Final plats which meet the requirements for approval under article XV must be signed by the planning director prior to recording in the clerk's office. 
Section 1503. - Copies of plats. 
In addition to the submittal of the required application, an applicant for approval under article XV shall furnish the planning director an original and five copies of the proposed final plat. The applicant shall also furnish the planning director copies of all recorded plats relating to applicant's acquisition and subsequent subdivisions of the land proposed to be subdivided. 
Section 1504. - ("ESA"). 
No ESA shall be required for a subdivision or a lot with no subdivision improvements, except when required pursuant to section 512. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1505. - Reporting. 
At the regular meeting of the county commission each month, the planning director shall submit a report to the county commission, which report includes copies of all final plats approved under article XV during the preceding month. 
Section 1506. - Selection and designation of type of approval. 
An applicant seeking approval under article XV must designate the type of approval requested for each lot situated within a proposed subdivision. If approval of a subdivision or a lot is granted under article XV, the final plat of such subdivision or lot shall clearly label each lot as to the type of approval granted for such lot. 
Section 1507. - Types of approval. 
The following types of approval are available under article XV: 
1507.01.  Limited approval for lots ten acres or greater and designated "Building Permits Not Allowed." The planning director can approve a final plat of a lot(s) of at least ten acres each, with no subdivision improvements, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The final plat is prepared in accordance with this ordinance and other applicable laws and shows the entire tract proposed for subdivision; 
(b)  The area and dimensions of the lot(s) created meet the greater of the minimum lot sizes set forth in this ordinance, the Bryan County zoning ordinance or other applicable laws; 
(c)  The lots created meet all the requirements of article V, except section 513.01; and 
(d)  The following statement is printed on the final plat in type size 12 point or larger: 
BUILDING PERMITS NOT ALLOWED 
The recording of this Plat is approved by the Planning Director only with respect to the external boundary lines and dimensions shown on the Plat. No approval is given as to any other matter and no Building Permits can be obtained by reference to this Plat. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
1507.02.  Limited approval for lots 100 acres or greater designated "Building Permits Not Allowed." The planning director can approve a final plat of a lot(s) of at least 100 acres each, with no subdivision improvements, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The final plat is prepared in accordance with this ordinance and other applicable laws and shows the entire tract proposed for subdivision; 
(b)  The area and dimensions of the lot(s) created meet the greater of the minimum lot sizes set forth in this ordinance, the Bryan County zoning ordinance or other applicable laws; 
(c)  Each lot must meet the requirements of section 502, with the exception of road frontage which shall be not less than 200 feet for all types of roads; and 
(d)  The following statement is printed on the final plat in type size 12 point or larger: 
BUILDING PERMITS NOT ALLOWED 
The recording of this Plat is approved by the Planning Director only with respect to the external boundary lines and dimensions shown on the Plat. No approval is given as to any other matter and no Building Permits can be obtained by reference to this Plat. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1508. - Exemption from requirement that final plat show entire tract. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 1507.01(a) and 1507.02(a), a remaining tract is not required to be shown on the final plat if the conditions of either section 1508.01 or section 1508.02 are met. 
1508.01.  Remaining tract with habitable dwelling. 
(a)  A habitable dwelling is situated on the remaining tract; 
(b)  If the habitable dwelling is served by an on-site water or sewerage disposal system then such system(s) must be situated on the remaining tract; 
(c)  The area and dimensions of the remaining tract meet the greater of the minimum lot sizes set forth in this ordinance, the Bryan County zoning ordinance or other applicable laws; and 
(d)  The remaining tract meets the minimum required road frontage under section 501 and section 502.02. 
1508.02.  Remaining tract with no habitable dwelling. 
(a)  No habitable dwelling is situated on the remaining tract; 
(b)  The remaining tract is at least five acres in size; 
(c)  The area and dimensions of the remaining tract meet the greater of the minimum lot sizes set forth in this ordinance, the Bryan County zoning ordinance or other applicable laws; 
(d)  The remaining tract meets the minimum required road frontage under section 501 and section 502.02; and 
(e)  The planning director determines, based on the Bryan County soil survey maps and the national wetlands inventory maps, that there exists on the remaining tract a contiguous area of at least 2.5 acres on which no wetlands or hydric soils are present, or, if the planning director cannot make such a determination, the applicant either (a) obtains a jurisdictional wetlands delineation on the 2.5 acre area; or (b) delivers to the planning director an on-site soil map of the 2.5 acre area prepared by a soils scientist, which map shows no hydric soils present with the 2.5 acre area. 
ARTICLE XVI. - REVISIONS OR MODIFICATIONS TO RECORDED SUBDIVISION PLATS 

Section 1600. - General. 
Plats of revisions or modifications to subdivision plats previously recorded in the clerk's office can be recorded in the clerk's office upon the approval of the planning director as provided in this article XVI. The planning director shall either approve or disapprove plats submitted under this article XVI within 15 days from the date of submission, except where an extension of time is requested or agreed to in writing by an applicant. 
Section 1601. - Items required on plat. 
Any plat which is a revision, modification or recombination of a recorded plat must contain all items or notes shown on the recorded plat. 
Section 1602. - Revision, modification or recombination. 
The planning director can approve a plat of a revision, modification or recombination to a recorded subdivision plat which does not increase the number of lots or alter any roads or utilities, provided: 
(a)  The plat is prepared in accordance with this ordinance and other applicable laws; 
(b)  The area and dimensions of the lots resulting from the revision, modification or recombination meet the minimum lot sizes for the zoning district within which the lots are situated, or larger lot sizes if required by this ordinance or other applicable laws; and 
(c)  Health department approval is obtained for the lots created by the revision, modification, or recombination. 
Section 1603. - Combination. 
The planning director can approve a plat of a combination, provided: 
(a)  The plat is prepared in accordance with this ordinance and other applicable laws; and 
(b)  At least one of the lots to be combined is an existing lot of record or has been previously approved under this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XVII. - PRIVATE SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 1700. - General. 
All private subdivision improvements must be constructed in accordance with this ordinance and all applicable laws. 
Section 1701. - Requirements for designation of a private road as an approved private road system. 
The county commission shall designate a private road an approved private road system if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The engineering director certifies to the county commission that the private road has been constructed in accordance with the approved construction plans and preliminary plat and meets all requirements of this ordinance and other applicable laws; 
(b)  A fully executed maintenance agreement is delivered to the county commission; 
(c)  All private roads are clearly identified as such on a final plat; and 
(d)  The final plat of a subdivision with private roads must contain the following statement in type size 12 point or larger: 
NOTICE OF PRIVATE ROADS AND DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
Bryan County will not maintain, repair or replace any Private Roads and Drainage Systems. The responsibility for such maintenance, repair or replacement is addressed in a Maintenance Agreement between the Developer of the Subdivision and the purchasers of Lots within the Subdivision. Any purchasers of Lots within this Subdivision are urged to carefully review such Maintenance Agreement to determine the party or parties responsible for the maintenance of the Private Roads and Drainage Systems and the source of the funds to provide such maintenance. 
Section 1701.01. - Alternative requirements for designation of a private road as an approved private road system under article XIII. 
Roads constructed under article XIII can be designated an approved private road system by the county administrator after his receipt of a certification from the county engineer, the director of engineering and inspections and the planning director that the road has been constructed in accordance with approved construction plans and proposed final plat and that the requirements of section 1307(b), (c), (d) and (e) have been met. 
Section 1702. - Maintenance agreement. 
A developer of a subdivision with private roads must establish a maintenance agreement for such private roads. 
Section 1703. - Trust indenture. 
A developer of a subdivision with a private water system or private sewerage system must establish a trust indenture for such system. 
Section 1704. - Notice of private water system or private sewerage system. 
The final plat of a subdivision with private water systems or private sewerage systems must contain the following statement in type size 12 point or larger: 
NOTICE OF PRIVATE SYSTEMS 
This Subdivision is served by a Private Water System and/or a Private Sewerage System. Bryan County will not maintain, repair or replace any Private Water System or Private Sewerage System. The responsibility for such maintenance, repair or replacement is addressed in a Trust Indenture between the Developer of the Subdivision and a trustee. Any purchasers of Lots within this Subdivision are urged to carefully review such Trust Indenture to determine the applicable rate structure and the party responsible for the maintenance of the Private Water System and Private Sewerage System. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - SCHEDULE OF FEES 

Section 1800. - General. 
The fees outlined in the appendix to this ordinance entitled "Schedule of Fees" shall be paid in full prior to the granting of any approvals under this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XIX. - PEDESTRIAN WAYS, RECREATION AND BUFFER COMMITTEE 

Section 1900. - Membership appointment, term of office, vacancies and compensation. 
(a)  Membership and appointment. The pedestrian ways, recreation and buffer committee ("committee") shall consist of three members ("members"). The county engineer and county administrator shall be members of the committee and the county commission shall appoint the other member of the committee. A member shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the board with respect to property in which the member has an interest. 
(b)  Term of office. The county engineer and county administrator shall serve on the committee for the period of time during which they hold their offices. The term of office for the other member shall be three years and such member may be re-appointed to successive terms. The member appointed by the county commission shall be removable for cause, upon written charges by the county commission. 
(c)  Compensation. None of the members shall receive compensation for service on the committee. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1995; Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1901. - Officers, committee members; meetings; quorum; minutes; procedures generally. 
The committee shall elect one of its members as chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. The committee shall appoint a secretary who may be a member or an employee of the county. The committee shall have authority to adopt rules of procedure. Meetings of the committee shall be held once per month within the county, with the place, time and date of the meeting specified by the chairman, after consultation with the other members. If, in any month, there are no applications pending for at least 15 days, the committee shall not be required to hold a meeting during such month. Two members shall constitute a quorum. The committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question. The decision of the committee shall be by resolution adopted by a majority of members. The full text of the resolution shall be sent to the applicant. If, because of absence or abstention, there is a tie vote on an application, the effect shall be a denial of the application. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1902. - Power and duty. 
The committee shall hear and decide upon applications for approval of alternative pedestrian ways plans under section 507(e), alternative buffer plans under section 514.06 and alternative recreation plans under section 517.01. It shall be the duty of the planning director to carry out the decisions of the committee. 
Section 1903. - Assistance by planning director. 
The planning director shall provide for such administrative and clerical assistance and office space as is required by the committee to carry out its functions under this article XIX. 
Section 1904. - Record. 
The planning director shall forthwith transmit to the committee all documents relating to applications made to the committee. 
Section 1905. - Committee process: 
(a)  Filing fee. There shall be no filing fee for an application to the committee. 
(b)  Presentation to committee. The planning director and the applicant shall be entitled to appear before the committee. The planning director may retain a landscape architect or other professional if required to aid in his presentation to the committee. The fees for such landscape architect or professional shall be reimbursed by the applicant pursuant to article VII. 
(c)  Time for decision; continuance; effective date of decisions. The committee shall render its decision during the meeting at which an application is considered, however, by majority vote, the committee may continue a meeting until a time certain within ten days. Decisions of the committee shall be effective when made. 
(d)  Transmittal of decision. Decisions of the committee, including the reasons therefor, shall be transmitted to the county commission and shall be maintained in the records of the county commission. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 1906. - Forms. 
Applications shall be made on forms provided therefor, and all information required on such forms shall be provided by the applicant. Applications shall be filed with the planning director. No application shall be accepted by the committee unless it contains all pertinent information. 
ARTICLE XX. - PENALTIES 

Section 2000. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by law for other misdemeanors. 
Section 2001. - Other penalties. 
After the effective date of this ordinance, unless a subdivision is approved in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, then: 
(a)  The county shall not accept the dedication of any subdivision improvements within such subdivision; 
(b)  The county shall not issue any building permits within such subdivision; and 
(c)  The clerk shall not record any plat of such subdivision or any plat of a lot within such subdivision. 
Section 2002. - Compliance. 
If the county commission by resolution determines that certain subdivision improvements within a subdivision approved pursuant to this ordinance do not comply with the approved construction plans, preliminary plat, final plat, or any other provisions of this ordinance, the subdivider of such subdivision shall, upon demand from the county commission, immediately correct any deficiencies as required by the county commission. 
ARTICLE XXI. - AMENDMENTS 

Section 2100. - General. 
(a)  Public hearings required. Except as provided in section 2100(b) and (c), this ordinance may be amended from time to time by the county commission. Before enacting an amendment to this ordinance, the county commission shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published at least 15 and no more than 45 days prior to such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Bryan County. 
(b)  Road classification plan. Notwithstanding the requirements of section 2100(a), the county commission can, by resolution, at any regular or special meeting can, add roads to the appendix to this ordinance entitled "Road Classification Plan" whenever a road becomes public road or an approved private road system. 
(c)  Schedule of fees. Notwithstanding the requirements of section 2100(a), the county commission can, by resolution, at any regular or special meeting, modify the appendix to this ordinance entitled "Schedule of Fees." 
(d)  No public hearing. No public hearings are required prior to the county commission adopting resolutions permitted under section 2100(b) and (c). 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
ARTICLE XXII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Section 2200. - Interpretation. 
The regulations expressed in this document shall be considered as the minimum provisions for the protection of the health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience and welfare of the general public. 
Section 2201. - Severability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the ordinance as a whole, or any other part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Section 2202. - Effective date. 
Except as provided in article XXIV, this ordinance shall take effect on and after June 6, 1995. 
Section 2203. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Section 2204. - Savings provisions. 
This ordinance shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing on or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the county under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the county as the governing authority, except as shall be expressly provided for in this ordinance. 
Section 2205. - Most restrictive. 
In the event of a conflict between a provision of this ordinance and a provision of the Bryan County zoning ordinance, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Section 2300. - Membership; appointment; term of office; vacancies; and compensation. 
(a)  Membership and appointment. The board of appeals ("board") shall consist of three members ("members") residing within the county and appointed by the county commission. None of the members shall hold any other public office in the county. Members shall be removable for cause, upon written charges by the county commission. A member shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the board with respect to property in which the member has an interest. 
(b)  Term of office. The term of office for each member shall be three years; however, in order that no terms shall expire upon the same date, the terms of the original members of the board shall be as follows: one appointee shall serve for two years, one appointee shall serve for three years, and one appointee shall serve for one year. Thereafter, each appointee shall be appointed to serve for three years. Members may be re-appointed to successive terms. 
(c)  Compensation. Members shall receive no compensation for service, except that they shall be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenditures made in connection with their duties. 
Section 2301. - Officers; meetings; quorum; minutes; procedures generally. 
The board shall elect one of its members as chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. The board shall appoint a secretary who may be a member or an employee of the county. The board shall have authority to adopt rules of procedure. Meetings of the board shall be held once per month within the county, with the place, time and date of the meeting specified by the chairman after consultation with the other members. If, in any month, there are no appeals pending for at least 15 days, the board shall not be required to hold a meeting during such month. Two members shall constitute a quorum. 
The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the planning department and shall be a public record. The decision of the board shall be by resolution adopted by a majority of members, which resolution shall contain a statement of the grounds of its decision or action. The full text of the resolution shall be sent to the appellant. If, because of absence or abstention, there is a tie vote on a resolution, the effect shall be an affirmation of the decision appealed from. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 2302. - Power and duty. 
(a)  The board shall hear and decide upon appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the planning director, the county engineer or the county administrator in the enforcement of this ordinance made pursuant to the following sections and articles of this ordinance: section 513.01; section 700; section 900; section 1306; section 1309; section 1411.01; section 1411.02; section 1412.02(e); section 1500; section 1507.01; section 1507.02; section 1508.02(e); article XVI; and section 1701.01; 
(b)  Upon the filing of an appeal by an applicant, all time limits for action by the, planning director or county commission shall be suspended; 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the planning director and planning commission to carry out the decisions of the board; and 
(d)  Decisions of the board, including the reasons for decisions, shall be transmitted to the planning department and shall be maintained in the records of the planning department. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 2303. - Assistance by county commission. 
The county commission shall provide for such administrative and clerical assistance and office space as is required by the board to carry out its functions under this article XXIII. 
Section 2304. - Record. 
The planning director shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
Section 2305. - Appeal process. 
(a)  Filing fee. The filing fee for an appeal shall be $100.00, however, no filing fee shall be required if an appeal is filed by either the planning commission or the county administrator. The filing fee shall be refunded if the board rules in favor of an appellant. 
(b)  Presentation of evidence. The planning director and the appellant shall be entitled to present evidence on the matter before the board. 
(c)  Time for decision; continuance; rehearings; effective date of decisions. The board shall render its decision during the meeting at which an appeal is considered, however, by majority vote, the board may continue a meeting until a time certain within ten days. No rehearings shall be permitted. Decisions of the board shall be effective when made. 
Section 2306. - Calendar of appeals. 
Appeals filed in proper form shall be numbered serially, docketed and placed upon the calendar of the board. The calendar of appeals to be heard shall be posted conspicuously in the office of the county commission prior to each hearing date. 
Section 2307. - Forms. 
Appeals shall be made on forms provided therefor, and all information required on such forms shall be provided by the appellant. Appeals shall be filed with the clerk of the county commission. No appeal shall be accepted by the board unless it contains all pertinent information and is accompanied by the required fee. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - PENDING SUBDIVISIONS 

Section 2400. - General. 
The purpose of this article XXIV is to identify subdivisions which are exempt from certain provisions of this ordinance noted in section 2403 because such subdivisions are continuations of developments in which phases were completed prior to the effective date of this ordinance and the application of such provisions would be disruptive to the orderly completion of such developments. 
Section 2401. - Method of designation as a pending subdivision. 
(a)  Prior to July 6, 1995, an applicant may file with the planning director a written request to obtain designation of a proposed subdivision as a pending subdivision. Such request must identify the specific provisions of this ordinance for which exemptions are requested by the applicant. 
(b)  The designation of a proposed subdivision as a pending subdivision and the exemptions applicable to such pending subdivision shall be made by the majority vote of the planning director, the county engineer and the chairman of the planning commission (collectively the "pending subdivision committee") on the basis of the criteria outlined in section 2402. Applicants for designation under this article XXIV shall provide the pending subdivision committee with information deemed necessary by such committee for consideration of the requested designation. 
(c)  The pending subdivision committee shall advise the applicant of the time and date at which the applicant can present documentation supporting his requested designation under this article XXIV. The pending subdivision committee shall accept or reject such request by November 30, 1995. 
(Ord. of 11-7-1995) 
Section 2402. - Criteria for designation as a pending subdivision. 
A pending subdivision is a proposed subdivision which: 
(a)  Is a continuation of the development of a contiguous tract by the applicant. As used herein, the term "continuation of the development of a contiguous tract" means that, prior to the effective date of this ordinance, the applicant recorded a subdivision plat or plats (which were approved by the planning commission) and which are contiguous to the proposed subdivision. Also, the proposed subdivision will utilize for access the same roads, or continuations of such roads, as constructed in connection with the previously developed subdivision or subdivisions; 
(b)  Prior to the effective date of this ordinance, was either owned by the applicant or subject to a written option to purchase in favor of the applicant; and 
(c)  Prior to the effective date of this ordinance, the applicant had taken specific actions exhibiting his intent to complete the proposed subdivision as a continuation of his development. Evidence of such intent may include, but is not limited to, the inclusion of the proposed subdivision on a master plan of a development; the obtaining for the proposed subdivision of an on-site soils survey or jurisdictional wetlands delineation; or the inclusion of the proposed subdivision in a master drainage plan of a development. 
Section 2403. - Exempted provisions. 
A subdivision designated as a pending subdivision under article XXIV may be exempted from the provisions of this ordinance relating to: 
(a)  Recreation, where a recreation tract has been provided for a development under the subdivision regulations in effect prior to the effective date of this ordinance ("prior regulations"); 
(b)  Pedestrian ways, provided that pedestrian ways in the pending subdivision are a continuation of pedestrian ways provided in a development under the prior regulations; 
(c)  Drainage system, provided that the drainage system in the pending subdivision is a continuation of the drainage system provided for in a development under the prior regulations; or 
(d)  The design specifications of subdivision improvements for a limited area in the pending subdivision, provided such area is utilized to provide a safe, orderly and aesthetically acceptable transition between the design of subdivision improvements constructed under the prior regulations and the design of subdivision improvements in the pending subdivision. 
Section 2404. - Reporting. 
At the next planning commission meeting following the designation of a subdivision a pending subdivision, the planning director shall report to the planning commission such designation, including a list of the provisions of this ordinance which will not apply to the pending subdivision. Such report and a map or plat of the pending subdivision shall be included in the records of the planning commission. 
Section 2405. - Termination of designation as pending subdivision. 
The designation of a subdivision as a pending subdivision shall terminate unless a preliminary plat of the pending subdivision is approved by the county commission prior to August 1, 1998. Upon such termination, the pending subdivision shall no longer be exempt from any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
ARTICLE XXV. - APPENDICES 

Section 2500. - General. 
The following documents are attached to this ordinance as appendices and are incorporated herein and made parts of this ordinance by specific reference: 
(a)  Required items and certifications; 
(b)  Schedule of fees; and 
(c)  Road classification plan. 
ARTICLE XXVI. - JURISDICTION 

Section 2600. - General. 
The jurisdiction of this ordinance shall be all the unincorporated area within the limits of Bryan County. 
ARTICLE XXVII. - DEFINITION OF TERMS 

Section 2700. - Interpretation of certain terms or words. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words in this ordinance have the customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words or terms used herein are defined as follows: 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. All pronouns used herein shall be deemed to include the masculine, the feminine and non-personal entities. 
Whenever reference is made in this ordinance to another article or section of this ordinance, all parts of such article or section are deemed to be included in such reference. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
The word "may" is permissive. 
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
Section 2701. - Definitions. 
(1)  Acceptable bonding company: A company licensed to act as a surety in Georgia and holding a certificate of authority from the United States as an acceptable surety on bonds with an underwriting limitation of at least $10,000,000.00. 
(2)  Applicant: An individual or any entity, including an estate, submitting a proposed subdivision/division to the planning department. Also sometimes called a subdivider or a developer. 
(3)  Approved private road system: A private road which has been designated an approved private road system, prior to the effective date of this ordinance or in accordance with sections 1701 and 1701.01. The appearance of a private road on a plat approved by the planning commission or county commission does not, by such appearance alone, constitutes such private road as an approved private road system. 
(4)  Berm: A ledge of dirt used to provide visual screening. 
(5)  Board of appeals ("board"): The board established pursuant to article XXIII of this ordinance. 
(6)  Buffer: A parcel of land free from any structures, except approved screening, permanently set aside with trees and/or shrubs of density sufficient to provide contiguous properties with a measure of privacy. 
(7)  Building line: A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the road right-of-way and nearest extreme projection of a building (including all areas covered by any vertical projections to the ground or overhang, walls, roof, or any other part of the structure). 
(8)  Building permit: A document required by Bryan County Building Code to be issued prior to the commencement of construction of certain improvements. 
(9)  Bryan County health department ("health department"): The organization in Bryan County established pursuant to Georgia law and the ordinances of Bryan County. 
(10)  Bryan County 911 Standards and Policy Manual ("911 Manual"): A document establishing criteria for establishing road addresses and road names. This document shall be maintained by the Bryan County Public Safety Director. 
(11)  Bryan County public safety director ("safety director"): An individual employed by the county commission to supervise the county's 911 program. 
(12)  Clerk: The clerk of the superior court of Bryan County, Georgia. 
(13)  Combination: The merger or joining of two or more lots shown on a recorded plat into one lot. 
(14)  Construction plans: Plans for the proposed subdivision of land prepared in accordance with: (a) this ordinance, including part II of the appendix entitled "Required Items and Certifications"; and (b) the engineering standards. 
(15)  Corner lot: Any lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersections or intercepting roads. If the angle or intersection of the direction lines of two roads is more than 135 degrees, the lot fronting on said intersection is not a corner lot. 
(16)  County: Bryan County, Georgia. 
(17)  County administrator: An individual employed by the county commission to supervise the operation of the county. 
(18)  County maintained road: A road accepted as a public road by the board of commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia. 
(19)  County attorney: An individual licensed to practice law in the State of Georgia and appointed by the county commission. Prior to appointment, such individual must provide the county with evidence of professional liability insurance coverage with limits acceptable to the county. 
(20)  County commission: The board of commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia. 
(21)  County engineer: An individual licensed by the State of Georgia as a professional engineer and appointed by the county commission. Prior to appointment, such individual must provide the county with evidence of professional liability insurance coverage with limits acceptable to the county. 
(22)  Cul-de-sac: A local road which does not extend more than 600 feet in length measured from the centerline of the intersecting street to the centerline of the cul-de-sac radius with a minimum pavement width of 18 feet and which ends with a permanent turn-around 80 feet in diameter with a 100-foot right-of-way. 
(23)  Cul-de-sac, minor: A local road which does not extend more than three hundred (300) feet in length measured from the centerline of the intersecting street to the centerline of the cul-de-sac radius with a minimum paving width of 18 feet and which ends with a permanent turn-around 60 feet in diameter with a 100-foot right-of-way. 
(24)  Date of submission: The date on which the following are delivered to the planning director: (i) a completed application and all required supporting materials; and (ii) all fees due in accordance with article XVIII. 
(25)  Development: A tract of land consisting of more than one subdivision and advertised and promoted under a common promotional plan. 
(26)  Director of engineering and inspections ("engineering director"): An individual employed by the county commission to supervise the county's engineering and inspections department. 
(27)  Director of planning and zoning ("planning director"): An individual employed by the county commission to supervise the staff of the Bryan County planning department and perform the duties outlined herein. 
(28)  DOT approval: A statement from the Georgia Department of Transportation ("DOT") indicating that the DOT will issue permits for driveways from a public road maintained by the State of Georgia for all lots abutting such public road. 
(29)  Drainage system: A swale or ditch or a device composed of concrete, plastic or other material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
(30)  Engineer: An individual licensed by the State of Georgia as a professional engineer. 
(31)  Environmental site assessment ("ESA"): An assessment by a professional engineer or other licensed professional, experienced in geotechnical investigations and the assessing of real property for environmental concerns, to determine the likelihood of the presence of a landfill, methane gas, underground storage tanks, or other environmentally dangerous situations on a site. 
(32)  Exterior corner lot: A lot abutting the exterior sides of the angle formed by the junction of two roads. If such angle is greater 1350 [135 degrees], the lot is not an exterior corner lot. 
(33)  Exterior curve lot: A lot abutting the exterior right-of-way of a curved road, where the radius of the centerline of such curved road is less than 500 feet. 
(34)  Existing: The state of a road at the date of submission of an application relating to such road under this ordinance. 
(35)  Existing lot of record: A lot shown on a plat recorded in the clerk's office that either: (a) was recorded prior to June 3, 1975; or (b) was approved by the planning commission or county commission prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
(36)  Family member: The applicant's spouse, natural or adopted children, stepchildren, father, mother, sister, brother or grandchildren. 
(37)  Final plat: A plat of a subdivision or lot prepared in accordance with: (a) this ordinance, including part I of the appendix entitled "Required Items and Certifications"; and (b) the engineering standards. 
(38)  Habitable dwelling: A building which is either: (a) used for human habitation; or (b) connected to functioning water and sewerage disposal systems. 
(39)  Health department approval: A statement from the Bryan County health department indicating that conditions on a proposed lot will allow an on-site sewerage disposal system of standard design and that the health department will issue a construction permit for such system when requested. 
(40)  Hydric soils: A soil type which appears on the hydric soils list for Bryan County published by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture ("SCS"). 
(41)  Jurisdictional wetlands delineation: The acceptance by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers of survey lines indicating the extent of wetlands on a tract of land. 
(42)  Landscape plan: A proposal to arrange the effects of natural scenery over a given tract to produce the optimum aesthetic effect. 
(43)  Landscaping: The shaping of land using natural land features and planting to produce the best functional and aesthetic effect. 
(44)  Lanes: Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a road. 
(45)  Laws: Any statutes, ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations of the United States of America, State of Georgia or Bryan County, Georgia, or any departments or agencies thereof. 
(46)  Letter of credit: An irrevocable obligation in a form approved by the county attorney having a term of 13 months and committing a federally insured lending institution to pay a sum certain to the county upon presentation by the county to such lending institution of a letter stating that there has been a failure or default by a developer in his obligations relating to construction or maintenance of certain subdivision improvements. 
(47)  Letter of credit commitment: An irrevocable obligation, in form approved by the county attorney, committing a federally insured lending institution to issue a letter of credit to the county. 
(48)  Lot: Any piece, division, or parcel of land. 
(49)  Lot width: The distance between the side lot lines measured at the building line. 
(50)  Maintenance agreement: A document approved by the county attorney which provides an adequately financed maintenance plan to ensure the continued safety, good order and long-term maintenance of private roads. 
(51)  Maintenance bond: An undertaking or agreement, on a form approved by the county attorney, by an acceptable bonding company guaranteeing the maintenance of subdivision improvements dedicated to the county for a period of one year from the date of acceptance of such dedication by the county commission. 
(52)  Major thoroughfare: A road designated for the movement of large volumes of traffic or recognized for purposes of this ordinance, as a result of long-range planning study, to possess such potential. For purposes of this ordinance, major thoroughfares are designated on the road classification plan. 
(53)  Marshlands: As used herein, the term "marshlands" has the same definition as that set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280 et seq., known as the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970. 
(54)  Master plan: A plan of a development, which generally shows all potential subdivisions, roads, buffers and amenities which may be part of such development. 
(55)  Ordinance: The subdivision regulations of Bryan County, Georgia. 
(56)  Pedestrian ways: Areas which provide pedestrians a means of walking throughout a subdivision without being required to walk on roads within the subdivision. 
(57)  Pedestrian ways, recreation and buffer committee ("committee"): The committee established pursuant to article XIX of this ordinance. 
(58)  Pending subdivision: A subdivision designated as a pending subdivision pursuant to article XXIV of this ordinance. 
(59)  Phased subdivision: A tract of land developed into more than one subdivision, with all such subdivisions being advertised and promoted as part of a common promotional plan. Also sometimes called a development. 
(60)  Planning commission: The Bryan County planning and zoning commission. 
(61)  Planning department: The department of county government authorized by the county commission to administer this ordinance. 
(62)  Pledge: An agreement by a developer or his guarantor, on a form approved by the county attorney, granting to the county an unconditional assignment of cash, a certificate of deposit or a savings account. 
(63)  Preliminary plat: A plat for the proposed subdivision of land prepared in accordance with: (a) this ordinance, including part I of the appendix entitled "Required Items and Certifications"; and (b) the engineering standards. 
(64)  Private sewerage system: A sewerage system serving more than one unit that removes waste water from units and is not owned, maintained or operated by the county or a municipality within the county. 
(65)  Private water system: A water system serving more than one unit that is not owned, maintained or operated by the county or a municipality within the county. 
(66)  Private subdivision improvements: Subdivision improvements which are not dedicated to and accepted by the county. 
(67)  Public sewerage system: A sewerage system that removes waste water from units and is owned, maintained or operated by the county or a municipality within the county. 
(68)  Public water system: A water system that is owned, maintained or operated by the county or a municipality within the county. 
(69)  Recognized private access road ("RPAR"): A road designated an RPAR pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the county commission. 
(70)  Recombination: The combination and redivision of lots shown on a recorded plat where the total number of lots is not increased and the resulting lots meet the standards of this ordinance and other applicable laws. 
(71)  Recreational purpose: Any of the following or any combination thereof: picnicking, baseball, basketball, soccer, football, softball, or playground activities. 
(72)  Remaining tract: The balance of a tract of land after deducting the lot or lots proposed for approval under article XIII, article XIV and article XV. 
(73)  Resolution: A decision or ordinance by which the county commission takes official action. 
(74)  Road: A way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. For the purpose of this ordinance, the term "road" or "roads" also means avenues, boulevards, streets, lanes and other public or private ways. 
(75)  Road, arterial: A road which is designated as an arterial road on the road classification plan. 
(76)  Road classification plan: An appendix to this ordinance which classifies roads in the county as either major thoroughfares, arterial roads, collector roads, scenic parkways and approved private road systems. 
(77)  Road, collector: A road which carries traffic from minor roads to arterial roads and highways, including the principal entrance roads of a residential subdivision and roads for circulation within such a subdivision. 
(78)  Road frontage: The common boundary between a lot and a road right-of-way. 
(79)  Road, local: A road which provides access only to adjacent properties and does not serve vehicles passing through an area with no origin or destination within such area. 
(80)  Road, marginal access: A minor road which is parallel to and adjacent to arterial roads and highways; and which provides access to abutting properties, and protection from through traffic. 
(81)  Road, minor: A road which is used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
(82)  Road, opened: A road shall be deemed to be opened if it is either of the following: (a) available for public use prior to the adoption of this ordinance; or (b) was constructed to county specifications following the adoption of this ordinance. 
(83)  Road, private: A road which has not been dedicated to and accepted by the county and has not been designated an approved private road system by the county. 
(84)  Road, public: A road which is maintained by the DOT or the county. Also a county maintained road or a state road. 
(85)  Road, unopened: A road or any part thereof shall be deemed to be unopened if it is not cleared, graded and available for public use. 
(86)  Scenic parkway: A road shown in the Bryan County comprehensive plan or designated as such by the United States of America, State of Georgia or Bryan County. 
(87)  Screening: A wall, partition or planting carried up to a certain height for separation and protection. 
(88)  Soils scientist: An individual licensed by the State of Georgia to interpret and classify soils. 
(89)  Sketch plan: A conceptual plan which outlines generally lot dimensions, drainage structures and the location of roads within a proposed subdivision. 
(90)  Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of immediate or future sale, legacy, or building development or all divisions of land involving a new road or a change in existing roads. The term "subdivision" includes the re-subdivision of land and when appropriate to the context relates to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided. Also sometimes called division. 
(91)  Subdivision improvements: Any structures installed or constructed by a developer within a subdivision, including, but not limited to, roads, drainage systems, private water systems or private sewerage systems. 
(92)  Trustee: An entity approved by the county engineer as to financial reliability and which holds legal title to property conveyed by a trust indenture. 
(93)  Trust indenture: A document, approved by the county attorney, which provides for the continued operation of private sewerage systems or private water systems by a trustee. 
(94)  Unit: Each building or dwelling or portion of a building or dwelling which ties into a water system or a sewage disposal system. 
(95)  Utilities: A system relating to the distribution of currently available services such as electrical power, natural gas and communications. 
(96)  Warranty: An agreement from a developer, on a form approved by the county attorney, guaranteeing to repair or replace any defect in subdivision improvements dedicated to the county by such developer for a period of three years from the date of acceptance of dedication of such subdivision improvements by the county commission. The agreement can contain a provision releasing the developer from liability for the repair or replacement of damages resulting solely from a natural disaster such as a hurricane or earthquake or resulting from emergency relief or clean-up efforts following any such disaster. 
(97)  Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshlands, bogs and similar areas. The term "wetland" also includes all land classified as such by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the SCS. 
(98)  Zoning classification: The identification assigned to a zoning district on the zoning map of Bryan County. 
(99)  Zoning district: An area delineated with specific geographical boundaries on the zoning map of Bryan County. 
(Ord. of 7-1-1997; Ord. of 11-7-1995; Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Appendix (a) 
REQUIRED ITEMS AND CERTIFICATIONS 
[Part] I.  The following items must be included on all plats except where specifically modified in the ordinance: 
Plats: 
(a)  Preliminary plat. This is the preliminary document which reflects the proposed subdivision of property in accordance with the county's regulations. This document should be prepared to the exacting standards as prescribed and should be substantially complete with the exception of any authorized changes made in the field for technical or esthetics reasons. 
(b)  Final plat. This is the final document which is to be recorded in the courthouse with all changes authorized and recorded in the field. This plat should reflect the "as-built" conditions, easements, and lot corner monuments as set in the field. The final plat will bear all certifications and signatures as required. 
(c)  Plat requirements. Plat shall conform to the amended Code Section 15-6-67 of the Official Code of Georgia (a/k/a "The Georgia Plat Act"), relating to recordation of maps and plats and specifications relating thereto. 
In addition, the following information shall be shown: 
(1)  Vicinity map showing location of project. 
(2)  Name of owner of record. 
(3)  Name of subdivision, if applicable. 
(4)  Date. 
(5)  North arrow; indication grid, magnetic, true north, etc. 
(6)  Graphic scale. 
(7)  Name, signature, registration number, and seal of registered surveyor and date of preparation. 
(8)  Name of county and General Militia District in which subdivision or lot is located. 
(9)  Scale to meet requirements of The Georgia Plat Act. 
(10)  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce accurately on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every road and alley line, lot line, easement, boundary line, and building line whether curved or straight. This shall include the radius, point of tangency, and other data for curved property lines and curved roads, to an appropriate accuracy and in conformance with good surveying practice. 
(11)  Names of owners of record of all adjoining land and all property boundaries, watercourses, roads, easements, utilities and other such improvements, which cross or form, any boundary line of the tract being subdivided. 
(12)  If applicable, exact boundaries and original property lines within the tract of land being subdivided shown with bearings and distances. 
(13)  Roads and alleys, right-of-way width, and road names. 
(14)  Error of closure. 
(15)  Lot lines, minimum building setback lines, road trees and lot and block numbers. 
(16)  Parks, school sites, or other public open spaces, if any. 
(17)  All dimensions shall be to the nearest 1/100 of a foot and angles to the nearest second. 
(18)  Accurate description of the location of all monuments and markers. 
(19)  The final plat must be drawn on Mylar or comparable material. 
(20)  Utility easements and widths. Location, dimensions, and purpose of any easement. 
(a)  Water. 
(b)  Gas. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer. 
(d)  Storm drainage. 
(e)  Electrical lines. 
(f)  Telephone lines. 
(g)  Cable TV. 
(21)  Signed certificates shall appear on the final plat which is submitted to the board of commissioners, planning commission, or planning director, by the divider/developer for recording as required in the subdivision regulations. 
(22)  Location of all buffers, if any. 
(23)  Letter or number to identify each lot or site. 
(24)  Show all watercourses, wetlands, and flood zones, if any. 
(25)  All plats shall show the expected limits of the 100-year flood where appropriate. 
(26)  Current zoning, setbacks, minimum lot frontage and area of each divided/subdivided tract indicated next to the minimum setbacks, lot frontage and lot size requirements (acre/square foot) for each applicable zone in which the tract is situated. 
(27)  Proposed finish floor elevations, if situated in unnumbered A zone. 
(28)  Location of all retention and detention basin for stormwater control, if any. 
(29)  Location of existing adjoining property lines. 
(30)  Total acreage of tract. 
(31)  Area of each divided/subdivided tract as indicated by the minimum size requirements (acre/square foot) of the Bryan County zoning ordinance for the zoning district in which the tract is situated. 
(32)  New 911 address assigned by the county. 
(33)  Pedestrian ways. Pedestrian ways, sidewalks and walkways shall be completed consistent with the construction plan and preliminary plat and in compliance with the provisions of section 507 of this ordinance and with article 10 of the engineering design standards found at chapter 19 [appendix C]. 
Pedestrian ways in areas other than on lots designated for house construction shall be completed within one year of approval of the final plat and are subject to the provisions of section 1201 of this ordinance. 
Pedestrian ways or sidewalks on lots designated for house construction shall be completed according to the following schedule: 
Pedestrian ways in subdivisions with one—ten such lots shall be fully completed within one year of the final plat approval. 
Pedestrian ways in subdivisions with 11—20 such lots shall be fully completed within two years of the final plat approval. 
Pedestrian ways in subdivisions with 21—50 such lots shall be fully completed within three years of the final plat approval. 
Pedestrian ways in subdivisions with 51 or more such lots shall be fully completed within four years of the final plat approval. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this subparagraph shall constitute a violation of the subdivision ordinance under article XX. Failure to complete the pedestrian ways within the time limits set forth in this schedule shall constitute a violation of the subdivision ordinance under article XX. 
In the event the party holding a building permit for house construction has not first complied with this ordinance, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until this ordinance is implemented on such lot and other conditions for a certificate of occupancy have been met. 
(34)  Digital copy of final plat reflecting all changes authorized and recorded in the field. 
(35)  Where infrastructure improvements will be dedicated to the county, the following statement will be included on the final plat: "The undersigned fee simple owner of all the real estate depicted on this plat, and identified as owned by the undersigned, does hereby dedicate and transfer to the Bryan county board of commissioners all streets, street rights-of-way and necessarily attendant drainage facilities and easements for the streets, all as shown on this plat. 

 
  
(d)  Permanent reference points. Prior to the approval of the final plat, all of the subdivisions permanent reference points shall have been placed in accordance with the following requirements. 
(e)  Subdivision corner tie. At least one corner of the subdivision shall be designated by course and distance (tie) from a readily discernible reference marker. If a corner is within 300 feet of a U.S. Coast and Geodetic Station, U.S. Geological Survey, or Georgia Grid System coordinate monument, then this corner shall be marked with a monument so designated by computed X and Y coordinate which shall appear on the map with a statement identifying this station or monument to an accuracy of 1:10,000. When such a monument or station is not available, the tie shall be made to some permanent and readily recognizable land mark or identifiably point, physical object or structure. 
(f)  Monuments. Monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the boundaries of the subdivision; at the intersection lines of roads and at the intersection of lines of roads with boundaries of the plat and at the intersections of alleys with the boundaries of the subdivision; all points of curvature, point of tangency, points of reverse curvature and angle points in the side lines of roads and alleys; and all angles of an intermediate traverse line. 
It is not intended or required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a road to mark angles in the boundary of the subdivision if the angle points can be readily re-established by reference to monuments along the sidelines of the road. 
All required monuments shall be placed flush with the ground where practicable. 
If the required location of [a] monument is in an inaccessible place, or where the location of a monument would clearly be impracticable, it is sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location thereof be clearly indicated on the plat and referenced to the true point. 
All monuments used shall be made of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half inch in diameter and 36 inches long and completely encased in concrete at least four inches square. 
If a point required to be monumented is on a bedrock outcropping, a steel rod, at least one-half inch in diameter shall be drilled and grouted into solid rock to a depth of at least eight inches. 
(g)  Property markers. A one-half inch rebar or a steel or wrought iron pipe not less than three-fourths inch in diameter and at least 30 inches in length shall be set at all corners, except those located by monuments. 
(h)  Accuracy. Land surveys, both within the limits of incorporated areas and beyond, shall be at an accuracy of at least 1:7,500. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1995; Ord. of 10-8-1997; Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 3-2-2010; Ord. of 8-19-2010) 
[Part] II.  The following items must be included on all construction plans, except where specifically modified in the ordinance: 
Construction plans: 
Construction plans reflect the actual infrastructure to be completed prior to the subdivision being offered for sale and generally consist of drainage, roads, water supply, water distribution, fire protection, wastewater disposal, recreational areas, bikeways, walkways, buffers, and provisions for electricity, gas, cable TV, telephone line, and other necessary utilities. 
All submissions shall bear the signature and date across the seal of the Georgia registered engineer who prepared the plans, reports, design consideration, and calculations pertinent to the construction plans. 
Construction plans shall be submitted in the following format as appropriate: 
1.  Title sheet. 
2.  Staking/layout plan and traffic control plan. 
3.  Grading, drainage and paving plan. 
4.  Road and roadside drainage profiles. 
5.  Water and sanitary sewer and sewer profiles. 
6.  Neighborhood grading and drainage plan. 
7.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
8.  Details (sheets as needed). 
9.  Other plans (as required). 
The drawing scale shall not be larger than 1"=20' and small[er] than 1"=100'. The plan sheet shall not exceed 30"x42" (E size); however, 24"x36" (D size) sheets are preferred. 
(a)  Existing features. Provide on all plan drawing sheets existing features of the property and the following additional information: 
1.  The bearings and distances of the boundary lines of the property to be subdivided. 
2.  If within one mile, the distance and direction to public water lines and sanitary sewer lines. 
3.  The name, location, and width of all rights-of-way or easements of existing streets, roads, railroads, and utilities either on the property or abutting the property. 
4.  Existing contours of the property at one foot intervals and based on mean sea level datum. 
5.  The location of railroads, of public or private rights-of-way or easements, and of parks or other public spaces either on the property or abutting the property. 
6.  Location of existing adjoining property lines with owner's names and addresses. 
7.  Existing buildings on the property to be subdivided. 
8.  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts, or other underground facilities within the street or within the right-of-way of streets or roads abutting the property, including the grades and invert elevations of storm and sanitary sewers. 
9.  Location of city limit lines and county lines, if applicable. 
(b)  Proposed design features. 
General: 
1.  Each sheet signed by [a] registered engineer. 
2.  Graphic scale shown on each sheet. 
3.  Legend. 
4.  North arrow (grid, magnetic, true, etc.). 
5.  Water system approved. 
6.  Wastewater system approved. 
7.  Benchmark on each plan sheet on permanent locations outside of area of construction. 
8.  A certificate from a professional engineer shall be required stating that drainage from the property to be subdivided, after subdivision and development will not affect adjacent property by either increasing or decreasing stormwater run-off onto such adjacent property. This certificate must be approved by the county engineer. 
9.  When the preliminary plan includes only a part of the tract on which the subdivider has an interest, the subdivider shall submit a tentative drainage and street plan for all of said tract. 
(c)  Title sheet. 
1.  Development name and phase (if applicable). 
2.  Owner's and engineer's name, address, and phone number. 
3.  Sheet content schedule with page numbers. 
4.  General location map. 
5.  Total number of lots, total acreage, total length of streets. 
(d)  Staking and layout plan. 
1.  Proposed road names; coordinate with director of public safety. 
2.  Centerline curve data and station numbers at 100 feet. 
3.  Location and purpose of all easements. 
4.  Locations relative to existing/future phases. 
5.  Adjacent property owners shown. 
6.  Flood elevation statement shown with zone limits. 
7.  Existing and proposed lot line dimensions; proposed lot numbers and block numbers. 
8.  Traffic signage and striping per MUTCD. 
9.  Location of proposed monuments and road signs. 
10.  Location of all buffers and landscaping. 
11.  Proposed major contour changes in areas where substantial cut and/or fill is to be done. 
12.  Designation of all lands (if any) to be reserved or dedicated for public use and areas proposed for use other than single-family residential use. 
(e)  Grading, drainage, and paving plan. 
1.  Contours shown at one foot intervals. 
2.  Topo information on adjacent property as appropriate. 
3.  Corps approved wetland jurisdictional delineation. 
4.  Stormwater detention features. 
5.  Invert elevations and size for all pipes, inlets, etc. 
6.  Ditch and swale invert elevations. 
7.  Detention basin profiles. 
8.  Peak water elevation labeled. 
9.  Maintenance access provided. 
10.  Topo provided at pond discharge location. 
11.  Easements for all pipes, ditches and swales. 
12.  Easements provided for all canals. 
13.  Detention basin responsibility. 
14.  Access to county maintained right-of-way. 
15.  Access approved to road. 
16.  Sidewalk location. 
17.  Temporary or permanent cul-de-sacs provided. 
(f)  Road and roadside drainage profile. 
1.  Profile of existing and proposed grades. 
2.  Centerline elevations and grades. 
3.  Storm drain elevations shown on profile. 
4.  Utility which cross profile. 
(g)  Water and sanitary sewer and profile. 
1.  Location and size of all water lines, valves, fire hydrants and services. 
2.  Location and size of all sewer mains, manholes, force mains, air release valves and laterals. 
3.  Location of all utility lines and easements. 
4.  Location of all improvements within ROW. 
5.  Typical section of utility locations in ROW. 
6.  Profile of proposed lines and grades. 
7.  Location of all proposed features crossing lines. 
(h)  Neighborhood grading and drainage plan. 
1.  Existing and proposed contours. 
2  Minimum house finish floor elevations. 
3.  Minimum garage finish floor elevations. 
4.  Lot drainage plan for each lot. 
5.  Lot numbers labeled in bold. 
6.  Proposed road centerline elevation every 100 feet. 
(i)  Soil erosion control. 
1.  Land disturbing activity application. 
2.  Use of SCS Universal Codes. 
3.  Construction exit provided. 
4.  24-hour contact provided. 
5.  Construction schedule. 
6.  Clearing limits indicated with trees shown. 
7.  Erosion control provided for all pipe outlets. 
8.  Temporary sediment basins. 
9.  Temporary and permanent grassing indicated. 
(j)  Details. 
1.  Construction details shown for all structures. 
2.  Details shown for all non-standard construction. 
3.  Typical cross-sections for roads; requirement for proof rolling. 
(k)  Design calculations. 
1.  Stamped by GA registered engineer. 
2.  Drainage map w/ areas shown. 
3.  "C" factor determined. 
4.  Length of travel shown on map. 
5.  Time of concentration determined. 
6.  Pipe sizing calculations determined. 
7.  Pond routing provided. 
8.  100-year flood event shown for basins and outfalls. 
9.  Peak water elevation provided. 
[Part] III.  The following signed certifications must appear on final plats approved under the ordinance: 
APPROVED UNDER ARTICLE XII: 

 
  
Approved by the Planning Director this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ 
Planning Director 
ATTEST: ____________ 
Clerk of County Commission 
  
APPROVED UNDER ARTICLE XIII: 
Approved in accordance with Bryan County Subdivision Regulations: 

 
  

 
  
APPROVED UNDER ARTICLE XIV: 
Approved in accordance with Bryan County Subdivision Regulations: 

 
  

 
  
APPROVED UNDER ARTICLE XV AND ARTICLE XVI: 
Approved in accordance with Bryan County Subdivision Regulations: 

 
  
(Ord. of 10-8-1997; Ord. of 3-2-2010) 
Appendix (b) 
SCHEDULE OF FEES 

 
  
(Ord. of 9-7-2004) 
Appendix (c) 
ROAD CLASSIFICATION PLAN 
Arterials: 
Black Creek Church Road. 
Eldora Road. 
GA SPUR 144. 
Olive Branch Road. 
Belfast River Road. 
Wilma Edwards Road from GA 119 to US 280. 
Collectors: 
Ash Branch Road. 
Bacontown Road. 
Belle Island Road. 
Beulah Church Road. 
Charles Shuman Road and Steve Bulloch Road from GA 67 to GA 204. 
Bill Futch Road from Wilma Edwards Road to GA 119. 
Brisbon Road. 
Cartertown Road. 
Daniel Siding Road from US 17 to Cartertown Road. 
GA 67 from US 280 South to Ft. Stewart Line. 
Groveland Nevils Road. 
Mack English Road. 
Port Royal Road. 
Harris Trail Road from US 17 to Belfast River Road. 
Rathlin Road. 
Sims Road from GA 67 to GA 119. 
Toni Branch Road. 
Timber Trail Road. 
Scenic parkways: 
This designation removed from ordinance. 
Approved private road systems: 
Mill Run Drive, South of drainage canal. 
Mill Run Lane. 
Mill Run Terrace. 
Mingarry Drive, West of boundary line between lots 5 and 6, Buckhead Subdivision. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 12-10-2013; Ord. of 6-10-2014) 

 
Appendix B - ZONING[1] 
ZONING ORDINANCE OF BRYAN COUNTY, GEORGIA 
Adopted by the board of commissioners of Bryan County at a meeting on the 7th day of November, 1995. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix is the county zoning regulations, being an ordinance adopted on June 6, 1995. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - ENACTMENT, SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE, JURISDICTION AND APPLICABILITY 

Section 100. - Preamble and enactment. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia and for several purposes of promoting the health, safety, aesthetics, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Bryan County ("county"); of improving the county's appearance; providing fiscal stability and preventing unreasonable increases in county taxes; lessening congestion in the roads; furthering traffic safety; securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land, avoiding both undue concentration of population and urban sprawl; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; protecting property against blight and depreciation; encouraging the most appropriate use of land and other structures throughout the county; securing economy in government expenditures; and for other purposes, all in accordance with the Bryan County comprehensive plan ("comprehensive plan"), the board of commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia ("county commission") does hereby ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections of the zoning ordinance of Bryan County, Georgia. 
Section 101. - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of Bryan County, Georgia" ("ordinance"). 
Section 102. - Jurisdiction. 
This ordinance shall apply to all land and structures within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Section 103. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories, sizes of lots and structures, sizes of yards, courts, and the use of structures, and lots for trade, industry, residences, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
Section 104. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The boundaries of the various zoning districts are shown upon the official zoning map of Bryan County, Georgia ("zoning map") which is hereby made a part of this ordinance. The zoning map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if all the matters and information set forth on the zoning map were fully described herein. 
(b)  The zoning map shall be composed of a set of maps which together comprise the zoning map. Upon adoption by the county commission, each map which is part of the zoning map shall be signed by the clerk of the county commission and shall bear the seal of the county under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Zoning Map of Bryan County, Georgia, referred to at pages 1 and 2 of the Zoning Ordinance of Bryan County, Georgia, and present in the County Commission Meeting Room on the date of adoption of the Zoning Ordinance of Bryan County, Georgia, on November 7, 1995." 
(c)  The zoning map, as adopted by the county commission and subsequently amended from time to time by their action, shall be maintained and revised by the planning director. A copy of the zoning map, as it exists at its adoption by the county commission, shall be kept in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Bryan County. 
(d)  If the zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the county commission may adopt a new zoning map which will replace the previous zoning map. The new zoning map must be identified as such in the same manner as described above in this section. When the new zoning map is adopted, a notation should, when possible, be made on the previous zoning map that it is no longer valid, indicating the date that the new zoning map was adopted, as a reference aid. The previous zoning map should be preserved, if it has not been lost or destroyed, for possible future reference. 
Section 105. - Zoning map amendments. 
(a)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, changes are made in the zoning district boundaries or other information portrayed on the zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the zoning map by the planning director promptly, after the amendment making such changes has been approved by the county commission. The entry showing an amendment to the zoning map shall be placed upon the property which is the subject of the amendment and shall show the date of the amendment and the zoning file number. All entries showing amendments to the zoning map must be signed by the clerk of the county commission. 
(b)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the zoning map which shall be located in the office of the planning director shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of lots in the county. 
Section 106. - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
(a)  Unless otherwise shown on the zoning map, the boundary lines of zoning districts are lot lines, the center lines of roads or alleys or such lines extended, railroad right-of-way lines, the center lines of creeks and streams or corporate limit lines as they existed at the effective date of this ordinance or as exist at the time of approval of an amendment to the zoning map. 
(b)  Zoning district boundary lines not coinciding with lot lines, the center lines of roads or alleys or such lines extended, railroad right-of-way lines, the center lines of creeks or streams or corporate limit lines shall be determined by use of the scale of the zoning map, unless actual dimensions are noted. 
(c)  If, because of an error or omission on the zoning map, any lot within the jurisdiction of this ordinance is not shown as being within a zoning district, such lot will be classified as A-5, until changed by amendment. 
Section 107. - [Relation to other ordinances/agreements; validity of conditions attached to previous zoning classifications.] 
(a)  Relation to other ordinances or agreements. This ordinance does not in any way repeal existing provisions of any other ordinances, except any provisions of the zoning ordinance in effect on the effective date of this ordinance which are in conflict with provisions of this ordinance. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, articles IV and V of the zoning ordinance of Bryan County, Georgia, adopted March, 1975, as amended, are repealed. Except as provided for herein, if the provisions of this ordinance impose greater restrictions or higher standards than is called for in other ordinances, then the provisions of this ordinance will take precedence over the others and will control. 
(b)  Validity of conditions attached to previous zoning classifications. This ordinance does not, in any way, repeal or affect any conditions placed on zoning reclassifications granted prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 108. - Relation of this ordinance to any pending actions. 
The adoption of this ordinance will not affect any action, suit, or proceeding which may be pending at the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 109. - No precedent. 
No action of the planning director, county commission, or planning commission hereunder shall establish a precedent. Each case shall be decided upon its merits and upon the particular circumstances relating thereto. 
Section 110. - Validity. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or if the provisions of any part of this ordinance as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect portions of this ordinance not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared that this ordinance would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
Section 111. - Repeal. 
All ordinances or parts thereof which are in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, articles IV and V of the zoning ordinance of Bryan County, Georgia, adopted March, 1975, as amended, are repealed. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 112. - Effective date of this ordinance. 
This ordinance shall become effective from and after the date of its adoption by the county commission ("effective date of this ordinance"). 
ARTICLE II. - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 

Section 200. - General rules of construction. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following rules of construction shall apply: 
(a)  This ordinance shall be construed to achieve the purposes for which it is adopted. 
(b)  In the event of a conflict between the text of this ordinance and any caption, figure, illustration, or table herein, the text of this ordinance shall control. 
(c)  In the event of any conflict herein in limitations, requirements, or standards applying to an individual use or structure, the more stringent or restrictive provision shall apply. 
Section 201. - Fractional requirements. 
When any requirement of this ordinance results in a fraction as to the number of dwelling units or any other measurement, that fraction will be disregarded and the nearest lower number shall apply. 
Section 202. - Additions to an existing development. 
Whenever any increment or addition to an existing development results in the total size of the development being greater than a threshold size identified in this ordinance, the development shall be treated as a whole in determining the type of review and approval required under this ordinance. 
Section 203. - Conflict. 
In the case of a conflict between any provision of this ordinance and a provision of the Bryan County Building Code Ordinance ("building code"), the building code shall control. 
Section 204. - Responsibility of applicant. 
It shall be the responsibility of an applicant to submit all materials necessary for the planning director, the planning commission or the county commission to consider applications for approvals or determinations requested pursuant to this ordinance. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 300. - Application of zoning ordinance. 
Except as otherwise provided, no structure or lot shall, after the effective date of this ordinance, be used and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or moved unless in conformity with the requirements herein specified for the zoning district in which it is located. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the county. 
Section 301. - Duties, building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
All questions of interpretation and enforcement shall first be presented to the planning director; any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the planning director to the board of appeals. 
(a)  Enforcing officer. The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the planning director and his designees. These officials shall have the right to enter upon any premises for the purpose of making inspections they deem necessary to carry out their duties in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(b)  Building permits/certificate of occupancy. The planning director or his designee shall issue all building permits and certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records thereof, and conduct inspections as prescribed by this ordinance and as necessary to insure compliance of this ordinance. 
(c)  Building permits required. No building permits shall be issued until the planning director, or his designee, certifies that the proposed construction is in compliance with this ordinance. 
(d)  Certificate of occupancy. No lot, or structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved or altered in its use, shall be occupied or used until the planning director or his designee has, pursuant to chapter 11 [now chapter 103, article II] of the Bryan County Code, issued a certificate of occupancy. Such occupancy or use must also conform with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
ARTICLE IV. - DECISION MAKING AND ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES 

Section 400. - Department of planning and zoning ("planning department"). 
In addition to any authority granted to the planning department by other laws and ordinances, the planning director and the employees under his control, shall have the following powers and duties, which include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  To serve as staff to the county commission and the planning commission, with regard to their functions under this ordinance, and to inform such bodies of all facts and information with respect to applications for amendments to the zoning map, the preparation, adoption, and updating of the comprehensive plan, or any other matters brought before them. 
(b)  To maintain a copy of this ordinance and the zoning map. 
(c)  To maintain development review files and other public records related to administration and enforcement of this ordinance. 
(d)  To recommend and comment on proposed amendments to this ordinance and the zoning map. 
(e)  To establish such rules of procedure as are necessary and proper for the administration of this ordinance. 
(f)  To enforce this ordinance. 
(g)  To render interpretations of the provisions of this ordinance and the zoning district boundaries indicted on the zoning map. 
Section 401. - Bryan County engineering and inspections department ("engineering and inspections department"). 
In addition to any authority granted to the engineering and inspections department by other laws and ordinances, the engineering director and the employees under his control shall have the following powers and duties, which include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  To review rezoning petitions to determine compliance of the proposed development with county requirements for engineering, erosion control, traffic circulation, traffic generation, parking, loading and unloading, connections to public street rights-of-way and drainage. 
(c)  As requested by the planning director, to provide the county commission or the planning commission with reports and recommendations with respect to matters before those bodies under the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 402. - Bryan County board of education ("board of education"). 
In addition to any authority granted to the board of education by other laws and ordinances, the superintendent and the employees under his control shall have the following powers: 
(a)  When requested by the planning director or county commission, review applications for rezoning petitions to evaluate the impact of the proposed rezoning on the availability of existing and planned educational facilities, teachers and staff. 
(b)  When requested by the planning director or county commission, provide to the county commission or planning commission, reports or recommendations with respect to matters before those bodies. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
ARTICLE V. - APPEALS AND VARIANCES 

Section 500. - Powers of planning commission. 
Reserved. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 501. - Appeals to the planning commission. 
Reserved. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 501.01. - Appeals to the board of appeals. 
An appeal to the board of appeals may be taken from any decision of the planning director by any person. Such appeal must be made within seven days of the action or decision appealed from by filing with the clerk of the county commission a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The provisions of article XVI shall apply to all appeals to the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 502. - Powers of county commission. 
Reserved. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 503. - Appeals to county commission. 
Reserved. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 504. - Appealing an action of the county commission. 
If the county commission takes an action pursuant to this ordinance which any party believes to be contrary to law, that action may be appealed to the superior court of Bryan County. Such an appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action of the county commission was taken. Said appeal shall be based solely on the record of the county commission action. No party shall be entitled to a de-novo appeal. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 505. - Variances. 
(a)  An owner may make application for a variance, using forms available from the planning department. Upon receipt of an application, the planning director shall schedule a public hearing. At least 15 but no more than 45 days prior to the scheduled public hearing, the planning director shall advertise such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the county and shall erect in a conspicuous place on the premises in question a sign giving public notice of the application for variance. The planning director shall, within 30 days after such public hearing, either grant or refuse to grant the requested variance based on a finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
(i)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the lot in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lots in the same zoning district. 
(ii)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other lots in the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(iii)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the lot of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other lots in the zoning district in which the applicant's lot is located. 
(iv)  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare. 
(v)  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant. 
(vi)  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the lot. 
(b)  In reviewing an application for a variance, the burden of showing that the variance should be recommended and granted shall be upon the applicant. 
(c)  The planning director, when granting a variance, may establish reasonable conditions concerning the use of the premises and may establish a time period for a variance. 
(d)  Any variance thus recommended and granted must be stated in writing in the records of the planning department with the reasons for which the departure was justified and the conditions under which granted stated therein. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 506. - Limitations on variances. 
In no case shall a variance be considered or granted from the conditions of approval imposed on a lot through a zoning change granted by the county commission, nor may a minimum lot size required by a zoning district be reduced, nor may any use of a lot be granted that is not a permitted use within the zoning district in which the lots is situated. The existence of adjacent non-conforming lots or structures shall not be grounds for a variance. 
ARTICLE VI. - AMENDMENTS 

Section 600. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide means for amending the text of this ordinance and the classification of any lot identified on the zoning map. The purpose is not to relieve particular hardships, nor to confer special privileges or rights on any person, but only to make adjustments: 
(a)  Necessary in light of changed conditions or changes in public policy; or 
(b)  Likely to achieve the purposes of this ordinance. 
Section 601. - Authority. 
Upon compliance with the provisions of this article, the county commission shall have the authority to amend or repeal the text of this ordinance and the classification of any lot as identified on the zoning map. 
Section 602. - Initiation. 
(a)  Any amendment, except for the reclassification of a lot to a conditional use district or a text amendment to this ordinance, may be initiated either by the county commission, the planning commission or by the owner of the lot in question. 
(b)  An amendment for reclassification of a lot to a conditional use district may be initiated only by the owner of the lot in question. 
(c)  A text amendment to this ordinance may be initiated by the planning commission, the county commission or any person. 
Section 603. - Preliminary meeting with planning commission staff. 
Before filing a petition for the reclassification of premises, the petitioner must meet with the planning department to discuss the nature of the proposed reclassification, the standards for development under the proposed reclassification, and, if known, any concerns that persons residing in the vicinity of the premises may have regarding the proposed reclassification. 
Section 604. - Filing of petitions. 
(a)  A petition for the reclassification of a lot or a text amendment must be in a form prescribed by and filed with the planning department, accompanied by the fee established by the county commission. 
(b)  As provided in subsection (c) below, applications for a change in zoning classification to a classification listed in said subsection (c) shall be accompanied by a written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed zoning change with respect to each of the standards enumerated in section 610, in a form acceptable to the planning director, as well as any other supporting materials required by the planning director. The analysis shall be filed with the planning department not less than 30 days before any meeting or hearing at which the reclassification will be considered. 
(c)  The analysis described in subsection (b) above shall only apply to the following applications for rezoning classifications: 
(i)  All reclassifications to the following zoning districts: PUD, I-1, WP, I-L, B-2, R-3, R-4 and WB-3; or 
(ii)  All other reclassifications of lots at least 20 acres in size in the following zoning districts: AR-1.5, R-30, R-1, R-2, B-1, O and WB-2. 
(d)  No application for reclassification of a lot will be accepted until it is complete. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007) 
Section 605. - Staff review. 
(a)  The planning director shall review the proposed amendment and deliver copies thereof to the following agencies for their review and comment: the planning commission, the Bryan County health department, the board of education, the engineering department, the public safety E911 department, and any other agencies deemed appropriate by the planning director. 
(b)  Prior to the public hearing held by the planning commission, the planning director shall deliver to the planning commission a report summarizing the comments, if any, of the agencies described in section 605(a). The planning commission shall hold a public hearing, review the comments, and give their recommendation on proposed amendment. 
(c)  Prior to the public hearing held by the county commission, the planning director shall deliver to the county commission the same report described in [section] 605(b) along with the recommendation if any by the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1999) 
Section 606. - Withdrawal and amendment of petition. 
(a)  A filed petition may be withdrawn by the petitioner at any time prior to the scheduling of the date of the public hearing for the petition before the county commission. After that time, the petitioner may file with the planning director a request to withdraw the petition, but the planning director shall determine whether or not to allow the withdrawal. 
(b)  It is generally not the intent of this section to permit the withdrawal of a petition after the scheduling of the public hearing before the county commission. The county commission may approve a request for withdrawal after such date, only if it determines that there are substantial circumstances favoring the withdrawal and that the withdrawal will not be detrimental to the interests of citizens affected by the petition. 
(c)  The petitioner shall not be allowed to amend a petition after a public hearing has been scheduled. 
(d)  When a petitioner withdraws a petition to amend, the petitioner shall not re-submit the petition for 90 days following such withdrawal; provided, however, if the withdrawal is made at the county's request, the petition may be re-filed within 30 days. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, "withdrawal" is defined as the retraction of a filed petition, either for amendment and re-submission or for permanent revocation. Should the commission defer consideration of a petition to the next meeting of the commission, either at the request of the petitioner or upon its own initiative, such deferral of consideration shall not constitute "withdrawal" and shall not trigger the time-bars to resubmission set forth in subparagraph (d) of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 10-5-1999; Ord. of 7-10-2007; Ord. of 1-6-2009) 
Section 607. - Notice of public hearing. 
Notwithstanding anything contained herein, notice of all public hearings required under this article shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 [et seq.], known as the "Zoning Procedures Law." 
Section 608. - The public hearing. 
(a)  No amendment shall be adopted by the county commission until after the county commission has held a public hearing on such proposed amendment. 
(b)  The public hearing shall be called and conducted in accordance with the rules and procedures set forth in article XIII. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 609. - Action by county commission. 
After the county commission has held the required public hearing, and unless an extension of time is requested by or agreed to in writing by the petitioner, if any, the county commission shall either reject the proposed amendment or adopt an ordinance enacting the proposed amendment with or without modifications. 
(a)  If it receives a recommendation of the planning commission, the county commission shall consider such recommendation, the report and recommendation of the planning director, [and] the comments of the agencies described in section 605(a). Except where an extension of time is requested by or agreed to in writing by the petitioner, the county commission shall, no later than its next regularly scheduled meeting held a minimum of seven days from either the date of delivery to it of the recommendation of the planning commission, or 31 days after the public hearing on the petition, either reject the proposed amendment or adopt an ordinance enacting the proposed amendment with or without modifications. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997) 
Section 610. - Standards governing the exercise of zoning power ("standards"). 
(a)  In considering any zoning map reclassifications, the following standards shall be considered, as they may be relevant to the application, by the planning director, planning commission and county commission. Such considerations shall be based on the most intensive uses and maximum density permitted in the requested reclassification, unless limitations to be attached to the zoning action are requested by the applicant. 
(i)  Whether the proposed reclassification is in conformance with the comprehensive plan; 
(ii)  Whether the proposed reclassification improves the overall zoning scheme and helps carry out the purposes of this ordinance; 
(iii)  Whether the proposed reclassification is compatible with or would negatively impact the overall character and land use pattern or a particular piece of property or neighborhood within one mile of the subject lot; 
(iv)  The adequacy of public facilities and services intended to serve the lot proposed to be reclassified, including, but not limited to, roads, parks and recreational facilities, police and fire protection, schools, stormwater drainage systems, water supplies, wastewater treatment, and solid waste services; 
(v)  Whether the proposed reclassification will adversely affect a known archaeological, historical, cultural or environmental resource, such as water or air quality, ground water recharge areas, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation and flooding; 
(vi)  Whether the proposed reclassification will adversely affect the existing uses or usability of adjacent or nearby lots or the preservation of the integrity of a [any] adjacent neighborhoods; 
(vii)  Whether the proposed reclassification could adversely affect market values of nearby lots; 
(viii)  Whether the proposed reclassification would require an increase in existing levels of public services, including, but not limited to, schools, parks and recreational facilities, stormwater drainage systems, water supplies, wastewater treatment, solid waste services, roads or police and fire protection beyond the existing ability of the county or board of education to provide; 
(ix)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the lot proposed to be reclassified which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed reclassification; 
(x)  The existing uses and zoning of nearby lots; 
(xi)  The extent to which the value of the lot proposed to be reclassified is diminished by its existing zoning restrictions; 
(xii)  The extent that any diminished property value of the lot proposed to be reclassified resulting from its existing zoning restrictions promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
(xiii)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon petitioner, by the existing zoning restrictions; 
(xiv)  The suitability of the lot proposed to be reclassified for its current and proposed zoned purposes; 
(xv)  The length of time the lot proposed to be reclassified has been nonincome producing as zoned; 
(xvi)  Whether the proposed reclassification would create an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
(xvii)  Whether there are substantial reasons why the lot cannot be used in accordance with this existing zoning classification; and 
(xviii)  Applications for a zoning map reclassification which do not contain specific site plans carry a rebuttable presumption that such rezoning shall adversely affect the zoning scheme. 
(b)  After hearing evidence at a zoning hearing, the planning commission and county commission shall apply the standards as deemed relevant to the application in making their decision. It will not be required that the planning commission or county commission consider every criteria contained in the standards. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that the proposed zoning map reclassification promotes the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. 
(c)  If the county commission determines from the evidence presented or the recommendation of the planning commission that the applicant has shown that the proposed zoning map reclassification promotes the health, safety, morality and general welfare based on the standards, then the application shall be granted, subject to any reasonable provisions as may imposed by the county commission pursuant to section 612. Otherwise such application shall be denied. 
Section 611. - Effect of denial of petition. 
A petition for the reclassification of a lot or an amendment to the text of this ordinance that have been denied in whole or in part, or approved to a classification other than the classification originally requested, shall not be resubmitted within one year of the date of the county commission's action on the original petition. However, nothing in this article shall preclude the seeking of a different classification. 
Section 612. - Provisional zoning. 
(a)  In deciding upon any application for a zoning map reclassification, the county commission may, on their own motion or upon the recommendation of the planning director or the planning commission or the suggestion of the applicant, grant the application subject to certain provisions necessary to promote and protect the health, safety, morality and general welfare of the county and to further the purposes of this ordinance. Such provisions shall be imposed for the benefit of the community to prevent or lessen any negative effects that the zoning map reclassification may cause. 
(b)  The county commission may grant any zoning map reclassification and include provisions as follows: 
(i)  Such provisions as are deemed necessary to protect neighbors and to prevent or lessen any negative effects of the zoning change; 
(ii)  That the rezoning is provisional upon the condition that the applicant or any successor in title to the applicant may construct, establish or continue only those uses named and only in such a manner as is approved by the county commission. 
(c)  Prior to a final vote being taken on any application for a zoning map reclassification in which provisions shall be imposed, such provisions will be announced at the hearing and the applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to present its position on such provisional requirements. If the applicant finds such provisional requirements to be unacceptable, it may, at that time, withdraw its application for a zoning map reclassification; such withdrawal shall be considered a denial for purposes of refiling an application. 
(d)  If the county commission adopts a zoning map reclassification which contains provisional requirements, such requirements shall become a part of this ordinance and the zoning map. Such property shall thereafter carry the suffix "-P" to indicate that such property has been provisionally zoned. Such provisions shall be binding upon all owners of the property until removed or modified by the county commission. The planning director shall so indicate in the records of the zoning actions the existence of the provisional requirements and shall attach the suffix "-P" to the zoning map for the appropriate property. The owners shall promptly file in the clerk's office of Bryan County, Georgia, a plat of the property bearing a legend that sets out the terms of the provisional zoning accorded the property under a caption, "Provisions of Zoning." 
(e)  A provisional requirement may be imposed upon either permitted or conditional uses in any zoning district. In ruling on such provisional requirements, the county commission shall utilize the applicable standards contained in section 610 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-4-2008) 
ARTICLE VII. - CONDITIONAL USE DISTRICTS 

Section 700. - Conditional use districts, purpose. 
(a)  The conditional use district rezoning process allows particular uses to be established, but only in accordance with specific standards and conditions pertaining to each individual project. Some lot uses are of such a nature or scale that they have a significant impact on both the immediate surrounding area and on the entire county, which impact cannot be predetermined and controlled by general zoning district standards. There are also circumstances in which a general zoning district designation allowing such a use by right would not be appropriate for a particular lot, even though the use itself could, if properly planned, be appropriate for the lot consistent with the objectives of this ordinance and the comprehensive plan. The review process established in this article provides for the accommodation of such uses by a reclassification of lots into a "conditional use" district, subject to specific conditions which ensure compatibility of the use with the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties. 
(b)  A conditional use district may be established only from conditional uses listed within article XI and only within the zoning district such conditional use may be allowed. 
Section 701. - Plans and other information to accompany petition. 
(a)  All petitions for the reclassification of lots to a conditional use district must be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, and any necessary supporting text, if applicable, including the following information: 
(i)  A boundary survey and vicinity map showing the lot's total acreage, zoning classification(s), general location in relation to roads, railroads, and waterways, the date, and north arrow; 
(ii)  All existing easements, reservations, and rights-of-way; 
(iii)  Proposed location and use of the lot and structures, including the number of residential units and the total square footage of any non-residential development; 
(iv)  All yards, buffers, screening, and landscaping either required by this ordinance or proposed by the petitioner; 
(v)  All existing and proposed points of access to public roads; 
(vi)  Flood zones; 
(vii)  Proposed phasing, if any; 
(viii)  The location of existing and proposed storm drainage patterns and facilities intended to serve the proposed development; and 
(ix)  General traffic, parking, and circulation plans. 
(b)  The planning director can waive any petition requirement where he determines that the type of use or scale of the proposal makes providing certain information unnecessary or impractical. 
(c)  In the course of evaluating the proposed use, the planning director, planning commission, or county commission may request additional information from the petitioner. This additional information may include the following: 
(i)  Proposed number and general location of all structures; 
(ii)  Proposed screening, buffers and landscaping over and above that required by this ordinance, as well as proposed treatment of any existing natural features; 
(iii)  Existing and proposed topography, at one foot contour intervals; 
(iv)  The location of trees on the subject lot; 
(v)  Scale of proposed structures relative to abutting property; 
(vi)  Height of proposed structures; 
(vii)  Exterior features of the proposed development; 
(viii)  Any other information needed to demonstrate compliance with this ordinance; and 
(ix)  Proposed number and location of signs. 
Section 702. - Conditions to approval of petition. 
(a)  The county commission may approve the reclassification of a lot to a conditional use district, only upon determining that the proposed use will meet all applicable standards and requirements in this ordinance. 
(b)  In recommending approval of a petition for the reclassification of a lot to a conditional use, the planning commission may recommend and the county commission may require reasonable and appropriate conditions be attached to approval of the petition. Any such conditions should relate to the relationship of the proposed use to surrounding property, proposed support facilities, such as parking areas and driveways, pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems, screening and buffering areas, the timing of development, road and right-of-way improvements, water and sewer improvements, storm drainage, the provision of open space, and other matters that the planning commission or county commission may find appropriate or the petitioner may propose. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 703. - Effect of approval. 
(a)  If a petition is approved under this article, the conditional use district that is established, the approved petition, and all conditions which have been attached to the approval are binding on the lot as an amendment to this ordinance and to the zoning map. All subsequent development and use of the lot shall be in accordance with the standards for the approved conditional use district, the approved petition, and all conditions attached to the approval. 
(b)  Following the approval of a petition for a conditional use district, the subject lot shall be identified on the zoning map by the appropriate zoning district designation, followed by the letters "CD." 
ARTICLE VIII. - NON-CONFORMING AND NON-COMPLYING LOTS, STRUCTURES AND USES 

Section 800. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights; however, this ordinance recognizes that the elimination of existing structures and uses that are not in conformance or compliance with this ordinance is as much a subject of health, safety and general welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of new uses which would violate the purpose, intent and provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 801. - Existing uses. 
(a)  Except as provided for herein, this ordinance shall not prohibit a continuation of a particular lawful use or uses of a lot or structure legally existing at the effective date of this ordinance; provided, however, that if any such legally existing use changes to a different use after the effective date of this ordinance, such different use shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this ordinance shall prohibit the continuation of agricultural or forestry uses on tracts ten acres or greater, regardless of the zoning district in which such tract is situated. 
(c)  The non-conforming use of a lot, where such use lawfully existed on the effective date of this ordinance and such use does not involve any principal structure, may be continued for a period of not more than three years; provided, however, that such non-conforming use of a lot shall not in any way be expanded or extended. If such non-conforming use of a lot is discontinued or changed, any future use of such lot shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 802. - Non-conforming lots. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 802(b), an existing lot of record may be used for the erection of any structure (including accessory structures) permitted in the zoning district in which the lot is situated, even though the lot does not meet the minimum area or dimensional requirements set forth herein for such zoning district. Front, side and rear yards shall conform with the requirements of this ordinance as closely as possible. The planning director shall make such determination after considering both the requirements of this ordinance and the established placement of structures in the neighborhood. However, under no circumstances, shall a structure be placed less than ten feet from a property line or less than 20 feet from a road. 
(b)  Where a non-conforming lot is less than the minimum lot area required by this ordinance, and such non-conforming lot is adjacent to another lot under the same ownership at the effective date of this ordinance, such lots must be combined. 
Section 803. - Non-conforming commercial structures. 
(a)  A non-conforming structure used for commercial purposes may be enlarged or extended, and accessory structures added, provided such enlargement, extension or accessory structure meets the setbacks for the zoning district as closely as possible, as determined by the planning director, and does not reduce existing setbacks from roads, where such setbacks are less than required in the zoning district. However, under no circumstances, shall a side or rear setback be reduced to less than ten feet. 
(b)  A non-conforming structure used for commercial purposes may be replaced, along with its accessory structure, provided replacement meets the setbacks for the zoning district. However, such a non-conforming structure can be replaced at its original location, provided that after removal, replacement takes place within a period of two years for site built structures. 
Section 804. - Non-conforming residential structures. 
(a)  A non-conforming structure used for residential purposes may be enlarged or extended, and accessory structures added, provided such enlargement, extension or accessory structure meets the setbacks for the zoning district as closely as possible, as determined by the planning director, and does not reduce existing setbacks from roads, where such setbacks are less than required in the zoning district. However, under no circumstances, shall a side or rear setback be reduced to less than ten feet. 
(b)  A non-conforming structure used for residential purposes may be replaced, along with its accessory structure, provided replacement meets the setbacks for the zoning district. However, such a non-conforming structure can be replaced at its original location, provided that after removal, replacement takes place within a period of one year for manufactured homes and two years for site built structures. 
(c)  A mobile home made non-conforming by this ordinance, located within the unincorporated limits of Bryan County, may be moved to another location within the unincorporated limits of Bryan County provided the following conditions are met: 
(i)  The mobile home is either non-conforming, non-complying, or classified as a secondary living unit. 
(ii)  The mobile home must pass a habitability inspection by the department of engineering and inspections. 
(iii)  Evidence is submitted that all required taxes and fees due the county in connection with the structure are current. 
(iv)  All required permits are applied for and the required fee paid. 
(Ord. of 4-2-1996) 
Section 805. - Non-conforming commercial uses. 
Non-conforming commercial uses of a structure may not be changed to another non-conforming use. Non-conforming commercial uses may not be reestablished after discontinuance for one year, however, this prohibition shall not apply during the time period permitted for the replacement of a structure under this article VIII. The portion of a structure used for commercial uses may not be extended, enlarged or expanded. 
Section 806. - Non-conforming residential use of a structure. 
(a)  Non-conforming residential use of a structure may be continued, and additional customary accessory uses may be established. The principal and accessory structures may be replaced, expanded or extended, provided that the lot and building requirements are not violated for the zoning district in which the structure is situated, except as permitted in section 804. 
(b)  Any structure used for residential purposes and situated in a zoning district which prohibits residential uses cannot be replaced, if removed. However, such a structure can be replaced, provided that after removal, replacement takes place within a period of one year for manufactured homes and two years for site built structures. 
Section 807. - Procedure to obtain approved status for a non-complying lot. 
A non-complying lot can be granted the status of an approved lot by the planning director if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  An application is filed with the planning director on forms prepared by the planning department and the required fee paid. 
(b)  Evidence is submitted to the planning director that all required taxes and fees due the county in connection with the lot are current. 
(c)  The applicant submits evidence and the planning director determines that the lot is a non-complying lot. 
(d)  The applicant submits to the planning director a plat of the lot, which plat may be either a new plat meeting the requirements of the Georgia Plat Act, as amended at the time of application, or a copy of a previously recorded plat. 
(e)  Certification of health department approval of the lot and any existing water and sewerage system serving the lot is submitted to the planning director. 
(f)  The planning director determines that the lot: 
(i)  Abuts, for a distance of at least 20 feet, either a public road or an approved private road system; and 
(ii)  Meets the minimum area and dimensional requirements for the zoning district in which the lot is situated. 
Section 808. - Procedure to obtain non-conforming status for a non-complying lot. 
Non-complying lots which meet all the requirements of section 807, except for the requirements of part (f)(ii) can be granted the status of a non-conforming lot by the planning director if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The requirements of parts (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f)(i) of section 807 are satisfied. 
(b)  The planning director determines that the size of the lot is at least 30,000 square feet, or if the lot is served by either public water or public sewer, the size of the lot is at least 15,000 square feet. 
Section 809. - Procedure to obtain RPAR lot status for a non-complying lot. 
Non-complying lots which cannot meet the requirements of part (f)(i) of section 807 and are not adjacent to another lot under the same ownership at the effective date of this ordinance can be granted the status of an RPAR lot by the planning director if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The requirements of parts (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of section 807 and part (b) of section 808 are satisfied. 
(b)  The recorded plat of the lot prominently displays the following notice: 
NOTICE TO PURCHASERS: THIS LOT IS AN RPAR LOT AS DEFINED BY THE BRYAN COUNTY ZONING ORDINANCE. SOME PUBLIC SERVICES PROVIDED BY FEDERAL, STATE OR COUNTY GOVERNMENTS MAY NOT BE AVAILABLE TO A DWELLING CONSTRUCTED ON THIS LOT. THIS LOT DOES NOT HAVE ACCESS TO A DEDICATED PUBLIC ROAD MAINTAINED BY BRYAN COUNTY OR AN APPROVED PRIVATE ROAD SYSTEM. THIS LOT CANNOT BE SUBDIVIDED. 
Section 809.01. - Combination of RPAR lots. 
Where two or more lots meet the requirements of section 809, except that they are adjacent and under the same ownership, such lots, if combined into a single lot, can be granted RPAR lot status, provided all applicable requirements of article VIII are met. 
Section 810. - Procedure to obtain non-conforming commercial structure status for a non-complying commercial structure. 
A non-complying commercial structure can be granted the status of a non-conforming commercial structure by the planning director if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  An application is filed with the planning director on forms prepared by the planning department and the required fee paid. 
(b)  Evidence is submitted to the planning director that all required taxes and fees due the county in connection with the structure are current. 
(c)  The applicant provides to the planning director a site plan of the lot showing the location of the structure on the lot and the planning director determines that the structure meets the setback requirements for the zoning district in which the lot is situated. 
(d)  The applicant submits to the planning director certification from the health department that any existing water and sewerage system on the lot is functioning in accordance with all health department requirements. 
Section 811. - Procedure to obtain recognized non-complying commercial status for a non-complying commercial structure. 
A non-complying commercial structure which cannot meet the setback requirements of section 810 can be granted the status of a recognized non-complying commercial structure by the planning director if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  An application is filed with the planning director on forms prepared by the planning department and the required fee paid. 
(b)  Evidence is submitted to the planning director that all required taxes and fees due the county in connection with the structure are current. 
(c)  The applicant provides to the planning director a site plan showing the location of the structure on the lot and the actual setbacks of the structure from property boundaries and other structures on the lot. 
(d)  The applicant submits to the planning director certification from the health department that any existing water and sewerage system on the lot is functioning in accordance with all health department requirements. 
Section 812. - Procedure to obtain recognized non-complying residential status for a non-complying residential structure. 
A non-complying residential structure can be granted the status of a recognized non-complying residential structure by the planning director if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  An application is filed with the planning director on forms prepared by the planning department and the required fee paid. 
(b)  Evidence is submitted to the planning director that all required taxes and fees due the county in connection with the structure are current. 
(c)  The applicant provides to the planning director a site plan showing the location of the structure on the lot. 
(d)  The applicant submits to the planning director certification from the health department that any existing water and sewerage system on the lot is functioning in accordance with all health department requirements. 
(e)  For manufactured homes, mobile homes, and other site installed dwellings, the engineering and inspections department certifies to the planning director that the dwelling meets or exceeds the GMHA, industrialized building and HUD codes. 
(f)  For site built dwellings, the engineering and inspections department certifies to the planning director that the dwelling meets or exceeds the requirements of the minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities within the standard housing code. 
Section 813. - Procedure to obtain non-conforming commercial use status for a non-complying commercial use in an agricultural, agricultural/residential or residential zoning district. 
(a)  A non-complying commercial use in an agricultural, agricultural/residential or residential zoning district can be granted the status of a non-conforming commercial use by the planning director if the following conditions are met: 
(i)  An application is filed with the planning director on forms prepared by the planning department and the required fee paid. 
(ii)  Evidence is submitted to the planning director that all required taxes and fees due the county in connection with the structure are current. 
(iii)  The applicant submits to the planning director copies of a Bryan County business license for such use for the year 1995 and all subsequent years up to the time the application is submitted. 
(iv)  The applicant submits to the planning director a floor plan of the structure showing the space used for commercial uses and a description of all commercial activities carried out within the structure. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the following commercial uses cannot be considered under this section: 
(i)  Uses for which a home occupation permit has previously been issued; 
(ii)  Uses which are within the scope of section 1105, home occupation, or section 1106, home business offices, which uses must obtain the permits required by such sections; 
(iii)  Any use which, as determined by the planning director, could affect the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood in which the use is situated. 
Section 814. - Procedure to obtain non-conforming residential use status for a non-complying residential use in zoning districts in which such use is not permitted. 
A non-complying residential use in a zoning district in which such use is not permitted can be granted the status of a non-conforming residential use by the planning director if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  An application is filed with the planning director on forms prepared by the planning department and the required fee paid. 
(b)  Evidence must be submitted to the planning director that all required taxes and fees due the county in connection with the structure are current. 
(c)  The applicant submits to the planning director a floor plan of the structure showing the space used for residential use. 
(d)  The applicant submits to the planning director certification from the health department that the existing water and sewerage system on the lot is functioning in accordance with all health department requirements. 
(e)  For manufactured homes, mobile homes, and other site installed dwellings, the engineering and inspections department certifies to the planning director that the dwelling meets or exceeds the GMHA, industrialized building and HUD codes. 
(f)  For site built dwellings, the engineering and inspections department certifies to the planning director that the dwelling meets or exceeds the requirements of the minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities within the standard housing code. 
(g)  The applicant submits evidence, and the planning director determines, that the structure in which the use exists is the only structure on the lot used for residential purposes. 
Section 815. - Procedure to obtain section 815 recognized non-complying residential use status for secondary living units (SLUS). 
SLUS can be granted the status of a section 815 recognized non-complying residential use by the planning director if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  An application is filed with the planning director on forms prepared by the planning department and the required fee paid. 
(b)  Evidence is submitted to the planning director that all required taxes and fees due the county in connection with the structure are current. 
(c)  The applicant submits evidence, and the planning director determines, that the structure in which the non-complying use is situated was erected pursuant to a building permit issued with no limitations. 
(d)  The applicant provides to the planning director a site plan of the lot on which the structure is situated showing the location and uses of all structures on the lot and designating the structure which is the principal dwelling. 
Section 816. - Procedure to obtain section 816 recognized non-complying residential use status for SLUS. 
SLUS can be granted the status of a section 816 recognized non-complying residential use by the planning director if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  An application is filed with the planning director on forms prepared by the planning department and the required fee paid. 
(b)  Evidence is submitted to the planning director that all required taxes and fees due the county in connection with the structure are current. 
(c)  The applicant submits evidence, and the planning director determines, that the structure in which the non-complying use is situated was erected pursuant to a building permit issued with limitations such as, but not limited to, temporary permits, hardship permits, hardship variances or variances for temporary second dwellings. 
(d)  The applicant provides to the planning director a site plan of the lot on which the structure is situated showing the location and uses of all structures on the lot and designating the structure which is the principal dwelling. 
Section 817. - Procedure to obtain section 817 recognized non-complying residential use status for SLUS. 
SLUS can be granted the status of a section 817 recognized non-complying residential use status by the planning director, if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  An application is filed with the planning director on forms prepared by the planning department and the required fee paid. 
(b)  Evidence is submitted to the planning director that all required taxes and fees due the county in connection with the structure are current. 
(c)  The applicant provides to the planning director a site plan of the lot on which the structure is situated showing the location and uses of all structures on the lot and designating the structure which is the principal dwelling. 
Section 818. - Rights and limitations of non-complying lots, structures and uses. 
It is the intent of this section to specify rights and limitations relating to the erection, expansion, replacement, removal and use of the following non-complying lots, structures and uses: 
(a)  Non-complying lots approved under section 807 shall have the same rights and limitations of lots legally approved under the subdivision regulations. 
(b)  Non-complying lots given non-conforming status under section 808 shall have the same rights and limitations given non-conforming lots under section 802. 
(c)  Non-complying lots given RPAR lot status under section 809 shall have the same rights and limitations given non-conforming lots under section 802, except that RPAR lots cannot be subdivided. 
(d)  Non-complying commercial structures given non-conforming commercial status under section 810 shall have the same rights and limitations given non-conforming commercial structures under section 803. 
(e)  Non-complying commercial structures given recognized non-complying commercial status under section 811 shall have the same rights and limitations given non-conforming commercial structures under section 803, except that structures given recognized non-complying commercial status cannot be expanded, enlarged or replaced, except in conformance with all use and building standards for the zoning district in which the structure is situated. 
(f)  Non-complying residential structures given recognized non-complying residential status under section 812 shall have the same rights and limitations given non-conforming residential structures under section 804. 
(g)  Non-complying commercial uses given non-conforming commercial use status under section 813 shall have the same rights and limitations given non-conforming commercial uses under section 805, subject to the limitations set forth in section 813. 
(h)  Non-complying residential uses given non-conforming residential use status under section 814 shall have the same rights and limitations given non-conforming residential uses under section 806. 
(i)  SLUS given section 815 recognized non-complying residential use status shall have the same rights and limitations given non-conforming residential uses under section 806. 
(j)  SLUS given section 816 recognized non-complying residential use status shall have the rights and limitations given non-conforming residential uses under section 806, however, the right to replace as permitted in section 806(b) is limited to the life of the occupant for whom the permit was originally granted, and such right to replace shall terminate upon the death of such occupant. 
(k)  SLUS given section 817 recognized non-complying residential use status can be replaced in the same location provided that after removal: (i) Replacement takes place within a period of three months; and (ii) all applicable building code requirements and health department requirements are complied with. Notwithstanding any rights conferred by this subsection, all SLUS granted section 817 recognized non-complying use status must be removed prior to June 3, 2010. 
(l)  Any lot certified by the planning director as a non-complying lot prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall have the same rights and limitations given non-conforming lots under section 802. The planning director shall maintain a list of all previously certified non-complying lots. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 819. - Notations on building permits. 
All building permits issued under article VIII shall be subject to any applicable limitations set forth herein and the planning director and engineering director shall note any such limitations on the building permits. 
Section 820. - Compliance with other codes or regulations. 
Notwithstanding any rights granted under article VIII, all structures and uses must comply with all applicable federal, state and county laws, rules, regulations and codes and when health department approval or certification is required under article VIII, such approval or certification must certify that water and sewerage disposal systems are operating in accordance with, and not in violation of, all applicable state and county laws, rules, regulations, codes and ordinances. 
Section 821. - Registration of non-complying lots, structures and uses. 
In order to obtain any of the rights and statuses granted under article VIII, owners and occupants of non-complying lots, structures and uses must register with the planning department on forms prepared by the planning department. This registration must be filed within 15 days of the notification to such owner or occupant of the commencement of an enforcement action relating to such owner or occupant's non-complying lot, structure or use by any governmental agency. Any non-complying lots, structures or uses not so registering shall not be entitled to the granting of any status or right under article VIII, and shall be subject to all enforcement provisions of this ordinance or any other laws, rules, regulations, codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 822. - Exemption for certain lots with dwellings. 
Notwithstanding the other provisions of article VIII, recombinations of lots shall not be required when such recombinations will result in more than one dwelling or principal structure being situated on a single lot. 
Section 823. - Report of planning director. 
At each meeting of the county commission, the planning director shall report to the county commission a list of the lots, structures and uses approved under article VIII since the previous county commission meeting. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
ARTICLE IX. - ENFORCEMENT 

Section 900. - Provisions of ordinance declared to be minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. 
Section 901. - Complaints regarding violations. 
Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, a written complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof may be filed by any person or county agency with the planning director. The planning director shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take such action thereon as provided by this ordinance. 
Section 902. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person or entity that violates any provision of this ordinance or fails to comply with the requirements thereof shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition pay the costs of such action. Each day such a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The owner or tenant premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, attorney, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains any such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(b)  If any structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained in violation of this ordinance, the county commission, planning director or the county administrator may institute an action in the magistrate court of Bryan County or seek a restraining order, temporary or permanent injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to: 
(i)  Prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion maintenance or use; 
(ii)  Correct or abate such violation; and 
(iii)  Prevent the occupancy of such structure or lot. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
ARTICLE X. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY 

Section 1000. - Uses and structures prohibited and allowed in required setbacks and yards. 
(a)  No principal structure shall be located within any setback or yard required by this ordinance, except as provided herein. 
(b)  Except as provided herein, no accessory structure shall be located within any front setback, or within ten feet of a lot line in an established side or rear yard. Piers, docks, and other water-dependent accessory structures may be located in any required setback or yard on lots which abut a body of water or marsh. A fence, wall, mailbox, power pole, light pole, patio at grade, paths, walkways, or berms may be located in any required setback or yard. Signs may be located in a required setback or yard which abuts a road. 
(c)  No outdoor storage of goods and materials, including mechanical equipment, structures on a permanent foundation or refuse containers shall be located within any required setback, or within any required side yard which abuts a road, except for the temporary placement of refuse containers for curbside pick-up. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2010) 
Section 1001. - More than one principal structure per lot. 
(a)  Commercial. More than one principal structure devoted to non-residential uses may be situated on a lot, provided that: 
(i)  An unobstructed accessway at least 15 feet wide is maintained from a road to each structure for use by service and emergency vehicles; and 
(ii)  Each structure on the lot is separated from any other structure on the lot by at least four feet. 
(b)  Residential. Except in manufactured home parks, planned unit developments or condominiums, only one principal structure and its customary accessory structures may hereafter be erected on any lot. Any dwelling, including site built dwellings, manufactured homes, mobile homes or modular homes, shall be deemed to be a principal structure. 
Section 1002. - Fences and walls situated in residential areas. 
The following restrictions apply to all fences and walls except for those located in a B-2, C-I, I-L, I-1, PUD or WB-3 zoning districts: 
(a)  No fence or wall located in a required setback shall be built to a height more than eight feet above grade, except in BN, B-1 or O zoning districts which can be a maximum height of ten feet above grade. 
(b)  The capital of a fence post or column may extend up to two feet above the maximum height limit. 
(c)  No fence or wall may be constructed which will block or impede the flow of stormwater runoff within a storm drainage easement. 
(d)  All fences and walls located at road intersections shall conform to the sight requirements at intersections outlined in the Bryan County Code. 
Section 1003. - Home occupations. 
If it [home occupations] is a permitted use within a zoning district it shall be submitted to the county administrator or his or her designee for review and approval if the criteria are met. it will be provided to the board of commissioners for informational purposes. If it requires a conditional use, it shall be reviewed by the planning commission and forwarded to the board of commissioners for review and approval. If deemed necessary, a code compliance officer shall inspect the premises and report to the appropriate authority to ensure the below listed requirements are met prior to approval. A code compliance officer shall have the right to inspect home occupation sites on an annual basis. 
(a)  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of a dwelling and must not change the essential residential character of the dwelling. 
(b)  Use of a dwelling for a home occupation shall be limited to no more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the total dwelling. 
(c)  An accessory structure shall not be used in connection with a home occupation in the R-30 and R-1 zoning districts. 
(d)  Accessory structures may be used connection with a home occupation within A-5, AR 2.5, AR-1.5 and AR-1 zoning districts. 
(e)  No chemical, mechanical, or electrical equipment that is not normally found in residential dwellings may be used for a home occupation, except for office equipment, such as computers, facsimile machines or copiers. 
(f)  No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of a dwelling shall be permitted. 
(g)  Only residents of a dwelling and one non-resident may be engaged in the home occupation. 
(h)  No display of products shall be visible from a road and only products made on the premises may be sold on the premises. 
(i)  Machinery greater than 20 horsepower, or machinery which causes interference in the communication reception of others, is prohibited. 
(j)  Only a vehicle whose operator is required to have a Class C driver's license can be parked on site in connection with the conduct of a home occupation. Any vehicle other than a passenger vehicle or trailer larger than 10,000 pounds shall be parked or stored within an enclosed structure if the lot size is smaller than 1½ acres, so as to completely screen the vehicle or trailer from view of adjacent property and from the road. No more than one vehicle other than a passenger vehicle used in the conduct of the home occupation shall be parked on premises. 
(k)  If signage on the vehicle exceeds total signage area of driver and passenger front doors, then said vehicle shall be parked in an area of the premises, enclosed garage, or accessory structure that would shield the vehicle from view from the street. 
(k)  The number of vehicles parked by clients, patrons, employees or business related visitors at the site of a home occupation shall be limited to three at any given time. 
(l)  One sign shall be permitted on the parcel for identification of a home occupation as follows: 
(i)  The sign shall be not be illuminated; and 
(ii)  The sign shall be no more than two square feet in size. 
(m)  No disturbance or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, traffic hazard, unhealthy or unsightly condition or nuisance shall be created by a home occupation. 
(n)  On an annual basis at the time of the occupational tax renewal(s), the holder of a home occupation permit shall certify to the planning director that there has been no change in the home occupation as originally permitted. 
(o)  If the nature or scope of the home occupation changes or if complaints are filed with the planning director, the county commission upon report from the planning director may reconsider any previously granted home occupation permit. 
(Ord. of 1-6-2004; Ord. of 4-6-2010; Ord. of 10-13-2015) 
Section 1004. - Home business offices. 
[Home business offices] shall be submitted to the county administrator or his or her designee for review and approval if all of the criteria of (a) through (i) below are met. The compliance officer shall have the right to inspect the premises on an annual basis to ensure compliance. The home business office shall be submitted to the board of commissioners for informational purposes. 
(a)  There shall be no sign or external indication of the home business office. 
(b)  No more than one vehicle used in the conduct of the home business office shall be parked at the premises. If signage on this vehicle exceeds in total signage area the space on the driver and passenger front doors of said vehicle, then said vehicle shall be parked in an area of the premises, or in an enclosed garage of other accessory structure that would shield the vehicle from view from the street. 
(c)  Only office supplies and household items normally found in the home may be stored on the premises. 
(d)  No detached accessory building will be allowed. 
(e)  The home business office may occupy no more than 25 percent of the floor area of the principal structure. 
(f)  The home business office must be located in the principal structure. 
(g)  Only residents of the dwelling may engage in work at the home business office. 
(h)  Customers shall not visit the home business office. 
(i)  On an annual basis at the time of occupational tax renewal(s), the holder of a home business office permit shall certify to the planning director that there have been no changes in the home business office as originally permitted. 
(j)  If the scope or nature of the home business office changes or if complaints are filed with the planning director, the planning director shall have the option of revoking the home occupation permit. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 1-6-2004; Ord. of 4-6-2010; Ord. of 10-13-2015) 
Section 1005. - Towing and recovery service operation. 
Any person applying for a business license for towing and/or for a wrecker service should provide, previous to the issuance of the license, documentation which indicates ownership of or a contract with a storage facility for vehicles that is approved by the planning and zoning department. 
(Ord. of 2-11-2014) 
Section 1006. - Junk yards. 
(a)  No junk yards shall be permitted closer than 300 feet to any R-30, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or AR-1 zoning districts. 
(b)  All junk yards must be completely screened by a solid fence or wall a minimum of eight feet above grade. All such fences must be perpetually maintained in good condition and, except for masonry fences or walls, must be painted. 
(c)  No operations shall be conducted at a junk yard which may cause a nuisance or endanger the public health. 
(d)  There shall be no temporary or permanent storage at a junk yard of vehicles or junk outside the fence or wall required by section 1005(b). 
(e)  All junk yards which are in existence on the effective date of this ordinance, shall be required to meet all the conditions set forth in subsections (b), (c) and (d) above within three years from the effective date of this ordinance. 
Section 1007. - Minimum living area. 
Except for guest houses and accessory living units, no structure, including, but not limited to, multiple family dwelling units intended for residential use shall be constructed or placed which has a total living area of less than 525 square feet per dwelling unit. 
Section 1008. - Guest houses or accessory living units. 
A guest house or accessory living unit shall be permitted as an accessory use on any lot on which a detached single-family dwelling unit exists in accordance with all applicable codes and regulations, including, but not limited to, building, health, and zoning as well as the following requirements: 
(a)  The guest house or accessory living unit must be clearly subordinate to the principal structure and must be of a design and construction allowed in the zoning district and be of a similar design and construction as the principal structure. 
(b)  The minimum lot size for a lot on which a guest house or accessory living unit is situated shall be no less than one acre, unless the lot is serviced by community water, in which case the minimum lot size can be reduced to 30,000 square feet. 
(c)  Adequate on-site parking is required and shall be provided for the guest house or accessory living unit based on the proposed size and/or anticipated number of persons utilizing the structure. 
(d)  No guest house or accessory living unit can have floor area of more than 40 percent of the square footage of the entire area under roof of the primary dwelling, and in no case shall a guest house or accessory living unit exceed 2,000 square feet in size. 
(e)  No more than one structure serving either as a guest house or accessory living unit may be located on a lot. 
(f)  The guest house or accessory living unit must be owned by the owner of the principal structure. 
(g)  The guest house or accessory living unit must not be served by a driveway separate from the driveway serving the principal structure. 
(h)  The guest house or accessory living unit must be situated to the rear or side of the principal structure and must meet the minimum setbacks required for the principal structure. 
(h)  The height of a guest house or accessory living unit cannot extend higher than the principal structure as measured from grade. 
(i)  The guest house or accessory living unit must be served by and through the same utility lines and meters that serve the principal structure. 
(j)  All guest houses or accessory living units must be attached to a permanent foundation. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 1-11-2011) 
Section 1009. - Adult bookstores, adult entertainment establishments, adult theaters. 
(a)  Adult bookstores, adult entertainment establishments and adult theaters may be permitted in the B-2 zoning district as a conditional use upon approval by the county commission after finding that the following location requirements have been complied with: No adult bookstore, adult entertainment establishment, or adult theater, as defined by this ordinance and herein collectively referred to as "adult uses," shall be located as follows: 
(i)  Within 1,500 feet of the property line of a residential dwelling; 
(ii)  Within 500 feet of the property line of any public library; 
(iii)  Within 600 feet from the property line of any church, shrine, chapel or mortuary, or other place used for religious services; 
(iv)  Within 1,000 feet of the property line of any school or college campus. The schools and colleges referred to herein shall include only such public, private or church-supported schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and shall not include private schools or colleges wherein only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, vocational occupational, and other special subjects are taught; 
(v)  Within 1,000 feet of a regular stop where a school bus for the transportation of school children in the public schools of the county shall board or discharge passengers; 
(vi)  Within 1,000 feet of any other adult use; or 
(vii)  Within 500 feet of any intersection with an average daily traffic count of 15,000 vehicles or greater. 
(b)  The distance restrictions set out above shall apply in any and all directions from the property lines of the proposed adult use, as measured in a straight line. This distance shall be verified by a plat prepared by a surveyor and furnished by the applicant. This plat shall accompany and be made a part of the application under this section. 
(c)  Any adult use existing at the effective date of this ordinance is deemed to be a non-conforming use. Such non-conforming use shall be subject to the requirements of article VIII of this ordinance. 
(d)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize or legalize the selling, lending, renting, leasing, giving, advertising, publishing or other dissemination to any person or persons, of any book, magazine, movie film, still picture or any other written material, pornographic matter, novelty, device or related sundry item which is obscene material under the law of the State of Georgia. 
(e)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize or legalize any act of prostitution, sodomy, solicitation for sodomy, masturbation for hire or distribution of obscene materials, as those acts are defined under federal, state or county laws. 
Section 1010. - Parking or storage of major recreational equipment. 
For purposes of this ordinance, "major recreational equipment" is defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, motor coaches, tent trailers, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. Major recreational equipment may be parked or stored only in side or rear yards, in a carport or in an enclosed building, except in A-5 or AR-2.5 zoning districts; provided, however, that such equipment may be parked anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed 24 hours during loading or unloading. In the case of a corner lot, no major recreational equipment may be parked or stored in the side yard on the road side of the lot. Major recreational equipment shall not be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes, except when parked in a campground, park or other facility approved for such uses. 
Section 1011. - Parking and storage of vehicles and certain commercial vehicles. 
(a)  No vehicles may be parked, stored or maintained on any public road or public road right-of-way, except where parallel parking on the public road was provided in the approved design of the public road. 
(b)  Commercial highway tractors or trailers, wreckers, earth moving equipment, logging trucks or trailers, farm tractors, dump trucks or any commercial vehicle with greater than 30,000 gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) are prohibited from being parked, stored or maintained in R-30, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts. 
(c)  Commercial highway tractors or trailers, wreckers, earth moving equipment, logging trucks or trailers, farm tractors, dump trucks or any commercial vehicle with greater than 30,000 gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) are prohibited from being parked, stored or maintained in AR-1 zoning districts, except where the lot on which such vehicle is parked, stored or maintained is at least 1.5 acres in size. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 1012. - Storing or parking of junk. 
Except as permitted by this ordinance in certain zoning districts, the storing or parking of junk is prohibited. 
Section 1013. - Off-street parking requirements. 
In all zoning districts, at the time of the establishment of or change to a use as listed on the list of permitted uses in article XI, or erection of any structure, or at the time any principal structure is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, or floor area, there shall be provided permanent off-street parking spaces, improved with an asphalt or concrete surface, in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Combination of required parking space. The required space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except where the parking space required for churches or other assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night, on Sunday, or otherwise, does not coincide with an adjacent use, said required parking may be assigned to the adjacent use. 
(b)  Proximity of off-street parking spaces to use. All required parking for all uses shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the structure (or open use area) it is to serve; provided, however, that no required parking spaces may be located across any public road from the use it is intended to serve. 
(c)  Requirements for design of parking lots. 
(i)  Except for lots devoted to one- and two-family residential uses, all areas devoted to off-road parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a road to obtain access. 
(ii)  Each parking space shall not be less than nine feet wide by 18 feet long, except that handicapped spaces shall comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(d)  Off-road parking requirements by use. In addition to the number of spaces required by the Americans with Disabilities Act, the minimum number of off-road parking spaces required for each type use shall be determined by the following: 
(i)  Single-family, two-family and townhouse dwellings: Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
(ii)  Multifamily dwellings: The aggregate of: 
a.  One and one-half spaces for each studio or one bedroom dwelling unit; plus 
b.  One and three-quarters spaces for each two bedroom dwelling unit; plus 
c.  Two spaces for each dwelling unit having three or more bedrooms. 
(iii)  Group dwellings: One space for each two rooms to be rented. 
(iv)  Motels: One space for each room to be rented, plus one additional space for each 400 square feet of floor area devoted to meeting space, restaurants and administrative offices. 
(v)  Medical and dental clinics: One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
(vi)  Hospitals: One space for each two beds intended for patient's use, exclusive of bassinets, plus one space for each three employees, including doctors. 
(vii)  Schools: One space for each classroom and administrative office, plus one additional space for each six seats in the largest assembly area or room. 
(viii)  Daycare centers, preschools: One space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
(ix)  Auditorium, theaters, churches, funeral homes and similar places of public assembly: One space for each four seats, or 12 feet of benches, or per 30 square feet of usable floor area in the largest assembly room, plus one space for each 200 square feet of floor or ground area used for amusement, entertainment or assembly, exclusive of the major assembly room. 
(x)  General and professional offices, banks and other financial service establishments, insurance and real estate offices: One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
(xi)  Automobile service station, auto and truck repairs or maintenance: Five spaces for each service bay, plus one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to retail sales or showroom. 
(xii)  Automobile, truck, mobile home, recreational vehicle, and utility structure sales: One space for each 600 square feet of gross floor area of indoor sales and showroom space, plus one space for each 2,500 square feet of outdoor display area, plus five spaces for each service bay devoted to vehicle repairs or maintenance. 
(xiii)  Restaurants: One space per 150 square feet of gross floor area. (For drive-in restaurants, one space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area.) 
(xiv)  Commercial retail and service uses not listed above: One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area and outdoor display area. 
(xv)  Wholesale, office-warehouse and business park uses: One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area and outdoor display area devoted to sales or office area, plus one space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area devoted to storage. 
(xvi)  Warehouse and storage uses: one space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(xvii)  Industrial uses: One space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area. 
(e)  Restriction on use of required parking. The required off-road parking shall be for employees, occupants, clients and visitors and shall be limited in use to temporary storage of motor vehicles with current license plates. The storage of merchandise or vehicles for sale, the servicing or repairing of vehicles or equipment and regular truck loading and unloading thereon is prohibited. 
(f)  Administrative variation of parking requirements. The number of parking spaces required by this section may be increased or decreased upon approval by the planning director based on the actual use of a property. 
Section 1014. - Conversion of dwellings. 
The conversion of any structure into a dwelling, or the conversion of any dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or families, shall be permitted only within a zoning district in which a new structure of similar occupancy would be permitted under this ordinance, and only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new construction in such zoning district, including, but not limited to, minimum living area, minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit, percentage of lot coverage, dimensions of yards and other open spaces, and off-road parking. 
Section 1015. - Reserved. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2005) 
Section 1016. - Parking and storing of structures. 
Unless otherwise authorized in this ordinance or the building code, no trailer, mobile home, manufactured home, modular home or any structure being moved shall be parked or stored on a lot for more than 48 hours. 
Section 1017. - Swimming pools and ponds. 
(a)  Swimming pools situated on a residential lot and designed for use by a single family must meet the setbacks for accessory structures for the zoning district in which the pool is situated. The pool must have a barrier of not less than four feet in height. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an above ground pool, the pool may be considered as part or all of the barrier or the barrier may be mounted on top of the pool structure to meet the required height. If the means of access for an above ground pool is a ladder or steps, the ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access. All gates shall be self-closing with positive latch devices to insure the pool is enclosed and secure at all times. 
(b)  All other swimming pools, their contiguous decking and accessory structures shall not be closer than 100 feet to any property line and shall be enclosed by a barrier of not less than five feet in height. All gates shall be self-closing with positive latch devices to ensure the pool is enclosed and secure at all times. 
(c)  Class A ponds must be located in an A-5 or AR-2.5 zoning district, situated on a lot of at least five acres with all pond banks at least 50 feet from any property line. However, contiguous ponds situated on separate lots are exempt from the setback requirements for their common boundaries. Slopes of all pond banks shall not be greater than one foot vertical drop for each three feet of horizontal run. Pond bank construction shall continue past the low water surface mark along the edge of bank for a minimum horizontal distance of 15 feet into the pond. Wetland delineation is required where wetlands are present. Setback from any state water shall be as required by part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. 
(d)  Class B ponds can be situated only in A-5, AR-2.5, AR-1.5 or AR-1 zoning districts, must be set back at least 50 feet from all property lines. Slopes of all pond banks shall not be greater than one foot vertical drop for each three feet of horizontal run. Pond bank construction shall continue past the low water surface mark along the edge of bank for a minimum horizontal distance of 15 feet into the pond. Wetland delineation is required where wetlands are present. Setback from any state water shall be as required by part 6 [of] article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. 
(e)  Class C ponds shall be considered a swimming pool and meet all swimming pool requirements. 
(f)  Class D ponds can be installed in any zoning districts and must meet the setbacks required for accessory structures. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004; Ord. of 7-10-2012) 
Section 1018. - Setbacks - kennel, commercial and animal shelters (private). 
(a)  Building requirements will be the same as "principle building requirements" by zone. 
(b)  Minimum buffer requirement for all kennels, commercial and animal shelters will be 30 feet on all sides and will be the same as stated in chapter 13, section 514.03. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2010) 
Section 1019. - Design Credits. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage developers to exceed certain minimum design requirements of the subdivision regulations and the engineering standards in order to better protect the health, safety and welfare of residents of subdivisions and other residents of the county. To achieve this purpose, design credit points (DCPS) will be awarded to developers for exceeding the minimum design requirements for certain design categories and upon reaching various levels of total DCPS, developers will be allowed flexibility in the required minimum lot width at building line and resulting required road frontage. 
(b)  Categories and points. DCPS shall be calculated according to the following schedule: 

 
  
(c)  Reduction for DCPS. The required lot width at building line can be reduced as follows: For every ten points of DCPS, a reduction of one percent of minimum lot width at building line otherwise required in a zoning district will be granted up to a maximum reduction of 20 percent. Such reduced minimum lot width at building line will be used for determining minimum required road frontage (except for cul-de-sac and exterior corner lots) under article V of the subdivision regulations. 
(d)  Required items. An applicant seeking reduction of minimum lot width at building line under this section shall submit an application to the planning director, such application must include a detailed analysis of the design categories and DCPS that the applicant contends should be awarded to him for the subject subdivision. 
(e)  Initial calculation of DCPS by planning director. After viewing the application and supporting analysis submitted by an applicant, the planning director shall calculate the recommended applicable DCPS. In making this calculation, the planning director shall have the authority to request input and comment from such agencies and officials as he deems necessary to better determine his calculations. The planning director shall submit his recommended calculations of DCPS, along with supporting data to the county commission. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(h)  Tentative determination of DCPS by county commission. After considering the recommendation of the planning director and any other data it deems relevant, the county commission shall tentatively establish the amount of DCPS to be awarded to the applicant for the subject subdivision. 
(i)  Final determination of DCPS by planning director. Contemporaneously with its approval of a final plat pursuant to section 1212 of the subdivision regulations, if the planning director finds that the developer has either completed the subdivision improvements relating to DCPS as tentatively approved by the county commission or has executed a letter of credit acceptable to the county commission securing the completion of such improvements, the planning director shall establish the amount of DCPS to be awarded to the applicant for the subject subdivision. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 1020. - Arterial roads. 
Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to preserve and enhance the appearance and operational characteristics of arterial roads within Bryan County. 
Definition. The "arterial road development standards overlay district" is defined as the area of land along major arterial roads within Bryan County. These regulations will apply to all parcels, properties, tracts and developments with frontages along Black Creek Church Road, Belfast River Road, Belfast Keller Road, Eldora Road, Harris Trail, Highway 203, Highway 80, Highway 280, Highway 119, Highway 67, Highway 144, Highway 144 Spur, I-16, I-95, and Oak Level Road and measured along all intersecting public road frontages for a distance to the nearest property line beyond 300 feet from the intersection of Black Creek Church Road, Belfast River Road, Belfast Keller Road, Eldora Road, Harris Trail, Highway 204, Highway 80, Highway 119, Highway 67, Highway 144, Highway 144 Spur, I-16, I-95, Highway 280 and Oak Level Road. 
Signage. The following types of signs are permitted, provided: 
1.  The conditions attached thereto are met; 
2.  Required setbacks for the sign type are met; 
3.  The sign is installed in accordance with the structural and safety requirements of the building code, and a building permit is obtained, if applicable. 
(A)  Permanent freestanding signs. 
1.  A property or development will be permitted only one ground-type sign, except that double frontage lots with more than 500 feet of frontage on each of two major highways will be permitted a second freestanding sign with a total message area not to exceed 50 percent of that allowed for the first sign and located a minimum of 250 feet from the adjacent sign located on the double frontage lot. Distance will be measured from the outer edge of the sign and/or supporting structure. 
2.  These standards include properties with multiple detached structures, except that outparcels which in themselves meet the minimum road frontage requirements for a lot in the applicable zoning classification and will be permitted one ground-type sign. Outparcels will not be deemed to overlap or to share frontage or area in any way with other outparcels or with the larger property of which they are a part. Outparcel(s) which would reduce the road frontage of a double frontage lot would not be approved without removal of the additional sign permitted herein. 
3.  On a developed lot without road frontage, one ground-type sign will be permitted. The signs will not exceed ten feet in height and 50 square feet in message area. The sign will be located on the adjacent lot which has road frontage on the road where in ingress and egress for the business is located, and written permission will be obtained from the property owner of the road frontage lot. 
4.  Banners are only permitted as temporary freestanding signs when they are noncommercial signs calling attention to events of general civic interest. 
5.  No freestanding sign will be nearer than 75 feet to any other freestanding sign or within any access sight triangle. 
6.  The message area of a sign includes, for example, the name(s) and logo(s) of the business(es) and/or the principal product or service; other copy; background, including any internally lighted area; borders; projections; and salient. 
7.  The maximum single message area permitted will be applied to the area of the plane view (elevation) of the largest single-message area of the sign, when the area is enclosed by the shortest perimeter encompassing all the parts of the message area, exclusive of the supports. 
8.  Sign area will be the area of the plane view (elevation) of the largest single-side of the sign when the area is enclosed by the shortest perimeter encompassing the message area and the area of the supporting or decorative structure. 
The following table contains sign specifications by size and type of development: 
Sign Specification Allowance* 

 
*Specifications: All signs must be ground-type identification signs. 
A.  Maximum total message area in square feet combining all message areas. 
B.  Maximum single message area in square feet. 
C.  Maximum height of the sign base above grade in linear feet. The sign base is the portion of the supporting structure of the sign below the lowest point on any message area. The sign base must equal the width of the sign. 
D.  Maximum total height of the sign in linear feet including the height of the supporting structure of the sign and all message areas of the sign. 
E.  Maximum total width of the sign in linear feet including the width of the supporting structure of the sign. 
*Sizes and Type of Developments. 
(1)  Major commercial. A development containing 45,000 or more square feet of commercial floor space. 
(2)  Secondary commercial. A development containing 15,000 square feet of commercial floor space or more, but less than 45,000 square feet of commercial floor space. 
(3)  Minor commercial. A development containing 5,000 square feet of commercial floor space or more, but less than 15,000 square feet of commercial floor space. 
(4)  Small commercial. A development containing less than 5,000 square feet of commercial floor space. 
(5)  Major residential. A development containing 300 or more residential units. 
(6)  Secondary residential. A development containing 150 or more, but less than 300 residential units. 
(7)  Minor residential. A development containing less than 150 residential units. 
Commercial floor space will include all usable, completely enclosed, interior floor space area under roofs in the principal building or buildings on the lot. It will not include floor space in accessory buildings or exterior floor space under roofs. 
(B)  Wall signs. Wall signage is permitted at the rate of one square foot of signage per linear foot of building width of that wall to which the signs are attached. No single wall sign may exceed 200 square feet. The aggregate wall signage plus window signage will not exceed 20 percent of that wall area to which the signs are attached. 
(C)  Temporary wall signs. Temporary wall signs will be permitted provided: 
1.  No more than one sign may be displayed at any one time, and no more than six during any 12-month period. 
2.  The area of each temporary wall sign will not exceed 12 square feet. 
3.  Banners are permitted as temporary commercial signs only when used as wall signs. Examples are banners advertising "Grand Opening", "Sale" or "Going Out of Business". 
4.  Temporary signs may be displayed for up to a total of 30 consecutive days. 
(D)  Sign illumination. Externally lighted signs will be illuminated by "white", steady, stationary lights and will not have light-reflected backgrounds, but may have light-reflecting lettering. LED and/or electronic message boards are permitted provided: 
(1)  Automatic sign brightness adjustment devices or photocells are installed so that the sign will not negatively impact adjacent property uses or create a traffic hazard, and 
(2)  The material displayed must cycle at a rate of not less than eight seconds, and 
(3)  Transition of displayed material must be instantaneous without creating the appearance of flashing, movement or animation. 
Bufferyards. The following standards are in addition to the bufferyard requirements contained within this chapter. These standards do not apply to single-family residential lots. 
(A)  Street bufferyard: Commercial/Industrial: The required minimum area for commercial and industrial use bufferyards shall be measured toward the interior of the property from the road right-of-way of streets and will be 50 feet in width. Four understory trees, four canopy trees, and twelve shrubs will be planted per 100 linear feet of road frontage. All trees must be a minimum of six feet tall and two inches in caliper measured one foot from ground level at installation. 
Street bufferyard: Residential: The required minimum area for residential and multi-family use bufferyards shall be measured toward the interior of the property from the road right-of-way of streets and will be 100 feet in width. Eight understory trees, eight canopy trees, and twenty-four shrubs will be planted per 100 linear feet of road frontage. All trees must be a minimum of six feet tall and two inches in caliper measured one foot from ground level at installation. However, the distance and planting may be reduced by 50% if an appropriate landscape and berm package is submitted that adequately shields the houses from the public view shed along existing corridors. 
(B)  Bufferyards; all others. Required bufferyards along perimeter property lines will conform to the standards listed in the bufferyard requirements of this chapter. 
(C)  Mature tree retention. Mature tree protection fencing will be erected prior to any construction activity to provide protection for any existing trees within required bufferyards. All existing deciduous trees, located inside a required bufferyard, with a size greater than four inches in diameter measured four and one-half feet from ground level must be preserved unless the zoning administrator approves, in advance, the removal of the trees. 
(D)  Maintenance. Required buffers will not be disturbed for any reason except for permitted signs, driveways, sidewalks, or other pedestrian or bicycle paths, walls, fences, or required landscaping, landscaping maintenance and replacement, or maintenance and construction of utility lines and drainage features that cross the bufferyard. 
Where utility or drainage easements exist along property lines, the buffer shall be located adjacent to the easement and may be reduced by the width of the easement on the property where the buffer is required or 25 percent of the required buffer width, whichever is smaller. 
Off-street parking. The following standards are in addition to the off-street parking requirements of this article: 
(A)  Definitions. For the purpose of these regulations, an off-street parking space is an asphalt or concrete area, not in a street, alley, or in front of a garage entrance, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one vehicle and connected with a street or alley by an asphalt or concrete driveway which affords ingress and egress, except that these regulations will not apply to single-family detached dwellings or manufactured homes (outside of parks). 
Alternative engineered porous paving surfaces may be approved by the Bryan County Planning and Zoning Administrator and the Bryan County Engineer. 
Additionally, permitted small businesses and multifamily projects in any zoning district will be exempt from paving when the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The required number of parking spaces is ten or less. 
(2)  The required handicap parking spaces, walkways, and driveway apron are paved; 
(3)  Any future expansion or change in use dictating more than ten required parking spaces will require the developer to pave all required parking and access drives, existing and proposed. 
(B)  Dimensions. Parking stalls will be not less than nine feet by 19 feet. The length may be reduced by two feet when protective devices (curbing or curb stops) are provided. However, the overhang will not extend into the required bufferyards, required landscaped areas, required accessibility or other similar areas. However, the dimensions of all parallel parking stalls will not be less than nine feet by 24 feet. Handicapped parking stalls will not be less than eight feet by 19 feet with a five-foot aisle separation (13 feet by 19 feet overall). All parking spaces will be located so as to insure adequate off-street maneuvering space. 
(C)  Access identification/separation. Approved barriers will be provided along boundaries to control entrance and exit of vehicles or pedestrians. Off-street parking spaces will be separated from walkways, sidewalks, streets, alleys and required yards by a wall, fence, or curbing. 
(D)  Landscaping/maintenance. Ten percent of the developed area (paved, gravel, building areas) will be open and landscaped in a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving with islands and barriers. These areas must be located throughout the parking area and cannot be placed around the parking lot perimeter unless approved by the board of zoning appeals. 
For every ten required off-street parking spaces, a minimum of one tree and three shrubs, 18 inches in height at installation, must be planted within each of the required islands and barriers of the parking area. All trees will be a minimum of six feet tall and two inches in caliper, measured one foot from ground level at installation. 
Off-street parking areas will be maintained in a clean, orderly, and weed-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee and not used for the sale, repair or dismantling or servicing of any vehicles or equipment, except for service and auto repair stations. 
(E)  Lighting. Adequate lighting will be provided if off-street parking spaces are to be used at night. Equipment for lighting parking facilities will be arranged so that light does not interfere with traffic, is shielded or directed away from adjoining residences, and produces no glare across residential property boundaries. 
(F)  Marking. Parking spaces in lots of more than ten spaces will be marked by painted lines to indicate individual spaces. Signs or markers, as approved by the zoning administrator, will be used as necessary to insure efficient traffic operation of the lot. All parking facilities, except single-family detached and duplex dwellings, will be designed so that all existing movements onto a public street are in a forward motion. 
(G)  Loading docks and dumpsters. Loading docks and dumpsters will be screened from the view of the arterial traffic flow. 
Road corridor preservation. No building, structure, or facility shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, added to, or structurally altered so as to impact the minimum right-of-way needed to preserve a corridor for road widening and improvement projects established through the Bryan County Transportation Sales Tax Program, the Bryan County Capital Improvements Plan, the Regional Area Transportation Study Transportation Improvement Program, or any anticipated GDOT and federal highway transportation project. 
When a future alignment for a road improvement has been established by the appropriate reviewing agency, the setback and bufferyard requirements shall be applied to the approved alignment. Where an alignment for expanding an existing road or highway has not been determined, no construction or development shall occur on properties within the limits of the projected corridor until a final alignment has been determined by the appropriate agency or until the Bryan County Planning and Zoning Department and the Bryan County Engineering Department has determined that the proposed construction or development will not have a negative impact on the future alignment or corridor. 
When a future alignment or improvement will require the acquisition of right-of-way from a parcel that will reduce the parcel's minimum lot size below the zoning district's minimum lot size requirement the plat may be approved for recordation without the need for a variance by the board of zoning appeals. The future development of vacant lots or the redevelopment of parcels must meet all other appropriate development standards for the zoning district and the use of the property or variations granted by the board of zoning appeals. 
Grandfather clause. These standards are in addition to the nonconforming uses section of this chapter. The construction of a new principal structure or the conversion of an existing structure into a nonresidential permitted use will require the property to be brought into compliance with the requirements contained herein. 
(Ord. of 3-14-2017(1)) 
ARTICLE XI. - USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS 

Section 1100. - "A-5" Agricultural Districts. 
District intent: The purpose of this district is to conserve natural resources and open space of land while permitting low density residential development compatible with that purpose. General farming and forestry growth are the primary activities to be conducted within this district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  One-family dwellings, including manufactured homes with their customary uses. 
(ii)  Agricultural or horticultural uses. 
(iii)  Accessory farm uses, including the sale of products grown on the premises and the keeping of farm animals. 
(iv)  All commercial agricultural pursuits, and structures incidental thereto, including farm animals and products, field crops, truck crops, horticultural specialties and forestry. Processing of agricultural products is limited to products produced on premises. 
(v)  Churches. 
(vi)  Home occupations, home business offices and family day care homes. 
(vii)  A landing strip for use by one single engine aircraft. 
(viii)  Non-commercial kennels. 
(ix)  Unlighted, regulation-size or par three golf courses, including normal club house and pro shop activities, and other business activity associated with country clubs. 
(x)  Bed and breakfast. 
(xi)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses and any conditional uses permitted by the county commission. 
(xii)  Simulated combat course for paintball gun users. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(i)  Commercial riding stables, horses, provided that no building or enclosure for animals is located closer than 100 feet from any property line. 
(ii)  Cemeteries. 
(iii)  Public utilities substation or subinstallations, including water towers. Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or chain-link fence or wall at least eight feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is no office, commercial operation or storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility. (Minimum lot area does not apply.) 
(iv)  Processing of agricultural products produced off premises. 
(v)  Airfields, together with subordinate uses, except that a landing strip for one single engine aircraft based on the property is a permitted use. 
(vi)  Schools. 
(vii)  Group dwellings (not more than eight residents). 
(viii)  Day care center. 
(ix)  Group homes (not more than eight residents). 
(x)  Camps, camp grounds and parks. 
(xi)  Excavation or mining of sand, gravel or other natural materials. 
(xii)  Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
(xiii)  Solar Farm: Solar Energy Systems (SES) provided: 
1.  The solar farm consists of a minimum of 25 acres; 
2.  Any portion of the solar farm property boundary is within two miles of an existing electrical transmission line; and 
3.  A conceptual plan which illustrates that the solar farm can meet the design and development standards set forth in this section. 
4.  Bryan County Board of Commissioners may require, at its sole discretion, a development agreement between the county and developers for properties developed as solar farms or utilizing solar energy systems as a prerequisite to development plan approval. 
Unless a deviation from such restrictions are provided elsewhere in this chapter, property approved as solar farm conditional use shall be required to adhere to all provisions of the Bryan County Zoning Ordinance and Land Development Regulations otherwise applicable within the underlying zoning district, including all subdivision plats and development plan applications. 
Design and Development Standards. The establishment and operation of a solar farm shall comply with the following design and development standards: 
Bufferyard: 

 
*Single Family Dwelling and all other residential use buffers may, at the board of commissioners' discretion, be increased, or reduced with an approved berm and or landscaping and screening plan, which will screen the solar farm equipment from being seen from the exterior of the property. 
*Street buffer may, at the board of commissioner's discretion, be reduced to 50 feet with an approved berm and or landscaping and screening plan, which will screen the solar farm equipment from being seen from the exterior of the property; 
This buffer is separate and distinct from the buffering requirement of Bryan County Zoning Ordinance and shall be measured from the property line. Only the following activities shall be permitted within the landscaped buffer: 
1.  Vehicular access drives which tie into approved access points as determined by GDOT and/or Bryan County; 
2.  Landscaping and landscaping fixtures; 
3.  Lighting; 
4.  Fencing; 
5.  Signage. 
Landscaping/Screening Requirements: In addition to buffering, screening shall be required by providing landscape within the buffer which achieves a full screening of all proposed site improvements with a minimum height of ten feet within three years. The intent is to provide sufficient screening, through a combination of buffers, fencing, landscaping, and/or landscaped berms to obscure the solar equipment from exterior view from adjoining property owners and public right of ways. 
A visually opaque screen shall be provided for any adjacent property that is zoned Residential, has an existing residential use, and/or has been subdivided to five acres or less (these are protected properties). An opaque screen is intended to exclude a visual contact with the solar equipment from any protected property, public street or public right of way. An opaque screen may be composed of a wall, fence, building, landscaping, landscaped beam, or combination thereof. Natural areas as detailed below may also be used to meet screening requirements. 
Natural areas: An existing vegetated area located on the same property as the solar farm; is within or includes the required buffer; and is of sufficient height, length, and depth and contains adequate and sufficient healthy vegetation to provide a visually opaque screen where required. The planning director may determine that further screening improvements shall not be required. 
Setbacks: The setbacks for solar equipment associated with the solar energy system shall be 25 feet larger than the applicable bufferyard to allow for an access road around the perimeter of the property. 
Fencing: A security fence shall be required at least six feet in height to secure the solar equipment unless a taller fence is needed in order to obscure the solar equipment from exterior view the fence can be on top of the berm in order to achieve this goal. A chain link fence shall not be allowed unless it is screened from exterior view from adjoining property owners and public rights-of-way; screening may include plantings to create a "living fence", or to obscure the view of the fence. Breaks in fencing may be allowed or required by board of commissioners to facilitate wildlife needs where natural features provide appropriate barriers to access by humans for security and safety purposes. 
Height: The solar energy system shall not exceed ten feet in height, as measured from the ground to the foremost/tip end of the solar collector, provided there is a demonstration that the screening prevents the system from being visible from the exterior of the property. Ancillary non solar collector structures, such as inverters, transformers, etc., may be taller than ten feet in height, provided that such are not visible from the exterior of the property. 
General Requirements: 
1.  Solar collectors shall be designed with anti-reflective coating to minimize glare. Mirrors are prohibited. 
2.  On-site electrical interconnections and powerlines shall be installed underground to the extent feasible. Existing above ground utility lines shall be allowed to remain in their current location. 
3.  A warning sign concerning voltage must be placed at the main gate that states the address of the site, the name of the solar farm operator, and a local phone number for the solar farm operator in the case of an emergency. 
4.  Access to the site must be controlled by a six foot wooden fence or gate if the fencing is visible from the exterior of the property. If the fencing/gate is within the interior 25 percent of the buffer, or is not visible from the exterior or the property, chain link gate and fencing may be used. 
5.  Entrance roadway should include a dog leg or meander to obscure vision from the roadway. 
6.  If lighting is provided at site, lighting shall be shielded and downcast such that the light does not spill onto the adjacent parcel or the night sky. Motion sensor control is preferred. 
7.  Adequate provisions to reduce average/constant noise levels at the property boundary not to exceed 50dBA at the property line, except during construction. 
8.  A solar collection device or combination of devices are to be designed and located to avoid directing glare or reflection onto adjacent properties and adjacent roadways and shall not interfere with traffic or create a safety hazard. 
9.  Planning commission may include special conditions in their recommendation to Bryan County Board of Commissioners to implement the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, appearance, prosperity, and general welfare set forth in Article 1 of the Bryan County Zoning Ordinance. The board of commissioners may accept, modify, reject, or add additional conditions at its sole discretion. 
Site Restoration/Stabilization: Unless otherwise agreed by Bryan County Board of Commissioners in its concept plan or development agreement approval process, the applicant shall submit a ten percent site restoration/stabilization guarantee in the form of a bond, irrevocable letter of credit and agreement, or other financial security acceptable to the County prior to issuance of the development permit. The site restoration/stabilization guarantee shall insure satisfactory grading, seeding, and stabilization of the site in case of default by the applicant and/or if the applicant does not install the required site improvements in a timely fashion as determined by the county engineer, including the costs of landscaping, screening, and or fencing for the site or such portion thereof being permitted. The developer shall provide the county with an itemized engineer's estimate of the approved site improvements. The site restoration guarantee may be refunded upon issuance of the certificate of project close-out for the site stabilization and improvements. 
Decommissioning: Unless otherwise agreed by county board of commissioners in its concept plan or development agreement approval process, the applicant must provide a decommissioning plan signed by the party responsible for decommissioning and the landowner (if different) that describes the anticipated life of the solar farm, the estimated decommissioning costs in current dollars, the method for ensuring that funds will be available for decommissioning and restoration, and the anticipated timeline and manner in which the solar farm project will be decommissioned and the site restored to its condition prior to the development of the solar farm or such other conditions approved in the concept plan or required in a development agreement. If the property has been timbered within two years of conditional approval, original condition means replanted with timber. Decommissioning will be required following a continuous period of 12 months in which no electricity is generated by the facility other than for mechanical, repair, replacement and/or maintenance purposes. 
1.  The permit holder will have 12 months to complete decommissioning of the solar farm. Decommissioning shall include removal of solar panels, foundations, structures, cabling, electrical components, conduit, and any other associated facilities as described in the decommissioning plan. 
2.  Prior to issuance of development permit, the applicant must provide the County with a performance guarantee in the form of a bond, irrevocable letter of credit and agreement, or other financial security acceptable to the county in the amount of 125 percent of the estimated decommission cost minus the salvageable value, or $50,000, whichever is greater. Estimates shall be determined by an engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. 
3.  Every five years a new engineer's estimate of probable cost of decommissioning shall be submitted for approval in the same manner as the initial submission, and the bond, letter of credit, or other financial security acceptable to the county shall be adjusted upward or downward as necessary. 
(xiv)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. There shall be no more than one principal building per lot for parcels less than 25 acres. Parcels containing 25 acres or more will be allowed one additional principal building on the parcel. 
(i)  Principal buildings: For lot and building requirements, see section 1119. 
(ii)  Accessory buildings: For lot and building requirements, see section 1120. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 2-2-2010; Ord. of 10-10-2014; Ord. No. 2016, § 1, 4-12-2016; Ord. of 10-10-2017(1)) 
Section 1101. - "AR-2.5" Agricultural Residential Districts. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide for large lot single family and manufactured home development in a rural environment. Limited farming and forestry activities is permissible here. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  One-family dwellings, including manufactured homes, and their customary uses. 
(ii)  Churches. 
(iii)  Non-commercial agricultural uses, but large farm animals shall be kept at least 100 feet from property lines and small farm animals shall be kept 50 feet from property lines. 
(iv)  Home occupations, home business offices and family day care homes. 
(v)  Non-commercial kennels. 
(vi)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses and any conditional uses permitted by the county commission. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(i)  Unlighted, regulation-size or par three golf courses, including normal club house and pro shop activities, and other business activity associated with country clubs. 
(ii)  Schools. 
(iii)  Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or chain-link fence or wall at least eight feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is no office, commercial operation or storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility. (Minimum lot area does not apply.) 
(iv)  Group dwellings (not more than eight residents). 
(v)  Cemeteries. 
(vi)  Day care centers. 
(vii)  Bed and breakfast. 
(viii)  Group homes (not more than eight residents). 
(ix)  Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
(x)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. There shall be no more than one principal building per lot for parcels less than 25 acres. Parcels containing 25 acres or more will be allowed one additional principal building on the parcel. 
(i)  Principal buildings: For lot and building requirements see section 1119. 
(ii)  Accessory buildings: For lot and building requirements see section 1120. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 2-2-2010; Ord. of 10-14-2014; Ord. No. 2016, § 1, 4-12-2016) 
Section 1102. - "AR-1.5" Agricultural Residential District. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide for large lot single family and manufactured home development in a rural environment. Limited non-commercial agricultural activity is permissible here. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  One-family dwellings, including manufactured homes, and their customary uses. 
(ii)  Non-commercial agricultural uses, excluding large farm animals. Small farm animals shall be kept 50 feet from property lines. 
(iii)  Home occupations, home business offices and family day care homes. 
(iv)  Non-commercial kennels. 
(v)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses and any conditional uses permitted by the county commission. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(i)  Churches. 
(ii)  Unlighted, regulation-size or par three golf courses, including normal club house and pro shop activities, and other business activity associated with country clubs. 
(iii)  Schools. 
(iv)  Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or chain-link fence or wall at least eight feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is no office, commercial operation or storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility. (Minimum lot area does not apply.) 
(v)  Cemeteries. 
(vi)  Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
(vii)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(viii)  Group homes (not more than six residents). 
(ix)  Group dwellings (not more than six residents). 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. There shall be no more than one principal building per lot for parcels less than 25 acres. Parcels containing 25 acres or more will be allowed one additional principal building on the parcel. 
(i)  Principal buildings: For requirements see section 1119. 
(ii)  Accessory buildings: For requirements see section 1120. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 2-2-2010; Ord. of 10-10-2014; Ord. No. 2016, § 1, 4-12-2016) 
Section 1103. - "AR-1" Agricultural Residential Districts. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide for large lot single family and manufactured home development in a rural environment. Limited non-commercial agricultural activity is permissible here. After the effective date of this ordinance, no applications for reclassification to this zoning district will be permitted. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  One-family dwellings, including manufactured homes, and their customary uses. 
(ii)  Non-commercial agricultural uses, excluding large farm animals. Small farm animals and livestock shall be kept 50 feet from property lines. 
(iii)  Home occupations, home business offices and family day care homes. 
(iv)  Non-commercial kennels. 
(v)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses and any conditional uses permitted by the county commission. 
(vi)  Clubs, private. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(i)  Churches. 
(ii)  Unlighted, regulation-size or par three golf courses, including normal club house and pro shop activities, and other business activity associated with country clubs. 
(iii)  Schools. 
(iv)  Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or chain-link fence or wall at least eight feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is no office, commercial operation or storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility. (Minimum lot area does not apply.) 
(v)  Bed and breakfast. 
(vi)  Cemeteries. 
(vii)  Large farm animals, provided they are kept by fencing no less than 100 feet from all property lines; and further provided that no more than one large farm animal is kept per three-fourths acre, excluding the area within the 100 foot perimeter of each lot. 
(viii)  Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
(ix)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(x)  Group homes (not more than four residents). The lot must be one or more acres. 
(xi)  Group dwellings (not more than four residents). The lot must be one or more acres. 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. There shall be no more than one principal building per lot for parcels less than 25 acres. Parcels containing 25 acres or more will be allowed one additional principal building on the parcel. 
(i)  Principal buildings: For lot and building requirements see section 1119. 
(ii)  Accessory buildings: For lot and building requirements see section 1120. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 1-6-2004; Ord. of 5-1-2007; Ord. of 2-2-2010; Ord. of 3-3-2012; Ord. of 10-14-2014; Ord. No. 2016, § 1, 4-12-2016) 
Section 1104. - "R-30" Residential Districts. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide for low to medium density single family development free from intrusion by incompatible agricultural and commercial uses. This district is primarily to be served by either public, community or individual septic, sewage and water systems. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  One-family dwellings, including manufactured homes, and their customary uses. 
(ii)  Non-commercial horticulture. 
(iii)  Home business offices. 
(iv)  Reserved. 
(v)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses and any conditional uses permitted by the county commission. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(i)  Churches. 
(ii)  Unlighted, regulation-size or par three golf courses, including normal club house and pro shop activities, and other business activity associated with country clubs. 
(iii)  Schools. 
(iv)  Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or chain-link fence or wall at least eight feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is no office, commercial operation or storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility. (Minimum lot area does not apply.) 
(v)  Reserved. 
(vi)  Cemeteries. 
(vii)  Home occupations. 
(viii)  Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
(ix)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. There shall be no more than one principal building per lot. 
(i)  Principal buildings: For lot and building requirements see section 1119. 
(ii)  Accessory buildings: For lot and building requirements see section 1120. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 5-5-1998; Ord. of 10-10-2014) 
Section 1105. - "R-1" Single Family Residential Districts. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide for medium to low density single family development free from intrusion by incompatible agricultural and commercial uses. This district is primarily to be served by either public, community or individual septic, sewage and water systems. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  Detached one-family dwellings. 
(ii)  Non-commercial horticulture. 
(iii)  Home business offices. 
(iv)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses and any conditional uses permitted by the county commission. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(i)  Churches. 
(ii)  Unlighted, regulation-size or par three golf courses, including normal club house and pro shop activities, and other business activity associated with country clubs. 
(iii)  Schools. 
(iv)  Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or chain-link fence or wall at least eight feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is no office, commercial operation or storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility (Minimum lot area does not apply). 
(v)  Cemeteries. 
(vi)  Group homes (not more than four residents). 
(vii)  Home occupations. 
(viii)  Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
(ix)  Customary accessory buildings and uses located on vacant parcels and incidental to the above listed conditional uses provided: 
a.  A site plan is submitted showing the location of the proposed accessory use in relation to the principal use(s) located on the subject or adjacent lot. 
b.  Elevation drawings are submitted showing the front, rear, and each side of the proposed structure that clearly depicts the architectural design proposed. The design must be architecturally compatible with the principal use and/or other adjacent uses as determined by the board of commissioners. 
c.  Current pictures of adjacent principal structures are submitted that clearly depict the architectural characteristics of houses in the immediate vicinity. 
d.  Any other items deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Director and/or the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. There shall be no more than one principal building per lot. 
(i)  Principal buildings: For lot and building requirements see section 1119. 
(ii)  Accessory buildings: For lot and building requirements see section 1120. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 10-14-2014; Ord. of 3-14-2017(2)) 
Section 1106. - "R-2" Two-family Residential Districts. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide locations for duplex and two-family housing along with appropriate single family housing. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  All permitted uses in R-1 district. 
(ii)  Duplexes and other structures housing two families. 
(iii)  Home business offices. 
(iv)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses and any conditional uses permitted by the county commission. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(i)  Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or chain-link fence or wall at least eight feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is no office, commercial operation or storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility. (Minimum lot area does not apply.) 
(ii)  Cemeteries. 
(iii)  Churches. 
(iv)  Schools. 
(v)  Group homes (not more than four residents). 
(vi)  Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
(vii)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. There shall be no more than one principal building per lot. 
(i)  Principal buildings: For lot and building requirements see section 1119. 
(ii)  Accessory buildings: For lot and building requirements see section 1120. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 10-14-2014) 
Section 1107. - "R-3" Multi-Family Residential Districts. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide locations for apartments and townhouse developments served by both a central water system and a central sewer system. These areas are to be buffered and screened from nearby incompatible uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  All permitted uses in R-1 and R-2 districts. 
(ii)  Group dwellings, apartments and condominiums. 
(iii)  Home business offices. 
(iv)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses and any conditional uses permitted by the county commission. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(i)  Churches. 
(ii)  Group homes (not more than four residents). 
(iii)  Schools. 
(iv)  Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or chain-link fence or wall at least eight feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is no office, commercial operation or storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility. (Minimum lot area does not apply.) 
(v)  Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
(vi)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. There shall be no more than one principal building permitted for every two acres of land in the parcel selected for building. 
(i)  Principal buildings: For lot and building requirements see section 1119. 
(ii)  Principal building - Townhouses - Deleted. 
(iii)  Accessory buildings: For lot and building requirements see section 1120. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 7-11-2006; Ord. of 10-14-2014) 
Section 1108. - "R-4" Manufactured Housing Park District. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to encourage the development of land as planned manufactured housing parks and to provide efficient networks of utilities to serve these manufactured housing parks. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  Manufactured housing parks. 
(ii)  Home business offices. 
(iii)  An office for the operation of the manufactured housing park. 
(iv)  The incidental sale of used manufactured homes shall be permitted within the boundaries of a manufactured housing park, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Allowable number. The number of manufactured homes for sale at any one time shall not exceed five percent of the total number of approved manufactured home spaces in any manufactured housing park. However, if there are less than 20 manufactured home spaces, only one manufactured home may be for sale at any one time. 
(2)  Location. Manufactured homes for sale shall be located only on manufactured housing spaces in the manufactured housing park and subject to the same setbacks and yard requirements as occupied manufactured homes. 
(3)  Maintenance. There shall be no renovating, overhaul, or repair to manufactured homes offered for sale within a manufactured housing park. However, customary maintenance shall be permitted, such as would be allowed for an occupant while living in a manufactured home. 
(4)  Advertising. There shall be no advertising signs, banners, pennants, or any type of displays advertising manufactured homes for sale, except that one sign, not over 18 inches by 24 inches shall be permitted to be posted on each manufactured home offered for sale. 
(v)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses and any conditional uses permitted by the county commission. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(i)  Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or chain-link fence or wall at least eight feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is no office, commercial operation or storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility. (Minimum lot area does not apply.) 
(ii)  Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
(iii)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. The following dimensional requirements apply to the external boundaries of the manufactured housing park. Dimensional requirements for manufactured housing spaces within the manufactured housing park are delineated elsewhere in this article. 

 
  
(d)  Buffers required. Buffers of the dimensions specified in this section 1108(c) shall be provided along the perimeter of all manufactured housing park districts, such buffers must meet the requirements of section 514.04, 514.05, and 514.06 of the subdivision regulations. Entrance roads to manufactured housing parks may traverse the required buffers. Buffer requirements do not apply to roads constructed within a manufactured housing park, except where such roads intersect with a required buffer abutting another road or property line. 
(e)  Compliance with subdivision design standards. In addition to complying with the requirements of this article, except as modified herein, all manufactured housing parks must comply with all applicable provisions of article V of the subdivision regulations and with the engineering standards. For the purposes of application of provisions of article V of the subdivision regulations and the engineering standards to manufactured housing parks, the number of manufactured housing spaces shall be used in lieu of the number of lots for determining minimum requirements. 
(f)  Minimum dimensional requirements for manufactured housing spaces. The boundaries of all manufactured housing spaces must be shown on the manufactured housing park plan and identifiable after construction of the manufactured housing park. Each manufactured home must have a minimum 30-foot setback on all sides from any other manufactured housing space, except a minimum setback from the right-of-way of any road within the manufactured housing park shall be 25 feet. All manufactured housing spaces must meet the minimum size requirements of the Bryan County health department, however, in no case shall any manufactured housing space be less than 5,280 square feet. 
(g)  Approval of manufactured housing park district. No rezoning to a manufactured housing park district may be considered and no manufactured housing park may be developed, expanded, or occupied until all the requirements set forth herein have been met and a manufactured housing park plan approved by the county commission. An application and all accompanying plans and supporting data required both by this section and article VI shall be filed in duplicate with the planning director in accordance with article VI. The application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall include the following: 
(i)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(ii)  The location and description of the boundaries of the property for the proposed manufactured housing park. 
(iii)  A completed "manufactured housing park plan" showing all existing conditions and proposed site development as required by this ordinance, including preliminary plans of all buildings, improvements, and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the manufactured housing park and a topographic map of the manufactured housing park. 
(iv)  All documentation required by article VI and any other information requested by the planning director or county commission to determine the manufactured housing park's compliance with all requirements of this ordinance and other applicable laws. 
(g)  (1)  Drainage. All manufactured housing parks shall be located on a well-drained and properly graded site. Necessary site drainage improvements, as approved by the county engineer, shall be required in accordance with the engineering standards. 
(h)  Interior public streets, drives, and walkways. Roads within manufactured housing parks must be designed, constructed and paved in accordance with the engineering standards and must have a minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet. Minimum widths of various roads within manufactured housing parks shall be: 
(i)  One-way with no on-road parking: 12 feet. 
(ii)  One-way with parallel parking on one side only: 21 feet. 
(iii)  One-way with parallel parking on both sides: 30 feet. 
(iv)  Two-way with no on-road parking: 24 feet. 
(v)  Two-way with parallel parking on one side only: 33 feet. 
(vi)  Two-way with parallel parking on both sides: 42 feet. 
(i)  Access. All manufactured housing spaces must abut an interior road which has direct access to a public road and must comply with all access and entrance requirements of article V of the subdivision regulations and the engineering standards. 
(j)  Off-drive parking. Each manufactured housing space shall be provided with at least two off-road parking spaces located on or adjacent to the manufactured housing space. In addition, one off-road parking space for each four manufactured housing spaces in the manufactured housing park for visitor parking must be provided. Off-road parking spaces shall not be considered a part of any manufactured housing space which meets only the minimum required lot area. No vehicle parking will be allowed in other than the specified parking areas. 
(k)  Additional conditions. In approving a manufactured housing park, the county commission may attach additional conditions to protect both the occupants of the manufactured housing park and the occupants of surrounding property, and to further the purposes of this ordinance. 
(l)  General requirements. 
(i)  Minimum requirements for manufactured homes. No manufactured home shall be placed in a manufactured housing park unless it is constructed to the Federal Manufacturing Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq., and is in compliance with the building code. 
(ii)  Water and sewerage. Each manufactured home space shall be provided with and each manufactured home connected to both a central water system and a central sewer system. 
(iii)  Lighting. All interior roads and walkways within a manufactured housing parks must be lighted at night with electric overhead vapor lamps no less than 400 feet apart, or equivalent lighting as approved by the county commission. 
(iv)  Refuse collection facilities. One covered garbage can with a capacity of at least 90 gallons each shall be provided for each manufactured housing space. The cans shall be located in areas designated on the manufactured housing park plan and shall be kept in sanitary condition at all times. 
The manufactured housing park shall provide garbage collection at least once each week. 
(v)  Service, administrative, and other buildings. 
(1)  Within a manufactured housing park, one manufactured home may be used as an administrative office. Other administrative and service buildings, housing, sanitation, and laundry facilities shall be permanent structures, complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regarding buildings, electrical installations, and plumbing and sanitation systems. 
(2)  No buildings shall be located closer than 30 feet to any manufactured housing space. 
(3)  All service buildings, manufactured homes, manufactured housing spaces and the grounds of the manufactured housing park shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition that, as determined by the planning director, will not negatively affect the health, safety or welfare of any occupant of the manufactured housing park or the public or constitute a nuisance. 
(vi)  Fire protection. All manufactured housing parks must be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good condition, and of such size, type, and number and located within the manufactured housing park so to satisfy all applicable state or county regulations. No open fires shall be permitted within a manufactured housing park. 
(vii)  Fuel storage. No fuel shall be stored within a manufactured housing park without approval of the county commission, except for fuel containers serving individual manufactured homes. 
(viii)  Management. The owner of a manufactured housing park shall ensure that the manufactured housing park, its facilities, equipment, grounds, roads, buffers, fences, manufactured housing spaces and manufactured homes are maintained in a clean, orderly, safe, and sanitary condition and are in compliance with all applicable laws, codes, ordinances and regulations. 
(ix)  Required records. The owner of a manufactured housing park shall maintain the following records relating to his manufactured housing park: the names of all occupants and owners of manufactured homes; the make, model, serial number, year of manufacture, county tax and decal number, and building permit number of each manufactured home and the dates of arrival and departure of each manufactured home. 
(x)  Occupancy permit. No manufactured home shall be parked within a manufactured housing park until all provisions of this ordinance and other applicable laws, codes or regulations have been complied with and a certificate of occupancy issued by the county commission. 
(xi)  Underground utilities. All utilities shall be under ground. 
(xii)  All manufactured housing parks of five or more manufactured housing spaces which are in existence on the effective date of this ordinance, shall be required to meet all the conditions set forth in [subsections] (a) (iv) and (1) (i), (iii) (iv) (vi), (vii), (viii) (ix) and (x) of this section within three years from the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 10-14-2014) 
Section 1109. - BN Zone - Neighborhood Business. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide for locations of convenience stores and personal services within otherwise primarily residential areas, so long as the architectural design of such stores and buildings as determined by the planning director is not incompatible with abutting residential areas. BN districts are not intended for a wide variety of commercial or office activities. Low or minimal traffic should be generated by uses in this district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  Neighborhood convenience stores not exceeding 3,500 square feet in size (no unenclosed outside storage). 
(1)  Alcohol sold to be consumed off premises only; 
(2)  Self-service service stations. 
(ii)  Florists. 
(iii)  Personal services (no unenclosed outside storage). 
(iv)  Fruit and vegetable markets. 
(v)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(i)  Offices (no outside storage). 
(ii)  One residential dwelling unit per lot as an accessory use within the same structure as the commercial activity. 
(iii)  Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
(iv)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(c)  Special site regulations. 
(i)  Maximum percent of gross land to be covered: 45 percent. 
(ii)  Minimum open space required: 55 percent. 
(d)  Principal and accessory buildings. 

 
  
(e)  Maximum size of BN district: 2 acres. 
(f)  Minimum distance to another BN district: 3,000 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 2-1-2005; Ord. of 10-14-2014) 
Section 1110. - "B-1" Neighborhood Commercial Districts. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide locations for small locally oriented businesses, serving primarily nearby residents. Businesses located here should not be heavy traffic generators. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
Retail stores. 
Personal services. 
Day care center facilities. 
Drug stores. 
Gardening and pet grooming services. 
Fruit and vegetable markets. 
Professional services offices. 
Offices. 
Soda fountains, cafes or restaurants (without drive-in facilities). 
Clubs, private. 
Mortuaries. 
Public uses. 
Lifetime learning. 
Medical clinics. 
Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses (no unenclosed outside storage). 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
Banks. 
Taverns. 
Theaters (indoor). 
Entertainment facilities. 
Drive-in commercial uses (not including drive-in theaters). 
Service stations. 
Utilities (except for storage yards, generation or treatment facilities). 
Shopping centers (less than 65,000 square feet). 
One residential dwelling unit per lot as an accessory use within the same structure as the commercial activity. 
Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any conditional uses (no unenclosed outside storage). 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. Principal and accessory buildings: 

 
  
(d)  Special site regulations. 
Maximum percent of gross land to be covered: 50 percent. 
Minimum open space required: 50 percent. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 2-1-2005; Ord. of 10-14-2014) 
Section 1111. - "B-2" General Commercial Districts. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide locations for large and county-wide businesses. Those businesses which generate larger traffic volumes are appropriately located in this district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
Extermination, pest control, fumigation, septic tank pumping, furnace cleaning and well drilling service. 
Vehicle sales and support center. 
Design and building services. 
Health and support services. 
Lifetime learning. 
Service stations. 
Restaurants. 
Motels, hotels. 
Tourist homes. 
Entertainment facilities. 
Retail business. 
Personal services. 
Offices, banks, and financial institutions. 
Professional offices. 
Radio stations and television studios or offices. 
Garages for service (excluding storing junked vehicles outdoors). 
Drive-in commercial uses (not including theaters). 
Mortuaries and monument sales. 
Animal hospitals, clinics, or kennels. 
Commercial greenhouses, and plant nurseries. 
Golf-driving ranges and miniature golf, golf courses. 
Public utilities. 
Mobile home, utility building, and trailer sales lots. 
Business services. 
Billiard or pool rooms. 
Commercial recreation. 
Lodges or clubs. 
Churches. 
Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission, after recommendation by the planning commission: 
Radio and television transmission, antennas and towers. 
Taxi stands. 
Bus stations. 
Auctions. 
Off-street parking lot/garages. 
Adult uses. 
Lumber yards. 
Tire retreading and recapping. 
Food processing. 
Research and testing facilities. 
Printing, lithographing or publishing plants. 
Amusement parks. 
Feed and grain, sales and storage. 
Wholesale businesses. 
Equipment sales and repair. 
Truck terminals. 
Cleaning, laundry and dry cleaning plants. 
Drive-in theaters. 
Machine shops. 
Taverns. 
Shopping centers. 
Mini-warehouse(s). 
Churches (add as a conditional use). 
Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. 

 
  
(d)  Special site regulations. 
(i)  Maximum percent of gross land to be covered: 60 percent. 
(ii)  Minimum open space required: 25 percent. 
(iii)  Lots which currently have frontage along the southbound portion of US 17 from the Richmond Hill city limits to Bryce Street, served by public sewer and water, not serviced by a through access road shall have the following lot and building requirements: 
Minimum lot area: 17,500 square feet. 
Minimum lot width at building line: 95 feet. 
Minimum front yard setback from road right-of-way: 50 feet. 
Minimum side yard setback from property line: 15 feet. 
Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 15 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 2-9-1999; Ord. of 8-1-2000; Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 3-3-2012; Ord. of 10-14-2014) 
Section 1112. - "C-I" Interchange Commercial District. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide for transportation related businesses associated with interstate highway travel and allow other commercial activities in areas away from access points. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Property and buildings in a C-I, Interchange Commercial District shall be used for the following purposes: 
Bus stations. 
Hotels, motels. 
Restaurants. 
Service stations. 
Gift shops. 
Tent and trailer campgrounds. 
Mini-warehouse(s). 
Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission, after recommendation by the planning commission: 
Banks. 
Shopping centers. 
Truck repair shops/garages. 
Lounges. 
Truck terminals. 
Professional and business offices. 
Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the C-I, Interchange Commercial District shall conform to the following regulations: 
Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet. 
Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet. 
Minimum front yard, setback from road: 50 feet. 
Minimum side yard, setback from property line: ten feet. 
Minimum side yard, setback if corner lot: 35 feet. 
Minimum rear yard, setback from property line: 15 feet. 
Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(d)  Special site regulations. 
(i)  Maximum percent of gross land to be covered: 60 percent. 
(ii)  Minimum open space required: 25 percent. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 8-1-2000; Ord. of 10-10-2014) 
Section 1113. - "I-L" Light Industrial District. 
District intent. This district is established to provide land for light industrial uses which are not significantly objectionable with regard to noise, odor, fumes, etc., to surrounding properties. This district's regulations are designed to provide a compatible environment for uses generally classified as light industrial in nature; to protect and reserve undeveloped areas within the county that are suitable for such light industries; and to discourage encroachment by residential, commercial, or other uses that may adversely affect the industrial character of the district. Lands within this district should be located in relation to the thoroughfare network of the county, as well as rail and air if required, and designed so that uses within the district do not disrupt normal traffic flow patterns within the county. Planned industrial parks are encouraged within this district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Property and buildings in an I-L, Light Industrial District shall be used for the following purposes, provided that such uses are conducted in such a manner that noxious odors, fumes, dust and similar particles, or noise are not emitted or detectable beyond the property lines of the lots on which the uses are located: 
(i)  Building material sales yards and lumber yards, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel, and the like. 
(ii)  Warehouse and wholesale establishments. 
(iii)  Public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses. 
(iv)  Research or experimental stations and laboratories. 
(v)  Radio and/or television station transmission or reception towers. 
(vi)  Horticultural nurseries. 
(vii)  Large office buildings for business, governmental, professional, or other general purposes. 
(viii)  Repair garages, provided there is no open storage of wrecked automobiles or scrapped or salvaged vehicle parts on the premises. 
(ix)  Transportation/trans-shipment terminals. 
(x)  Extermination, pest control, fumigation, septic tank pumping, furnace cleaning and well drilling services. 
(xi)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(i)  Retail businesses or services provided such businesses or services are (1) incidental to a permitted light-industrial use; and (2) located on the same premises. 
(ii)  Storage yards. 
(iii)  Watchman or caretaker's one- or two-family dwelling, provided that: 
1)  Such dwelling is located on the premises of the permitted light-industrial use; and 
2)  The head of the household is employed by the industry as a watchman or caretaker. 
(iv)  Open yard use for the sale, rental, dismantling and/or storage of new or used salvage and/or junk materials or equipment, provided that: 
1)  Such uses are separated from adjoining properties by a suitable planting screen, fence, or wall at least eight feet in height; and 
2)  No burning of materials or products will be conducted on the premises. 
(v)  Animal hospitals with exercise yards (no outside pens). 
(vi)  Commercial kennels with exercise yards (no outside pens). 
(vii)  Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
(viii)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(c)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, lots permitted in the I-L, Light Industrial District shall conform to the following regulations: 
(i)  Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet (larger if required by the county commission to meet district's regulations and intent). 
(ii)  Minimum lot width at building line: 150 feet. 
(iii)  Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet. 
(iv)  Minimum side yard setback (interior or street): 30 feet. 
(v)  Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet. 
(vi)  Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
(d)  Special site regulations. 
(i)  Maximum percent of gross land to be covered: 65 percent. 
(ii)  Lots permitted in an I-L, Light Industrial District served by public sewer and water and not serviced by a through access road shall have the following lot and building requirements: 
Minimum lot area: 17,500 square feet. 
Minimum lot width at building line: 95 feet. 
Minimum front yard setback from road right-of-way: 50 feet. 
Minimum side yard setback, from property line: 15 feet. 
Minimum rear yard setback, from property line: 25 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 2-14-2006; Ord. of 2-2-2010; Ord. of 10-10-2014) 
Section 1114. - "I-1" General Industrial Districts. 
District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide areas for manufacturing, assembling, fabricating and related activities and to provide standards to prevent adverse effects on surrounding properties. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
Manufactories, assembly facilities and their associated buildings; 
Asphalt emulsion (water-based) plants; 
Machine shops; 
Warehouse and transfer/storage establishments (distribution centers); 
Radio and television transmission, antennas and towers; 
Public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses; 
Research or experimental stations and laboratories; 
Repair garages for commercial vehicles and trucks; 
Transportation terminals; 
Mobile home, utility building, and trailer sales lots; 
Office buildings for business, governmental, professional or general purposes; 
Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission, after recommendation by the planning commission: 
Vehicle sales and support centers; 
Extermination, pest control, fumigation, septic tank pumping, furnace cleaning and well-drilling services; 
Construction supply yards; 
Junk yards; 
Lumber yards; 
Food processing; 
Wholesale businesses; 
Equipment sales and repair; 
Cleaning, laundry and dry cleaning plants; 
Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2005; Ord. of 11-7-2006) 
Section 1115. - "O" Office District. 
District intent. It is the intent of this section that the "O" zoning district be developed and reserved for business, office, institutional, or specified public purposes. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a quiet, compatible and uncongested environment for office type business or professional firms and certain public uses and to discourage any encroachment by unrestricted retail and/or wholesale business establishments, industrial concerns, or other uses capable of adversely affecting the specialized commercial, institutional and housing character of the district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  Medical, dental, chiropractic or other medically oriented office, outpatient clinic and laboratory, and health services. 
(ii)  Artist studios for crafts, dance, drama, music, and photography. 
(iii)  Multi-unit office parks. 
(iv)  Lifetime learning. 
(v)  Office buildings and offices for governmental, business, professional or general purposes, but not including any storage, sale, rental or servicing of goods on the premises. 
(vi)  Photographic studios. 
(vii)  Radio and/or television studios. 
(viii)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses and any conditional uses permitted by the county commission. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(i)  Schools. 
(ii)  Day care center facilities. 
(iii)  One residential dwelling unit per lot as an accessory use within the same structure as the commercial activity. 
(vi)  Waste water treatment plant and land application system. 
(c)  Lot and building requirements. 

 
  
(d)  Special site regulations. 
(i)  Maximum percent of gross land to be covered: 60 percent. 
(ii)  Minimum open space required: 25 percent. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 2-1-2005; Ord. of 10-14-2014) 
Section 1116. - "WP" Waste Management District. 
District intent. This district is established to provide land for waste treatment and disposal in locations which meet strict criteria for protection of other land uses and the environment. The district's regulations are designed to provide a compatible environment for waste processing and treatment facilities so that they will not be encroached upon by other uses or be adversely effected by nearby conflicting land uses. Lands designated for waste management should be located in relation to the transportation systems it will utilize so that it will not disrupt normal traffic flow patterns within the county. Due to the special nature of waste and the potential health and environmental risks involved, this district will be only designated on the zoning map in response to a specific rezoning request by an applicant. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Medical waste treatment and incineration, hazardous waste processing, sewerage treatment, solid waste processing and recycling services. 
(b)  Area regulations. 
(i)  Minimum lot area: 50 acres. 
(ii)  There shall be a minimum of a 200-foot wide thick, mature, natural or cultivated landscape buffer established and maintained along all property lines, excluding approved driveways, building sites and drainage facilities as shown on the approved development plan. 
(iii)  As conditions for approval, access to the site shall be controlled and monitored by the operator. 
(iv)  The operator shall be responsible for the control and proper disposal of incidental litter by providing fencing or other physical barriers around the site. 
(v)  As a conditional of approval, the applicant shall develop an emergency plan which will be used should there be an accident or other problems which threatens the health or environment. The applicant shall put in place the necessary equipment, hire the necessary personnel and other requirements of the emergency plan before operation can begin. This plan must be approved by the county commission. 
(vi)  The applicant shall follow the procedures for siting, operating, closure and post closure in accordance with article 2, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 and subsequent changes. Verification of compliance with article 2, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 shall be required before the landfill becomes operational; however, no waste management district shall be located within 1,000 feet of a residence or a residential domestic water supply (well). 
(vii)  The applicant must show evidence that the facility will comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations, including all specifications but not limited to provisions of the Bryan County ordinance regarding the collection, storage and disposal of solid waste. 
(viii)  All waste management districts must have primary access via a state or federal highway. 
(ix)  Waste management districts shall not be located in wetlands, as defined by the U.S. Corps of Engineers. All applications for a waste management district must be accompanied by a wetlands delineation of the site and must demonstrate that all processing, storage or disposal of waste products will be outside of wetlands areas. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2011) 
Section 1117. - "WB-1, WB-2, WB-3" Waterfront Business and Commercial Districts. 
District intent. It is the intent of this district that the environmentally sensitive nature of waterfront and marsh front locations be considered and protected. When applying for a building permit in a "WB" district, the applicant must certify compliance with all applicable state, federal and county laws, codes or regulations. 
(a)  "WB-1" Waterfront Business. 
(i)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Marinas for private, recreational watercraft (no length limit), including enclosed dry storage and docking with ramp and lift equipment. 
(2)  Small convenience stores including bait, tackle, marine supplies and accessories. Beer and wine sold to be consumed off-premises only. (May serve both water and land customers.) 
(3)  Gas and fuel facilities for both boats and vehicles. (No repair facilities.) 
(4)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses and any conditional uses permitted by the county commission. 
(ii)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(1)  Commercial fishing boats under 25 feet in length (no storage, packing, or processing facilities). 
(2)  Charter boats under 65 feet in length (no size limit for sailboats) for sport or recreational use. (Maximum of 30 persons plus crew per boat.) 
(3)  One residential dwelling unit per lot as an accessory use within the same structure as the commercial activity. 
(4)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to any approved conditional uses. 
(b)  "WB-2" Waterfront Commercial. 
(i)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  All permitted uses in "WB-1" classification. 
(2)  All conditional uses in "WB-1" classification. 
(ii)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
(1)  Restaurants (no entertainment unless approved for entertainment facilities). 
(2)  Entertainment facilities. 
(3)  Hotels, motels, and tourist homes. 
(4)  Private clubs. 
(5)  Boat, motor, and marine supply dealers. 
(6)  Enclosed marine service and repair facilities. 
(7)  Taverns, including floating taverns. 
(8)  Charter or cruise boats (no length limit). 
(9)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses. 
(c)  "WB-3" Waterfront Commercial-Industrial. 
(i)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  All permitted uses in "WB-2" classification. 
(2)  All conditional uses in "WB-2" classification. 
(3)  Commercial watercraft including fishing boats. 
(4)  Seafood storage, packing, or processing plants. 
(5)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the above permitted uses and any conditional uses permitted by the county commission. 
(ii)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in this district on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission, after recommendation by the planning commission: 
(1)  Marine construction, repair, and service facilities including boat yards and marine railways. 
(2)  Manufacturing plants. 
(3)  Customary accessory buildings and uses incidental to the any approved conditional uses. 
(d)  Lot and building requirements. Because of the uniqueness of waterfront and marsh front sites, applications for a reclassification to WB districts must include a site plan proposing appropriate buffers and setbacks which must be approved by the county commission. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 2-1-2005) 
Section 1118. - "DM-1" Dunes and Marshlands District. 
District intent. It is the intent of this district to protect those areas of the county that are considered to be environmentally sensitive to development, due to soil types, drainage, vegetation, wildlife habitats or other factors that are subject to being seriously endangered, damaged, or destroyed if allowed to develop in a manner inconsistent with their conservation and preservation. Since the welfare and well-being of the citizens of the county are directly linked and related to the natural environment of the area, it is recognized that in order to maintain sensitive areas in their natural condition for the benefit of mankind, it is necessary to protect such areas from degradation. 
(a)  Establishment of dunes and marshland areas. Areas which meet any one of the following criteria shall be considered an environmentally sensitive area, subject to the conditions of this section which may be applied to such areas: 
(i)  Marshland. All land subject to tidal action which is comprised of generally unstable soil materials commonly known as "hard or soft" marsh grass, reeds and similar growth and is usually characterized by poor load bearing capacity. Marshland lies below an elevation of 5.6 feet above mean sea level. 
(ii)  Dunes. All land where, through natural action of the wind, sand has accumulated in hills and ridges forming a mound of sand. This area is usually confined to the soil classification Kershaw-Osier complex and is found immediately adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean on the barrier islands. The slopes range from zero to eight percent. 
(b)  Permitted uses in marshland and dune areas. 
Boating. 
Swimming. 
Sunbathing. 
Picnicking. 
Fishing. 
Hunting. 
Education uses. 
Other active and passive recreational uses not inherently destructive to the existence or integrity of the marshlands and dunes. 
When approved by the state or U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, bulkheads for single family residential lots, single family docks and boat hoists and other private docks serving up to three lots. 
(c)  Conditional uses in marshland areas. The applicant for a conditional use permit shall prove conclusively that the proposed use will have no significant short or long-term adverse environmental effects, including increasing potentials for disturbance of existing eco-systems, penetration of channels of navigable waterways, interference with existing established dune sequences; and exposure of inland properties to wind, water, or wave damage. The following uses may be permitted in marshland areas of a DM-1 District on a conditional basis upon approval by the county commission: 
Seawalls. 
Jetties. 
Bulkheads, other than those permitted in [subsection] (b) above. 
Piers. 
Revetments. 
Groins. 
Breakwaters. 
Roads, streets, utility lines, sewer lines. 
Boat ramps. 
Docks and boat hoists, other than those permitted in [subsection] (b) above. 
(d)  Conditional uses in dune areas. No conditional uses are allowed in dune areas of the "DM-1" districts. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 1119. - Setback requirements for homes - duplexes - apartments - townhouses and manufactured homes by zoning district. 
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS FOR HOMES-DUPLEXES-APARTMENTS-TOWNHOUSE & MANUFACTURED HOMES  BY ZONING DISTRICT  (Principal Structures) 

 
  
Ord. of 5-5-1998) 
Section 1120. - Setback requirements for accessory structures by zoning district. 
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES BY ZONING DISTRICT 

 
  
Ord. of 5-5-1998) 
Section 1121. - Uses not listed. 
BRYAN COUNTY ZONING ORDINANCE - SECTION 1121 
Permitted and Conditional Uses by Land Use District 
The following table shows uses that are permitted (P), *conditionally permitted (C), and not permitted (X). 

 
  
(Ord. of 5-4-2010) 
ARTICLE XII. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: PUD 

Section 1200. - Definition. 
In order to permit flexible land use regulations and to facilitate the use of innovative techniques for development, planned unit developments (PUD) can be established. The development of PUDs in Bryan County requires different regulations than those provided for in the usual application of the county's ordinance. It is an objective of the county in allowing for PUD zoning, to encourage ingenuity and imagination on the part of architects, site planners and developers, allowing for creative designs, and deviation from the strict application of use, setback, height, and the minimum lot size requirements of the various zoning districts. At the same time, PUDs should remain within the general purpose and intent of this ordinance and the county's comprehensive land use plan. PUDs must also include a program for the provision, maintenance, and operation of all areas, improvements, facilities, and necessary services for the common use of all occupants thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003) 
Section 1201. - Standards. 
The planning commission and the board of commissioners shall consider the following standards when reviewing the PUD application: 
2.  Compatibility with the surrounding area; 
3.  Harmony with the character of the neighborhood; 
4.  Need for the proposed development; 
5.  The effect of the proposed PUD upon the immediate area; 
6.  The effect of the proposed PUD on the future development of the area; 
7.  Whether or not an exception from the zoning ordinance requirements and limitations is warranted by virtue of the design and amenities incorporated in the development; 
8.  That the land surrounding the proposed PUD can be planned in coordination with the proposed PUD; 
9.  That the proposed change to a PUD district is in conformance with the general intent of the comprehensive master plan and the general zoning ordinance of the county; 
10.  That the existing and proposed streets are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic within the proposed district and in the vicinity of the proposed district; 
11.  That the existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the proposed development; 
12.  That the PUD creates a desirable and stable environment; 
13.  That the PUD makes it possible for the creation of a creative, innovative and efficient use of the property. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003) 
Section 1202. - Permitted land uses within a PUD. 
1.  Allowable business uses within the PUD zone shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  General office uses. Including, but not limited to, administrative, sales representatives, legal services, engineering and architectural, accountants, auditing, bookkeeping, finance, real estate, physical fitness and health service clinics, veterinary clinics, insurance and personal services; 
b.  Indoor amusement and recreation. Theater, bowling, billiards, video and mechanical amusement games; 
c.  Retail sales and service. Including, but not limited to, food stores, drug stores, clothing stores, home furnishings and hardware, specialty shops, craft shops, photography studios, art studios, antique shops, gift and floral shops, bookstores, beauty and barbershops, dry cleaning, laundry service and office supplies; 
d.  Eating and drinking establishments. Restaurants, with or without alcoholic beverages, cocktail lounges, nightclubs, taverns, and package stores; 
e.  Outdoor amusement and recreation. Marina, charter or sightseeing watercraft facilities, golf course, tennis courts; 
f.  Off-street parking lots; 
g.  Other residential support services as deemed necessary by the BOC. 
2.  All proposed land uses will be identified within the PUD application provided by the applicant. Land uses not included within the PUD application shall be permitted only as a conditional use through the approval of the board of commissioners. 
3.  Compatible land uses, which would not otherwise be permitted to locate within the same zoning district, can be proposed for development on one or more adjacent parcels. Buffers required between proposed land uses shall be in compliance with section 514 of the Bryan County subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003) 
Section 1203. - Site requirement. 
All PUDs will have a minimum site area of 50 acres. The requirement may be waived by the board of commissioners to insure orderly development of a particular area prior to the submission of a PUD application upon the written request of a potential applicant. The written request will include justification for the PUD zone in lieu of a conventional zoning district. Design criteria as described in section 1201 should be used to show this justification. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003) 
Section 1204. - Unified ownership or control. 
1.  The title to all land within a proposed site for a PUD will be owned or controlled by the applicant submitting the application provided for under this article. 
2.  The term "controlled by" shall be interpreted to mean that such applicant shall have the written consent of all owners of property within the proposed site not wholly owned by the applicant. Such consent shall contain a statement that such applicant is authorized to represent such owners in the submission of an application under the provisions of this article and that such owners shall agree to be bound by the decision of the board of commissioners in the event such application is approved. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003) 
Section 1205. - Access and parking. 
3.  Easements may be used in commercial application to reduce the number of direct connections to a county or state road. The proposed use of easements in residential applications will be reviewed by the board of commissioners at the time of the submission of the PUD application. County representatives shall be permitted ingress and egress on private rights-of-way, easements and open spaces in order to perform basic county services such as fire and police protection, emergency medical services or any other service required. 
4.  Pedestrian access will be provided within the PUD. Adjacent developments within the PUD will be connected via pedestrian paths and/or sidewalks, which shall be a minimum of five feet wide. Pedestrian access will be provided between all parking areas and the structure(s) served by such parking areas. Pedestrian access into each development or phase within the PUD is preferred but not mandatory. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003) 
Section 1206. - Public facilities and services. 
1.  All parts of the development must be served by a sanitary sewer system and water system approved by the appropriate government agencies. 
2.  All roads, sidewalks, drainage facilities, water systems, sewerage systems, or any other infrastructure proposed for dedication to the county, must be acceptable by the county, as to the size, shape, and location. Infrastructure will be constructed and fully improved according to the requirements of the subdivision regulations and the engineering standards. 
3.  All electrical, telephone, and other utility services will be underground except for main transmission lines or temporary service for construction use. These utilities shall be provided in accordance with the rules, resolutions and/or regulations established by the appropriate governmental agency. 
4.  Open space. 
a.  A PUD shall require a minimum of 20 percent of the gross sit acreage as open space. 
b.  A minimum of five percent of the required open space or one acre, whichever is greater, shall be used for community recreation and dedicated for use by all residents. i.e., ball fields, picnic sites, gardens, parks, walking trails, or playground areas. 
c.  A minimum of five percent of the required open space must be permanently preserved under the county's greenspace program. The land must be permanently protected under a permanent conservation easement pursuant to the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.) or a permanent restrictive covenant pursuant to Georgia State Statute (O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60(c)), and must be consistent with at least one of the greenspace statutory goals (O.C.G.A. § 36-22-2(3) [repealed—see now O.C.G.A. § 12-6A-1]). 
d.  Active recreation that requires the use of developed facilities, may be built within the remaining open space requirement. 
e.  Nontidal wetlands may be used to fulfill up to 50 percent of the remaining open space requirement. Calculations for such may not exceed 50 percent of the required open space. Isolated wetlands can also be used to fulfill the five percent greenspace requirement. 
f.  There will be some open space within PUDs that cannot be counted towards the 20 percent open space requirement. Examples of such open space include road rights-of-way, yards, and spacings between dwelling units. Only a limited amount of impervious surfaces used for parking lots that service recreation areas will be allowed as part of the required open space. 
Example: 1,000 acre PUD 

 
  
g.  All privately owned open space shall continue to conform to its intended use as specified in the PUD application. 
h.  All open space and recreation facilities shall be included in the PUD application and each preliminary and final development plan as called for in the PUD application. 
i.  All community open space and recreational facilities shall be constructed and fully improved according to the development schedule established for each development phase of the PUD. 
j.  A homeowners association or nonprofit corporation created by the developer, by recorded covenants, declaration and restrictions running with the land, shall preserve and maintain for the owners and occupants of the units the land set aside for open space, parks or recreational use and common off-street parking spaces. The book and page in which these covenants, declaration and restrictions are recorded shall be shown on the final plat of the subdivision. Once the development phase is completed, the applicant must deed all open space, recreational facilities and off street parking, not managed by another private entity, to the association or nonprofit corporation. 
5.  Adequate public facilities and services. It is the responsibility of the applicant to predict the future demand of public facilities and services, including transportation, recreation, education, emergency services, and similar necessary facilities created by the development of the proposed PUD. All public facilities and services for which a need is determined shall be constructed and fully improved according to Bryan County regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003) 
Section 1207. - Rezoning procedure. 
1.  Pre-application 
a.  Pre-application submittal. Prior to submitting an application for establishing a PUD district, the applicant shall submit a pre-application form and the required supporting documentation to Bryan County planning department so the county can determine the feasibility and suitability of the application. This step is required so that the applicant may obtain information and guidance from county personnel before entering into any binding commitments or incurring substantial expenses of the site and plan preparation. See section 1208 for information required in the pre-application submittal. 
b.  DRI. If the proposed development meets the threshold for a development of regional impact (DRI) as defined by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, the project shall be reviewed by the Coastal Georgia Regional Development Center prior to action on the rezoning request. The DRI report and all required information shall be submitted to the Bryan County planning and zoning department concurrently with the rezoning application. 
c.  Determination of sufficiency. Within 30 working days of receipt of an applicant's request for a pre-application conference, the planning and zoning director will review the pre-application to determine its sufficiency and schedule a pre-application conference. 
i.  When the planning and zoning director determines the application is not sufficient, he will mail a written notice to the applicant specifying the deficiencies. No action will be taken to initiate a pre-application conference until the deficiencies are remedied. 
ii.  When the application is determined sufficient, the planning and zoning director shall notify the applicant in writing of the application's sufficiency and that the application is ready for review pursuant to the procedures and standards of this section. A pre-application conference and on site walk-through will be scheduled with the applicant and such other county departments and/or state agencies that may be involved in the review and processing of the application. 
b.  Pre-application conference issues. 
i.  Physical characteristics of the site; 
ii.  Identify proposed PUD land uses; 
iii.  Describe surrounding land uses and what potential effects the PUD will have on them; 
iv.  Consistency with the comprehensive plan; 
v.  Status of existing and proposed on-sit streets, utilities or other public and private facilities to service the proposed development; 
vi.  Potential drainage concerns; 
vii.  Open space proposed to serve the development; 
viii.  Identification of the appropriate development review procedures for the proposed development. 
e.  Written summary. Within 15 working days of the pre-application conference, the planning and zoning director will summarize the issues discussed in the pre-application conference and mail a copy to the applicant. 
2.  Submission of PUD application. 
a.  In addition to the requirements of article VI, section 604 of the zoning ordinance, the applicant will arrange a meeting and submit to the planning director, in hard and digital format when possible, a PUD application including five copies of the application, master plan, fee as established by the board of commissioners and other required documents. The PUD application shall be submitted to the planning director at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the planning commission. During this 30 day period, the planning director shall distribute copies of the PUD application to the appropriate county departments for review and comment. Each department shall conduct its review and submit written comments to the planning director within ten days after its receipt. 
b.  If any revisions are deemed necessary by the planning director after the review process is complete, the applicant shall submit revisions to the planning director at least ten days prior to the public hearing and pay any additional review fee. 
3.  Approval of PUD application. 
a.  Upon completion of the review of the PUD application, the application will be discussed at a scheduled meeting of the planning commission, at which meeting such application is to be considered in a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing required under this article shall be given in accordance with the Zoning Procedures Act. The planning commission shall recommend to the board of commissioners the approval, approval subject to conditions, or disapproval of the PUD application. The planning commission shall consider the review criteria established in this article when making its recommendations. 
b.  Upon receiving the recommendations of the planning commission, or if 60 days has elapsed after the application has been submitted to the planning director, the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing to review the planning commission's recommendations and the PUD application. The board of commissioners shall approve, approve subject to conditions, deny or table the application. Approval of the PUD application indicates approval of the PUD zoning. The county commission shall take into consideration the review criteria established in this article when making their decision. 
4.  Preliminary plat and construction plans. A preliminary plat and construction plans, i.e., a preliminary development plan for the first phase of the PUD must be submitted within one year of the rezoning of the property. If a preliminary development plan is not submitted within this time frame, the applicant must petition the commission for an extension of time for development. Failure to do so within the required time limits, will result in the invalidation of the PUD zoning. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003) 
Section 1208. - Requirements for the pre-application submittal. 
1.  The pre-application, submitted in a form established by the planning director and made available to the public, shall contain the following information: 
a.  Fee payment. 
b.  All plans submitted must be 24 inches by 36 inches in size. 
c.  Proposed project schedule. 
d.  Exhibit of existing conditions. 
e.  Pictures of existing on-site conditions. 
f.  Conceptual site plan, showing adjacent properties, zoning, existing land uses, within 300 feet of site, existing streets, rights-of-way, dimensions and gross site acreage, proposed arterial and connector roads, driveway locations and parking, scale, vicinity map and north arrow indication. 
g.  Conceptual subdivision plan showing scale, applicable names and addresses, site, adjacent parcels, vicinity map, existing and adjacent zoning and land uses, parcel dimension, residential density (gross acreage and number of lots), all existing buildings, typical lot sizes and setbacks, existing and proposed collector or arterial roadways, and proposed open space. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003) 
Section 1209. - Requirements for the PUD application. 
1.  The application, submitted in a form established by the planning director and made available to the public, shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of record of the land proposed for development. 
b.  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, if different from the owner and an explanation of the difference. 
c.  The name, address, and telephone number of the agent for the application, if there is an agent. 
d.  The name, address, and telephone number of all land use, environmental, engineering, economic, or other professionals that are assisting in the application. 
e.  The street address and legal description of the land on which the PUD is proposed to occur, with attached copies of any instruments referenced, such as, but not limited to, deeds, plats, easements, covenants, and restrictions. 
f.  Evidence that the applicant has unified control of the land proposed for PUD zoning district classification. 
g.  A copy of the relevant Bryan County map and parcel number(s). 
h.  The date and legal description of the proposed PUD zoning district classification. 
i.  A written report which explains the type, nature, intent and characteristics of the proposed development and specifically describes the proposed standards for development, including restrictions on the use of property, density standards, lot size and restrictive covenants. Also include a list of the standards of development, which are exceptions or variations from the design standards of Bryan County subdivision regulations. 
j.  A master plan, at a scale appropriate for a sheet no larger than 36 inches by 42 inches, that contains, but is not limited to, the following: 
i.  The proposed name or title of the development, and the name of the engineer, architect and applicant. 
ii.  A north arrow. 
iii.  A vicinity map locating the land proposed for development. 
iv.  The date and legal description of the proposed PUD zoning district classification. 
v.  Identification of the boundaries of the land shown with bearings, distances, and all existing easements, section lines, streets and physical features. 
vi.  The topography of the site at five-foot intervals. 
vii.  Existing marshes, natural drainage ways, flood plains and other natural features. Conceptual wetland locations or approximate delineations by a soil scientist or environmental scientist should also be shown. 
viii.  Conceptual drainage plan showing effect all phases will have on drainage after completion. 
ix.  Existing streets and easements. 
x.  The proposed parks, school sites or other public and private open space. 
xi.  The vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, including off-street parking and loading areas, driveways, walkways and access points. 
xii.  The site data, including tabulation of the total number of gross acres in the development, the acreage to be devoted to each of the several types of residential, non-residential uses, and open space uses, the total number of residential non-residential lots, minimum lot size, setbacks, number of dwelling units and square feet of gross non-residential building area. 
xiii.  Designation of open space and any complementary structures, and the tabulation of the percent of the total area devoted to open space. 
xiv.  The general location, dimensions and character of construction of all proposed collector or arterial roadways shall be shown on the master plan. Additionally, all points of ingress and egress to a state or county roadway including driveways shall be indicated on the plan. Residential areas and structures, non-residential areas and structures, recreational areas and structures and open space shall also be shown. 
xv.  A delineation of specific areas within the master plan, which constitute the proposed development phases designating different types of development i.e., residential, multifamily, recreation, commercial, public service, etc. 
k.  Assurance that adequate public facilities and services will be available. 
l.  A statement of how open space and recreational facilities will be preserved and maintained. 
m.  A certificate of survey completed by a professional land surveyor registered in the State of Georgia certifying the plat. 
n.  Proposed architectural and landscape deed restrictions that clearly reflect the compatibility of the variety of primary and secondary uses proposed. 
o.  A development schedule. 
i.  Delineating areas to be developed according to their order of construction. 
ii.  Proposing dates for beginning and completing construction of each development phase. 
iii.  Proposing a schedule for the construction and improvement of open space, streets, public facilities, utilities, and any other necessary improvements for each development phase. 
p.  A calculation of the number of average daily and peak hour trips produced by the proposed PUD will access a collector, arterial or scenic parkway and will produce 1,500 or more new vehicle trip ends, a traffic analysis shall be submitted by the applicant for review by the county engineer. The analysis shall demonstrate the impact of the development on the adjacent roads. Included shall be the average daily trips and peak hour trips proposed along with the existing capacity of each roadway. The level of service of each roadway shall also be included for conditions before and after the proposed development. 
2.  Deviation from the approved PUD. Any adjustments which may be required to the approved PUD or associated master plan during the development of the PUD must be approved by the board of commissioners. Any adjustments will be considered based on the following criteria: 
a.  There is no increase in the number of units. 
b.  There is no increase in the number of stories or floor area. 
c.  There is no decrease in the amount of open space and the open space is in the same general location. 
d.  There is no major change in the location of traffic routes. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003) 
Section 1210. - Permits. 
For multifamily homes, model homes within a residential development, non-residential improvements or commercial developments, building permits may be issued after preliminary approval of plat and construction plans by county board of commissioners. No building permits shall be issued for single family homes until the planning director has approved the final plat for the particular development phase and fully recorded with the clerk of superior court. No certificates of occupancy for a particular development phase shall be issued until all facilities and services shown on or provided for on the approved final plat and approved construction plans for the particular development phase are fully installed and approved for use by the county and the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003) 
ARTICLE XIII. - POLICIES AND PROCEDURES IN CALLING AND CONDUCTING A PUBLIC HEARING 

Section 1300. - Policies and procedures. 
As used in this article, the term "board" shall mean either the planning commission or the county commission, as the case may be. The following policies and procedures will be observed in conducting a public hearing: 
(a)  Written comments on the subject of the hearing may be submitted by any citizen or property owner at any time prior to the adjournment of the hearing. 
(b)  Persons desiring to present their views orally at the hearing, must first sign up on a form to be provided by the board prior to the commencement of the hearing. The length of time of oral presentations permitted to each speaker will be determined by the board chairman and will depend upon the number of persons present and desiring to speak. Personal remarks will not be tolerated. 
(c)  The board chairman will cause to be read the proposed zoning decision or other matter under consideration and any departmental reviews pertaining thereto prior to receiving public input on such proposed zoning decision or matter. Proposed zoning decisions shall as a general rule be called in the order in which they are received, provided that nothing shall prevent the board chairman from changing the order of decisions reviewed at the time of hearing. 
(d)  The board chairman shall call each person who has signed up to speak on the proposed zoning decision or matter in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak, except for the applicant, who will always speak first, or if the board has brought a proposed zoning decision or matter to the hearing, then the board shall speak first. Each person shall have only one opportunity and time limit in which to speak and such opportunity and time shall be used only by the person and the person's attorney. The purpose of this provision is disallow additional time not allowed to other speakers, by use of attorneys, thereby gaining an unfair advantage at the hearing. Prior to speaking, the speaker will identify himself and state his current address and if an attorney, identify his client. Only those persons signed up to speak prior to the commencement of the hearing shall be entitled to speak. Notwithstanding anything contained in this article to the contrary, a minimum time period of no less than ten minutes per side shall be allowed for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion by proponents and opponents of each proposed zoning decision. 
(e)  Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning decision or matter under consideration and shall address his remarks only to the board. The merits of the proposed zoning decision or matter shall include evidence or opinions regarding devaluation, fair market value, nuisance, environmental concerns, traffic, noise, aesthetics and in general, the health, welfare and benefit of the county as it is affected by the proposed zoning decision or matter. The speaker shall refrain from comment on unrelated zoning issues, unrelated tracts of land or matters not the subject of the hearing. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or person and from discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed decision or matter under consideration. The board chairman may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
(f)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the board from taking reasonable steps it deems necessary to insure that hearings are conducted in a decorous and safe manner, or to assure that the public hearing on each proposed zoning decision or matter is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
(g)  Prior to the close of the hearing, the board shall announce whether it will vote on the proposed amendment, decision or matter at that same hearing, or whether it will defer its vote for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(h)  Any person desiring a transcript of the hearing must arrange for a court reporter at their own expense. 
(i)  Cross-examination of persons making oral presentations will not be permitted. 
(j)  All questions will be addressed to the board chairman. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
Section 1301. - Policies and procedures in calling a public hearing. 
(a)  Whenever required by this ordinance or the zoning procedures law, public hearings shall be called by either the planning director or the county commission in the manner set forth in this ordinance. However, if a conflict exists between provisions of this ordinance and the Zoning Procedures Law, all public hearings shall be called in the manner set forth in the Zoning Procedures Law. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
ARTICLE XIV. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 1400. - Government property. 
Property owned by Bryan County, the State of Georgia or the United States of America and used or held for governmental purposes, is not subject to this ordinance. 
Section 1401. - Temporary permits. 
The planning director is authorized to issue temporary permits for the following uses, subject to the applicable conditions for each individual temporary use and provided it is determined such uses will cause no traffic congestion: 
(a)  Carnival or circus for a period not to exceed four weeks, subject to approval by the county commission. 
(b)  Religious meetings in a tent or other temporary structure, for a period not to exceed 40 days, except in AR-1, R-30, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts. 
(c)  Open lot sales of Christmas trees for a period not to exceed 45 days. 
(d)  Contractor's office and equipment sheds, for a period of not more than 12 months, provided that such office or shed is placed on the lot to which it is appurtenant. 
Section 1402. - Severability of provisions. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the county that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance hereby adopted are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this ordinance hereby adopted shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, this unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this ordinance hereby adopted. 
Section 1403. - Most restrictive. 
In the event of a conflict between a provision of this ordinance and a provision of either the subdivision regulations of Bryan County or the rules or regulations of the Bryan County board of health or the department of human resources, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998) 
ARTICLE XV. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 1500. - Interpretation of certain terms and words. 
When used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases have the meanings as defined in this article. Terms not defined herein have the same meanings as are found in the latest edition of the American Heritage College Dictionary. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. All pronouns used herein shall be deemed to include the masculine, the feminine and non-personal entities. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
The word "may" is permissive. 
The words "person," "owner," "occupant," "developer," "applicant," [and] "petitioner," include a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual. 
Section 1501. - Definitions. 
(1)  Accessory structure or use - A structure or use that is subordinate to the principal structure or use and which is located on the same lot. Also includes "accessory building." 
(2)  Adult use - A structure or portion of a structure used or proposed to be used for an adult bookstore, adult entertainment establishment or adult theater. 
(3)  Alterations - Any change in the arrangement of a structure, including any work affecting its structural parts; or an enlargement or change in the wiring, plumbing, heating, or cooling system of a structure. 
(4)  Animal shelter (private) - Any premises designated for the purpose of impounding and caring for cats and dogs found running at large or otherwise subject to impoundment in accordance with the provision of this law. Setbacks and buffers requirement should be the same as for kennel. 
(5)  Apartment - A structure which is used or intended to be used as a home or residence for more than two families living in separate quarters. 
(6)  Approved lot - A lot meeting the requirements of this ordinance and all applicable county codes, rules or ordinances. 
(7)  Automotive sales and services - The sale, storage, or repair of new or used automobiles, including paint and body repair shops. 
(8)  Barrier - A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof which completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool. 
(9)  Bed and breakfast - A structure containing less than ten guest rooms or suites of rooms, in which lodging, with or without meals, is provided and offered to the public for compensation, and which is open primarily to transient guests. 
(9)  Board of appeals - The board of established pursuant to article XVI of this ordinance. 
(10)  Board of commissioners ("county commission") - The board of commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia. 
(11)  Bookstore, adult - A use which contains or is used for the display or sale of books, magazines, movie films, still pictures and any and all other written materials, photographic material novelties, devices and related sundry items, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein; or an establishment with a segment or section developed to the sale or display of such material constituting a majority of its retail value of stock displayed for sale or a majority of the monthly gross receipts of the business. 
(12)  Bryan County Building Code Ordinance ("building code") - The ordinance regulating the moving, alteration, or repair of structures and the excavation for or the construction of any structure. 
(13)  Bryan County Code of Ordinances ("Bryan County Code") - The compilation of all laws, regulations, ordinances, and codes of Bryan County as adopted, and amended, by the county commission. 
(14)  Bryan County comprehensive plan ("comprehensive plan") - A document, composed of text and associated maps, entitled as such and adopted by the county commission, and as amended from time to time in accordance with the requirements of the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act. 
(15)  Bryan County engineering and inspections department ("engineering and inspections department") - The agency established pursuant to the Bryan County Code to, along with other duties and functions, carry out certain duties under this ordinance. 
(16)  Bryan County engineering standards ("engineering standards") - The ordinance establishing technical standards for plats, environmental site assessments, other engineering matters and minimum guidelines for the design and construction of subdivision improvements, including, but not limited to, roads, easements, pedestrian ways, subdivision entrances and driveways, recreational tracts, buffers, private water systems, private sewerage systems and drainage systems and other matters. 
(17)  Bryan County planning and zoning commission ("planning commission") - The agency established pursuant to the Bryan County Code to carry out certain duties under this ordinance, along with other duties or functions. 
(18)  Bryan County subdivision regulations ("subdivision regulations") - The ordinance regulating the subdivision of land in the county and other matters. 
(19)  Buffer - A parcel of land free from any structures, except approved screening, permanently set aside with trees and/or shrubs of density sufficient to provide contiguous properties with a measure of privacy. 
(20)  Buildable area - That portion of a lot which may be used or built upon in accordance with this ordinance once the various front, side and rear yard setback requirements required for the zoning district in which the lot is situated have been subtracted from the total lot area. 
(21)  Building - Any structure, except a trailer, which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
(22)  Building permit - A permit issued in accordance with the building code, the Bryan County Code and this ordinance. 
(23)  Building height - The vertical distance from the established average sidewalk grade, street grade, base flood elevation (BFE), or finished grade at the front of the principal structure, whichever is highest, to the highest point of the roof of the principal structure or from the finished grade at the front of the structure to the eve of the principal structure, whichever is least restrictive. 
(24)  Building line - A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the road right-of-way and nearest extreme projection of a building (including all areas covered by any vertical projections to the ground or overhang, walls, roof, or any other part of the structure). 
(25)  Building site - The ground area of a building or buildings together with all open spaces surrounded by said building or buildings. 
(26)  Camper - A motor home, tent, trailer, or other self-contained vehicle designed for recreational purposes. 
(27)  Care facilities - A rest home, nursing home, convalescent home or boarding home for the aged or similar use and established to render domiciliary care for chronic or convalescent patients or hospices, but not including facilities for care of feeble-minded or mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics, senile psychotics, or drug addicts. 
(28)  Central sewer system - A sewerage treatment system, including pipe lines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains and all other constructions, devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, designed for treating or conducting sewage for treatment and disposal into wetlands, lakes, streams, other bodies of surface water or surface land application, but not including treatment and disposal by septic take systems or on-site sewage management systems. 
(29)  Certificate of occupancy - A certificate issued in accordance with the building code, the Bryan County Code and this ordinance. 
(30)  Church - A principal structure and its accessory structures used on a permanent basis, primarily for public worship. 
(31)  Clerk - The individual serving as the clerk of the superior court of Bryan County. 
(32)  Club, private - An organization or association of persons for some common purpose, including, but not limited to a fraternal, social, educational or recreational purpose; but not including an organization formed for profit or to render a service, which is customarily carried on as a business. 
(33)  Commercial - A use of a structure or a lot for any purpose other than residential. 
(34)  Conditional use - Those uses allowed within a zoning district, only after specific requirements are met. The county commission may require additional restraints, restrictions, qualifications, or limiting factors upon any specific use. 
(35)  Conditional use district - A zoning district which allows the county commission to approve a specific use of a lot with conditions attached to the lot to assure the compatibility of the use with surrounding properties in accordance with this ordinance. 
(36)  Day care - There are two types of day care: 
(a)  Family day care home - A facility located in a one-family dwelling which receives not more than eight children, including the family's natural or adopted children residing in the dwelling. It is considered a home occupation use for the purposes of this ordinance. Hours of operation are limited to 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(b)  Day care center facilities - Facilities providing care for children on a regular or nonrecurring basis which do not fall within the above definition of family day care home. 
(37)  Density - The number of dwelling units or buildings per acre; the number of people per dwelling unit, building, acre or mile; or the quantity of people, structures, or dwelling units within a specified area. 
(38)  Department of planning and zoning ("planning department") - The county agency which serves as the staff of the planning commission and carries out other duties and functions as directed by the county commission. 
(39)  Depth of lot - The depth of a lot is the distance between its mean front road line and its mean rear line, measured along the median between the two side lot lines. 
(40)  Development - The carrying out of any construction activity, the making of any change in the use or appearance of any Structure or land, or the subdividing of a lot into two or more parcels. 
(41)  Director of engineering and inspections ("engineering director") - The individual employed by the county commission to supervise the engineering and inspections department. 
(42)  Director of planning and zoning ("planning director") - The individual employed by the county commission to supervise the staff of the planning department and perform the duties outlined herein. 
(43)  Duplex - A dwelling having rooms on two adjoining floors connected by an inner staircase. 
(44)  Dwelling - A building or portion of a building arranged or designed to provide living quarters for one or more families. A guest house or accessory living unit is not deemed to be a dwelling. 
(45)  Dwelling, condominium - A building or series of buildings on the same lot, or portions thereof, containing more than one dwelling units or office units under separate ownership with joint ownership of common areas. 
(46)  Dwelling, one family - A building used or intended to be used as a home or residence in which all living rooms are accessible to each other from within the building, and in which the use and management of all sleeping quarters, all appliances for sanitation, cooking, ventilating, heating, cooling, or lighting are designed for the use of one family only on a minimum of a single lot. One-family dwelling includes modular homes as defined herein. 
(47)  Dwelling unit - One or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for a family. A dwelling unit includes bathroom and kitchen facilities in addition to sleeping and living areas. 
(48)  Engineer - An individual licensed by the State of Georgia as a professional engineer. 
(49)  Entertainment establishment, adult - A use which contains, or is used for commercial entertainment where the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact with or to allow personal contact by employees, devices, equipment or by personnel provided by the establishment; or where the patrons views a series of dance routines, strip performances or other gyrational choreography provided by the establishment which appeals to the prurient interest of the patron. 
(50)  Entertainment facility - A play house, concert hall, or other facility for performance and dancing, excluding adult entertainment establishment. 
(51)  Existing lot of record - A lot described on a plat or deed recorded in the clerk's office that: (a) was recorded prior to June 3, 1975; or (b) was approved by the planning commission or county commission prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
(52)  Family - One person or two or more persons related by blood or marriage, with any number of natural children, foster children, stepchildren or adopted children, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a one-family dwelling. 
(53)  Farm animals, large - Horses, cows, goats, sheep, hogs, or other animals commonly considered as livestock. 
(54)  Farm animals, small - Any animal not defined as a large farm animal and raised or bred for commercial purposes, including fowl, which shall mean chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons, and similar fowl. 
(55)  Fees - All sums required to be paid to the county pursuant to this ordinance, the building code, the Bryan County Code or state law. 
(56)  Floor area - The sum of the gross floor area for each of the several stories under roof, measured from the interior limits or faces of a structure. 
(57)  Frontage - The distance or width of a lot abutting a public or private road, as measured along such right-of-way. 
(58)  Garage, community - A structure or series of structures under one roof, for the storage of vehicles by three or more owners or occupants of property in the vicinity where said structure is situated with no facilities for mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public nature for profit. 
(59)  Garage, private - A structure for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal structure, situated on the same lot as the principal structure for the storage of motor vehicles with no facilities for mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public nature for profit. 
(60)  Garage, public - A structure for the storage, care, repair, or refinishing of vehicles, or a structure containing a public shop, or where vehicle mechanical service is provided. 
(61)  Group dwelling - A building or portion of a building occupied or intended for occupancy by several unrelated persons or families, but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons or families. The term "group dwelling" includes, but is not limited to, the terms "rooming house," "apartment hotel," "fraternity house" or "sorority house," "Y.M.C.A." or "Y.W.C.A." A hotel, or motel, shall not be deemed to be a group dwelling as herein defined. 
(62)  Group home - A residential building under the ownership or supervision of or funded, in whole or in part by a government agency, and occupied or intended for occupancy by several persons who may or may not be related, but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons. 
(63)  Guest house or accessory living unit - A detached unit that is clearly subordinate and incidental to the principal residence on the same building site that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
(64)  Home business office - An office within a dwelling which is secondary to the use of the structure for residential purposes. The office may be for the purposes of service or trade workers who customarily work at various locations, such as electricians, plumbers, appraisers, or individuals who work at home, such as writers or computer programmers. Home business offices are not offices for on-site customer servicing. 
(65)  Home occupation - An occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants of a one-family dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
(66)  Hospital - An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients, and medical and surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices. 
(67)  Hotel - A structure containing individual guest rooms or suites of rooms, in which lodging, with or without meals, is provided and offered to the public for compensation, and which is open primarily to transient guests. 
(68)  Junk - Inoperable, abandoned or wrecked automobiles, trucks, tractors, wagons, trailers, campers, mobile homes, and other such vehicles, machinery, equipment and parts thereof, scrap building materials, scrap piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery, rags, paper, mattresses, beds or bedding, appliances, boats or any other kind of scrap or waste material which is stored, kept, handled, or displayed. As used herein, an abandoned vehicle is a vehicle that either does not have a current year state license plate or has been inoperable for more than 60 days. Also called "salvage." 
(69)  Junk yard - Any lot or structure used for storage or sale of junk, or for the dismantling, storage or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in running condition, or of machinery or parts thereof, but not to be used as a dump. 
(70)  Kennel, commercial - Premises where any number of dogs or cats (four months or older) are kept for sale, breeding and/or temporarily maintained for the public. This provision does not include veterinary clinics. 
(71)  Dog pen - Premises where animals are kept for personal use. As used herein, an adult dog is four months or older. 
(72)  Lifetime learning - Schools teaching specific skills such as music, art, technology, tutorial or remedial education. 
(73)  Lot - A developed or undeveloped tract or parcel of land suitable for building purposes and legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
(74)  Lot, corner - A lot having frontage on two roads which are at their intersection. 
(75)  Lot, interior - A lot which is not a corner lot that has frontage only on one road other than an alley. 
(76)  Lot lines, front - In the case of a lot abutting upon only one road, the front lot line is the line separating such lot from such road. In the case of any other Lot, the front lot line shall be determined by the planning director. 
(77)  Lot lines, rear - The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, or any odd-shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be determined by the planning director. 
(78)  Lot lines, side - A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a road is an exterior side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot, or lots, is an interior side lot line. 
(79)  Lot, through - A lot having frontage on two roads which are approximately parallel. 
(80)  Lounge (see also Tavern) - An area primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. A lounge is distinct from a tavern in the presence of facilities for live entertainment in a lounge. 
(81)  Manufactured home - A structure, transportable in one or more sections which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured homes are constructed to the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards governed by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
(82)  Manufactured housing park - A parcel of land under single ownership providing rental of manufactured housing spaces or manufactured homes. Such manufactured housing park may also include recreational and laundry facilities solely for the use of occupants of the manufactured housing park. 
(83)  Manufactured housing space - An area within a manufactured housing park providing a defined space for the location of an individual manufactured home and its accessory structures. 
(84)  Mobile home - A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in size and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and was manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
(85)  Modular home - A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with the regulations of the Southern Building Code Congress International, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act, or the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act as amended. For the purpose of this ordinance, a modular home is a one-family dwelling. 
(86)  Motel - One or more buildings containing sleeping units which have individual access to the outside in which sleeping accommodations are provided and offered to transient guests for compensation. The term "motel" shall include tourist homes and motor courts. 
(87)  Non-conforming lot - Any existing lot of record which is: (i) smaller than the minimum dimensions, area, or other requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located; or (ii) a remaining tract resulting from a division of land approved by the either the planning commission or county commission between June 3, 1975, and the effective date of this ordinance. 
(88)  Non-conforming structure - Any Structure, including an accessory structure legally existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance which does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance. 
(89)  Non-conforming use - Any use of a lot or structure which use was legally existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and which Use does not comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(90)  Non-complying commercial structure - Any structure erected without a building permit between June 3, 1975, and the effective date of this ordinance and used for commercial purposes. 
(91)  Non-complying lot - A lot: (i) resulting from a division of land between June 3, 1975, and the effective date of this ordinance without the approval of the planning commission or the county commission; and either (ii) described in a deed or shown on a plat recorded in the clerk's office between June 3, 1975, and the effective date of this ordinance; or (iii) is the remaining tract resulting from a division of land described in (i) above. 
(92)  Official zoning map of Bryan County ("zoning map") - The illustration of the manner in which unincorporated areas of the county are classified and divided up into distinct zoning districts. 
(93)  Pedestrian way, recreation and buffer committee ("committee") - The committee established pursuant to the subdivision regulations. 
(94)  Parking space - That area required for the parking or storage of one vehicle, including necessary aisle or driveway space providing access thereto. 
(95)  Personal services - Includes barber, hairdresser, beauty parlor, shoe repair, shoe shine, laundry, laundromat, dry cleaner, photographic studio and businesses providing similar services of a personal nature. 
(96)  Ponds, Class A - A pond located in an A-5 or AR-2.5 zoning district, situated on a lot of at least five acres, with a surface area of greater than 2,000 square feet. 
(97)  Ponds, Class B - A pond located in an A-5, AR-2.5, AR-1.5 or AR-1 zoning district with a surface area of less than 2,000 square feet. 
(98)  Ponds, Class C - A pond with a surface area less than 1,000 square feet that is capable of containing water at a depth of greater than 18 inches. 
(99)  Ponds, Class D - A decorative or landscape pond with a depth of no more than 18 inches. 
(100)  Premises - A lot or other tract of land, including the structure thereon. 
(101)  Principal structure - A structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot or lot on which such structure is situated. 
(102)  Principal use - The specific primary purpose for which a lot or structure is used. 
(103)  Professional services - The conduct of business in any of the following or related categories: law; architecture; accounting; engineering; medicine; dentistry; optometry; osteopathy; podiatry; counseling; psychology; chiropractic or optician. 
(104)  Projected average daily traffic count - The maximum traffic projected for a road at time of complete build out of all land abutting said road, based on five vehicle trips per residence per day. 
(105)  Public body - Any government or governmental agency of Bryan County, the State of Georgia, or the United States of America. 
(106)  Public road - A road owned by either the United States of America, State of Georgia or Bryan County. 
(107)  Public use - Structures and uses of land owned, operated and maintained by a public body, including, but not limited to, schools, fire stations, recreational sites and facilities and water and sewerage treatment facilities. 
(108)  Public utility - Any entity duly authorized to furnish and furnishing to the public under federal, state, county, or municipal regulations: natural gas, telephone, electricity, water, sewage disposal or cable television. 
(109)  Recreation, commercial - Any establishment whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an amusing or entertaining activity and where tickets are sold or fees are collected for the activity. Includes, but is not limited to, skating, water slides, miniature golf courses, arcades, bowling alleys, billiard halls, swimming pools, tennis courts, outdoor racquetball courts, motorized cart and motorcycle tracks. 
(110)  Recreational vehicle - A transportable vehicle constructed for use as temporary living quarters. It may be self-propelled, mounted on a truck bed, or towable on its own chassis. 
(111)  Removal - The date on which a structure is rendered uninhabitable. 
(112)  Repairs - Restoration of portions of a structure to its condition as before decay, wear or damage, but not including alteration of the shape or size of any portion of a structure. 
(113)  Replacement - In the case of a manufactured home or mobile home, the date a certificate of occupancy is issued. In the case of a site built dwelling, the date that the foundation, exterior walls and roof are completed. 
(114)  Residential - A lot or structure used exclusively for family dwelling purposes or intended to be so used, including accessory uses specified herein. 
(115)  Restaurant - A building, room or rooms where food is prepared or served for profit to a group of families, a club, or to the public and for consumption within the enclosed building. 
(116)  Road - A way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. For the purpose of this ordinance, the term "road" or "roads" also means avenues, boulevards, streets, lanes and other public or private ways. 
(117)  Major thoroughfare - A road which is designated as a major thoroughfare on the road classification plan, is designated to move traffic through the county and which has a projected average daily traffic count of 1501+ vehicles per day. 
(118)  Roads, arterial/connector - A road which is designated as an arterial road on the road classification plan and which has a projected average daily traffic count of 1500+ vehicles per day. 
(119)  Road classification plan - An appendix to this ordinance which classifies roads in the county as either major thoroughfares, arterial roads/connector, collector roads, scenic parkways or approved private road systems. 
(120)  Road, collector - Roads which: (i) traffic from minor roads to arterial roads and highways, including the principal entrance roads of a residential subdivision; or (ii) provide circulation within such a subdivision and which have a projected average daily traffic count of 401—1500 vehicles per day. 
(121)  Road, local - A road which provides access only to adjacent properties and does not serve vehicles passing through an area with no origin or destination within such area and which has a projected average daily traffic count of 101—400 vehicles per day. 
(122)  Roads, marginal access - A minor local road which is parallel to and adjacent to arterial roads and highways and which provides access to abutting properties, with protection from through traffic. 
(123)  Road, minor local - A road which provides access only to adjacent properties and does not serve vehicles passing through an area with no origin or destination within such area and which has a projected average daily traffic count of 0—100 vehicles per day. 
(124)  Road, scenic parkway - A road shown in the Bryan County comprehensive plan as a scenic parkway or designated as such by the United States of America, State of Georgia or Bryan County. 
(125)  Rooming house - A building, other than a hotel or dormitory, where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, lodging or lodging and meals are provided for more than three persons not related to the owner of the building. Also called a "rooming house," "boarding house," "cooperative house," and "lodging house." 
(126)  Rooming unit - Any room or group of rooms, forming a single habitable unit used for living and sleeping, but which does not contain cooking or eating facilities. 
(127)  School - A facility used for teaching general curriculum for educational advancement. 
(128)  Screening - A wall, partition or planting carried up to a certain height for separation and protection. 
(129)  Secondary living units ("SLUS") - A dwelling situated on a lot in addition to another dwelling which is the principal structure on the lot. 
(130)  Service station - A structure designated or used for the retail sale or supply of fuel, lubricants, air, water, and other operating commodities for vehicles and including the customary spacing and facilities for the installation of such commodities on, or in, such vehicles, but not including space or facilities for the storage, painting, repair, refinishing, body work, or other servicing of vehicles. 
(131)  Setback - The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building situated on the lot. When two or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior property line so grouped shall be used in determining offsets. 
(132)  Solar collector - A solar device that absorbs and accumulates solar rays for use as a source of energy. 
(133)  Solar energy - Radiant energy received from the sun collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector to produce energy. 
(134)  Solar energy system - A complete assembly consisting of one or more solar collectors and associated mounting hardware or equipment. 
(135)  Solar energy system, accessory; solar electric power generation - Accessory Solar - A solar energy system that is roof mounted or ground mounted as a secondary activity incidental to the primary use of the property. 
(136)  Solar farm - Any freestanding solar energy system as a primary land use and commercial enterprise located on a site larger than 25 acres being the minimum zoning district area requirement. 
(137)  Site built dwelling - A dwelling which is not a manufactured home, mobile home, modular home or trailer. 
(138)  Specified anatomical areas - 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covering (1) human genitals, pubic regions; (2) buttocks; and (3) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(b)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(139)  Specified sexual activities - 
(a)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy or any acts of bestiality; 
(b)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or breast of either male or female; and 
(c)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(140)  Story - That portion of a structure included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. 
(141)  Surveyor - An individual licensed by the State of Georgia as a registered surveyor. 
(142)  Structure - Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, manufactured homes, mobile homes and fences. 
(143)  Subdivision - All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of immediate or future sale, legacy, or building development or all divisions of land involving a new road or a change in existing roads. The term "subdivision" includes the re-subdivision of land and when appropriate to the context relates to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided. Also sometimes called "division." 
(144)  Superintendent - The individual who supervises and directs the operation of the Bryan County board of education. 
(145)  Swimming pool - Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches deep with a closed-loop circulation of water through a water treatment system with a return to the pool. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs or spas. 
(146)  Tavern (see also Lounge) - An area primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. A tavern is distinct from a lounge in the absence of facilities for live entertainment in a tavern. 
(147)  Theater, adult - A structure used for viewing of performances or activities by others, whether such performances are in the form of live shows, motion pictures, slide shows or other forms of photographic or visual display, which are distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
(148)  Trailer - A non-self-propelled vehicle or conveyance permanently equipped to travel upon a street or highway that is not to be used as a residence or living quarters, but may be used as a temporary office. 
(149)  Trash - Cuttings from vegetation, refuse, paper, bottles, or rags. 
(150)  Use - The purpose for which a lot or structure is arranged, designed or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
(151)  Variance - A modification of the strict terms of this ordinance granted by the county commission where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions unique to the individual lot on which the variance is sought and not as a result of any action on the part of the lot owner, a literal enforcement of this ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
(152)  Vehicle - A conveyance for persons or materials. 
(153)  Waterfront - A site shall be considered waterfront provided any or all of its lot lines abut on or are contiguous to any body of water, including creeks, canals, rivers, or any other bodies of water natural or artificial, including marshlands, but excluding swimming pools. 
(154)  Yard - An open space on a lot situated between the principal building on such lot and the lot lines of such lot or situated between the principal building on such lot and the center line of an abutting road. In measuring a yard for determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line or the road center line and the principal building on the lot shall be used. 
(155)  Zoning district - An area delineated with specific geographical boundaries on the zoning map. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1998; Ord. of 9-7-2004; Ord. of 1-6-2004; Ord. of 9-7-2004; Ord. of 8-2-2005; Ord. of 5-4-2010; Ord. of 3-13-2012; Ord. of 10-10-2017(1)) 
ARTICLE XVI. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Section 1600. - Membership; appointment; term of office; vacancies; and compensation. 
(a)  Membership and appointment. The board of appeals ("board") shall consist of three members ("members") residing within the county and appointed by the county commission. None of the members shall hold any other public office in the county. Members shall be removable for cause, upon written charges by the county commission. A member shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the board with respect to property in which the member has an interest. 
(b)  Term of office. The term of office for each member shall be three years; however, in order that no terms shall expire upon the same date, the terms of the original members of the board shall be as follows: one appointee shall serve for two years, one appointee shall serve for three years, and one appointee shall serve for one year. Thereafter, each appointee shall be appointed to serve for three years. Members may be reappointed to successive terms. 
(c)  Compensation. Members shall receive no compensation for service; except, that they shall be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenditures made in connection with their duties. 
Section 1601. - Officers; meetings; quorum; minutes; procedures generally. 
The board shall elect one of its members as chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. The board shall appoint a secretary who may be a member or an employee of the county. The board shall have authority to adopt rules of procedure. Meetings of the board shall be held once per month within the county, with the place, time and date of the meetings specified by the chairman after consultation with the other members. If, in any month, there are no appeals pending for at least 15 days, the board shall not be required to hold a meeting during such month. Two members shall constitute a quorum. 
The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the planning department and shall be a public record. The decision of the board shall be by resolution adopted by a majority of members, which resolution shall contain a statement of the grounds of its decision or action. The full text of the resolution shall be sent to the appellant. If, because of absence or abstention, there is a tie vote on a resolution, the effect shall be an affirmation of the decision appealed from. 
Section 1602. - Power and duty. 
(a)  The board shall hear and decide upon appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the planning director, in the enforcement of this ordinance; 
(b)  Upon the filing of an appeal by an applicant, at time limits for action by the planning director shall be suspended; 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the planning director to carry out the decisions of the board; and 
(d)  Decisions of the board, including the reasons for decisions, shall be transmitted to the planning department and shall be maintained in the records of the planning department. 
Section 1603. - Assistance by county commission. 
The county commission shall provide for such administrative and clerical assistance and office space as is required by the board to carry out its functions under this article XVI. 
Section 1604. - Record. 
The planning director shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
Section 1605. - Appeal process. 
(a)  Filing fee. The filing fee for an appeal shall be $100.00. The filing fee shall be refunded if the board rules in favor of an appellant. 
(b)  Presentation of evidence. The planning director and the appellant shall be entitled to present evidence on the matter before the board. 
(c)  Time for decision; continuance; rehearings; effective date of decisions. The board shall render its decision during the meeting at which an appeal is considered, however, by majority vote, the board may continue a meeting until a time certain within ten days. No rehearings shall be permitted. Decisions of the board shall be effective when made. 
Section 1606. - Calendar of appeals. 
Appeals filed in proper form shall be numbered serially, docketed and placed upon the calendar of the board. The calendar of appeals to be heard shall be posted conspicuously in the office of the county commission prior to each hearing date. 
Section 1607. - Forms. 
Appeals shall be made on forms provided therefor, and all information required on such forms shall be provided by the appellant. Appeals shall be filed with the clerk of the county commission. No appeal shall be accepted by the board unless it contains all pertinent information and is accompanied by the required fee. 
Section 1608. - Appealing an action of the board of appeals. 
If the board of appeals makes a decision which any party believes to be contrary to law, that action may be appealed to the superior court of Bryan County. Such an appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date of the decision of the board of appeals. Said appeal shall be based solely on the record of the board of appeals' decision. No party shall be entitled to a de-novo appeal. 

 
Appendix C - ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS[1] 
BRYAN COUNTY ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix is the county engineering design standards. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE 1. - SHORT TITLE 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Bryan County engineering design standards ("engineering standards"). 
ARTICLE 2. - ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
The commissioners of Bryan County, pursuant to the authority conferred by the provisions of article IX, section 2, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of Georgia of 1983, do ordain and enact into law the engineering standards. 
ARTICLE 3. - PURPOSES 
The engineering standards are adopted for the following purposes, among others: 
(a)  To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Bryan County; and 
(b)  To establish technical standards for plats, environmental site assessments, other engineering matters and minimum guidelines for the design and construction of subdivision improvements, including, but not limited to, roads, easements, pedestrian ways, subdivision entrances and driveways, recreational tracts, buffers, private water systems, private sewerage systems and drainage systems. 
ARTICLE 4. - DEFINITIONS OF TERMS 

Section 400. - Interpretation of certain terms or words. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words in the engineering standards have the customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of the engineering standards, certain words or terms used herein are defined as follows: 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. All pronouns used herein shall be deemed to include the masculine, the feminine and non-personal entities. 
Whenever reference is made in the engineering standards to another article or section of this ordinance, all parts of such article or section are deemed to be included in such reference. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
The word "may" is permissive. 
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
Section 401. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in section 2701 of the subdivision regulations of Bryan County ("subdivision regulations") are incorporated herein by reference and shall have the same definitions herein as set forth in the subdivision regulations. 
ARTICLE 5. - GENERAL 
All submissions shall bear the signature and date across the seal of the engineer who prepared the plans, reports, design consideration, and calculations pertinent to the construction plans. 
All construction in a county right-of-way shall require a permit and approval by the engineering director. 
Details are provided herein to provide specifics on construction. 
If a question concerning the interpretation of the engineering standards arises, the interpretation of the county engineer shall govern. 
The county engineer's written approval must be obtained for any significant change in the approved construction plans prior to implementing the change in the field. 
The engineering inspection services letter, as shown in the sample, shall be provided before approval is given on the construction plans as evidence that inspection services under the direction of an engineer will be provided. 
The applicant's engineer shall require that one set of the approved construction plans be kept in the field and updated on a daily basis by the contractor. The applicant's engineer shall review such set of plans on a weekly basis and make a field report to the file as to the progress of the work and any changes documented which differ from the approved construction plans. 
ARTICLE 6. - REQUIREMENTS 

Section 600. - Required improvements. 
Except as otherwise provided by the subdivision regulations, a developer shall provide, install and pay for the following improvements to serve his subdivision. Utilities shall be located where possible in accordance with the proposed utility location detail. 
(1)  Water supply and distribution; 
(2)  Sanitary sewerage collection; 
(3)  Sewage disposal systems; 
(4)  Road grading and surfacing; 
(5)  Storm drainage; 
(6)  Road name signs; 
(7)  Electricity; 
(8)  Natural gas (optional); and 
(9)  Traffic control devices. 
Section 601. - Easements. 
Easements having a minimum width of 15 feet and located along the side or rear lot line shall be provided as required for utility lines, underground mains and cables and drainage. 
Maintenance easements shall be provided when deemed necessary by the county engineer. Where the county engineer determines from the preliminary plat that a drainage canal within a proposed subdivision requires mechanical cleaning, the developer of such proposed subdivision shall offer to the county a 20 foot access easement on one side of such canal. Such easements may be used as a location for pedestrian ways, bikeways and other amenities which do not conflict with the basic maintenance function of such easements. 
ARTICLE 7. - DRAINAGE 

Section 700. - Stormwater management standards - riparian rights. 
(1)  A certificate from applicant's engineer stating that the development of the subdivision will not increase, decrease or change the quality or quantity of surface or subsurface water reaching adjacent property shall be required. If such certificate cannot be delivered to the county, then an easement from or other agreement with the affected adjacent property owner shall be required. 
(2)  Each subdivision shall incorporate stormwater management facilities sufficient to maintain pre-development peak discharge rates across adjacent property lines. 
(3)  No subdivision shall be undertaken unless the applicant can establish to the county engineer that the flood potential within the subdivision, on adjacent or surrounding lands or wetlands will not be increased by the development of such subdivision. If such potential is in question, the county engineer shall make the final determination. 
(4)  Inter-basin transfer of water between river basins is prohibited. 
Section 701. - Planning and submission requirements. 
(1)  Prior to submission of an application, the applicant and/or his engineer shall meet with the engineering director and the county engineer to determine applicable methodology and existing known drainage conditions. Where existing known drainage problems exist, cooperative methods shall be sought to resolve deficiencies. 
(2)  All applications for construction plan approval shall include a map at appropriate scale of all site areas to be covered by impervious surfaces and calculations of said areas. Any change to [an] impervious surface after approval by the engineering director will require updated maps and the approval of the county engineer. 
(3)  Drainage plans shall be designed to reduce the rear lot drainage facilities by taking advantage of natural topography as much as possible. When rear lot drainage facilities cannot be avoided, they shall be designed to accommodate maintenance. 
(4)  Minimum lot slope grades shall be 2.0 percent. 
(5)  All on-site drainage features shall be piped, including such features (including ditches, swales, streams, canals, etc.). Ditches are not permitted. 
(6)  Swales may be permitted as a special exception by the engineering director where appropriate, but shall be considered a secondary and inferior option for drainage placement. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006; Ord. of 6-19-2012) 
Section 702. - Construction standards. 
(1)  Pipe: 
(a)  Only reinforced concrete pipe Class III and HDPE corrugated pipe shall be used in county road rights-of-way or for subdivision drainage systems. Where HDPE is used the following criteria shall be met: 
·  12 inch minimum cover shall be maintained at driveway crossings. 
·  At driveway crossings, where end treatments are not required pipes shall extend a sufficient length to allow a 4:1 (H:V) or shallower slope from the top of pipe back to the top of the adjacent driveway. 
·  Installation shall be in accordance with GDOT standards. 
(b)  Driveway pipes shall be a minimum of 15 inches in diameter. 
(c)  Pipes located along scenic parkways, major thoroughfares, or arterial/connector roads up to 36 inches in diameter shall have a flared end sections; pipes larger than 36 inches in diameter shall have winged headwalls or other prior approved end treatments. 
(d)  Pipes of dissimilar size shall be vertically aligned with their energy grade line or shall have the crowns of the pipes set at matching elevations when dissimilar size pipes converge at a manhole or other structure. 
(e)  All pipe joints, in addition to the required rubber gaskets, shall be covered with approved geotextile material of sufficient width to be secured to the pipe and completely encircle the joint with a 50 percent overlap. 
(f)  Pipes located on property lines shall have a minimum depth of cover to the finish grade of 36 inches. Where such depth of cover cannot be maintained, the pipe shall be relocated in such a manner that the property owner will not be impaired in the construction of fences and other amenities normally located at such locations and a sufficient easement provided for the relocated position of the pipe. 
(g)  Pipe gradients shall provide self-cleaning velocities without scour (2 - 9 fps). 
(h)  Maximum length of pipe runs shall not exceed 300 feet. All drainage pipes shall begin and end in either inlets, manholes, or end treatments. 
(i)  Only reinforced concrete pipe and HDPE corrugated pipe will be approved for drainage systems which the county will be required to maintain. The pipe installation shall be in accordance with GDOT standards. 
(j)  Other types of pipe may be used if approved, in writing, by the county engineer prior to use. 
· Curb inlets. All inlets shall be of the standard design. Curb inlets should be located at the end of corner curve radius. 
· Drainage swales. 
Swales with a velocity greater than five feet per second shall be paved a minimum of two feet wide and six inches deep. 
Swales shall have a 5:1 side slope or flatter; however, if a swale traverses a wooded site, use of a 3:1 side slope may be submitted for approval by the county engineer to reduce impact on trees. 
Prior to use, drainage swales shall have sufficient vegetation to provide filtration and erosion stabilization. 
Drainage pipes or gutter flow shall not discharge into a swale. 
· Maintenance. All swale banks shall be constructed in a manner that the side slopes will not erode and can be maintained with riding grass cutting equipment. The type of soil encountered will be considered in selecting the proper slope. Side slopes flatter than 3:1 may be required if soil conditions warrant. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2006; Ord. of 6-5-2007; Ord. of 6-19-2012) 
Section 703. - Drainage design standards, methodology and criteria. 
(1)  On-site stormwater control. All applications for subdivision approval will provide for on-site retention or detention (dry or wet) for the differential between pre-development and post-development computed peak runoff. The site shall be the total area of development, including non-contiguous lands if part of a non-contiguous planned unit development (PUD) application, and shall be owned in fee simple or have perpetual cross easements for drainage purposes. 
(2)  Methodology. 
Two hydrological methods for computing surface runoff are hereby adopted: "The Rational Method" and U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service (SCS), Technical Release No. 55 (TR-55), entitled "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds." 
Alternative computer models may be utilized if such computer models are approved by the county engineer. 
(3)  Drainage design criteria. The following design criteria shall be used for either methodology utilized for computation: 
Design storm. The design storm for Bryan County shall be the 25-year frequency, 24-hour, antecedent condition II for all on-site roads, swales, drainage systems and ditches, etc. The design storm for all detention basins, retention basins, outfall structures and outfall pipes shall be the 100-year frequency, 24-hour storm event. 
Impacts. Required. 
(a)  Site inflows (cfs); 
(b)  Site outfall (cfs); 
(c)  Tidal backwater effects; 
(d)  Soil characteristics; 
(e)  Static water levels; 
(f)  Peak water levels - 25-year storm; 
(g)  Peak water levels shall be checked relative to 100-year storm frequency in setting first floor elevations; 
(h)  Pre-development conditions shall be carefully evaluated as to adequacy of drainage design (if any) and removed, replaced, or reworked if found unsatisfactory. 
(4)  General requirements. 
An overall map of the drainage area with basin area, length, and slope information keyed to the drainage calculations. 
The calculations shall clearly show how the time of concentrations was determined. 
Pipe sizing calculations shall be checked for inlet and outlet control. Maximum headwater and tailwater conditions should be provided. 
Flood plain elevations and zones for the FEMA 100-year storm shall be shown on the construction plans. 
Where FEMA flood elevation has not been determined. Applicant's engineer shall provide such elevations based on his study and set the finish flood elevations one foot above the 100-year flood elevation or the peak elevation backwater of the 100-year storm event within the subdivision. 
Detention and retention ponds shall be designed so that shorelines are meandering where possible to increase the length of shoreline, thus offering more space for growth of littoral vegetation for filtering purposes. 
Maximum basin side slopes shall be 3:1, except where soil conditions require flatter slopes. 
Wet detention basins shall have a permanent pool depth of not less than four feet to reduce bottom vegetation growth. 
Dry basins must be designed with access to allow for efficient maintenance of the basin bottom and side slopes. 
Detention and retention ponds shall be designed to provide at least one foot of vertical detention storage volume for runoff above the proposed dry weather water level design elevation. 
Major drainage canals shall not be used for storage. 
Use of rectangular weir outlets will be allowed only where the weir will provide better outlet control needed for a given situation than that provided by a V-notched weir. V-shaped or V-notched weir outlets are recommended to achieve detention storage. Use of innovative outlet structures such as pip-culvert combinations, perforated riser pipes, or special graduated opening outlet control boxes, are encouraged as ways of reproducing pre-development runoff conditions. 
Design data for storage volume and detention outlet requirements shall be submitted and approved by the county engineer. 
Detention and retention ponds shall be designed for ten-year sediment load before the one-foot storage volume requirement is included. 
The principal outlet must convey the design peak flow without emergency overflow. 
Use of concrete weirs or standpipes are preferred over undersize pipes. Restrictor plates are prohibited. 
Where cleared site conditions exist around detention or retention areas, the bank shall be sloped to proposed dry weather water surface elevation and planted for stabilization purposes. Where slopes are not practical or desired, other methods of bank stabilization will be used and noted on plans submitted. 
Dredging, clearing, deepening, widening, straightening, stabilizing or otherwise altering natural waterbodies or canals may be permitted by the county engineer only when a positive benefit can be demonstrated. Such approval by the county does not obviate the need for state or federal agency approvals where applicable. 
Section 704. - Direct stormwater discharge. 
(1)  Tidal discharges. 
Where direct discharges are requested into tidal areas, the department of natural resources and/or the Corps of Engineers and the county engineer approval is required before a permit to construct is granted. Granting of a permit will be based upon unique site hardships and not hardships created by the proposed development plan, or financial consideration. 
New drainage outfalls into marshlands, tidal waters, or wetlands shall be approved by the Corps of Engineers and/or Georgia Department of Natural Resources. Any modification to existing outfalls that have inverts below +3.5 MSL or any modification that results in the invert being lower than mean high tide, shall be approved by the various state and federal agencies having jurisdiction. 
Tide control structures shall be installed where the invert elevation of the first structure is below mean high tide. 
(2)  Discharges to natural water bodies. Where a specific site requires a permit to allow direct discharge into a natural water body, methods of diffusing and filtering the discharge and of reducing velocity may be required. 
(3)  No stormwater discharge shall be permitted directly onto any beach. 
(4)  Final landscape design and planting shall not work against the stormwater runoff controls and drainage concepts approved as part of the construction plan approval process. 
(5)  Rip rap. Where discharge velocities exceed five feet per second (fps), rip rap shall be provided in accordance with the table herein. Where this is not desirable, energy dissipation devices of concrete may be used instead of rip rap. 
Graded Rip Rap Stone Table 

 
  
Section 705. - Drainage easement. 
All drainage easements to the county must be cleared. The county shall require as a condition for obtaining approval of runoff control and drainage plans that the applicant record plats and covenants where available ensuring that drainage easements and facilities are assigned to a specific entity. 
The applicant shall submit to the county commission a request for permanent dedication of drainage systems for county maintenance. The county engineer shall certify that all as-built improvements so offered are in conformance with approved plans and with all prevailing county standards. 
Should drainage systems and easements be deeded to a homeowners' or landowners' association, the general maintenance requirements necessary to ensure the long-term functions of stormwater runoff controls, easements and drainage facilities shall be described in the documents establishing such association. The documents will also state that Bryan County or a legal entity having authority over such drainage may perform or require the homeowners' or landowners' association to take action under the following conditions: 
(1)  If normal maintenance is not performed and it [is] adversely affecting drainage flow. 
(2)  To alleviate flooding or other drainage problems upstream or downstream of the easement. 
Section 706. - Underground storm sewers and drainage. 
All existing natural water courses, ditches, canals and swales located on a property to be developed shall be protected to the greatest extent possible. Only where a drainage study justifies that no other alternatives are available to mitigate flooding impacts due to the proposed development will be [the] diverting of a stream or existing water body be allowed, subject to obtaining all necessary permits for the proposed improvements. All new drainage features required for a development must be diverted through underground storm drain pipes. Adequate access for maintenance and improvements of the drainage facility will be required. Generally, for underground storm drain pipes the minimum width of the easement shall not be less than 30 feet. Additional width may be required based on drainage requirements. Sufficient width as determined by the county engineer will be provided within the easement on one side of the pipe to allow for service equipment mobility and storage of removed fill. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2011) 
Section 707. - Open channel rights-of-way. 
Open channel rights-of-way shall be sized in the table below. The open channel shall be located in the easement to provide an adequate maintenance area on each side of the open channel. 
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY SIZING TABLE 

 
  
All storm drainage rights-of-way shall be reviewed by the county engineer and upon approval recorded in the clerk's office and two copies submitted to the engineering director. 
Section 708. - Water surface elevations. 
No subdivision will be permitted which alters the surface water elevation of any waterbody or wetland in such a way as to adversely affect the natural drainage from any upstream or downstream areas of the drainage basin on a permanent basis. 
The county engineer shall review and approve any water surface elevation proposed for lagoons or waterbodies. An applicant shall submit sufficient groundwater and topographic elevation data around the proposed waterbody site to assist in establishing the water surface elevation and area of coverage. 
As a condition of drainage plan approval, the county may require that adjustments be made to existing or approved water surface elevations if upstream or downstream areas require such adjustments to provide required drainage flows. 
Section 709. - Exemptions from site runoff and drainage planning. 
The following activities shall be exempt from the requirements of site runoff control and drainage planning: 
(1)  Any maintenance, alteration, renewal, use or improvement to an existing drainage system as approved by the county engineer which does not create adverse environmental or water quality impacts and does not affect the velocity, volume or location of stormwater runoff discharge; or 
(2)  Work by agencies or property owners required to meet emergency flooding conditions. If possible, emergency work should be approved by the duly appointed officials in charge of emergency preparedness or emergency relief. Property owners performing emergency work will be responsible for any damage caused by their unauthorized actions. Property owners will restore the site of the emergency work to its approximate pre-emergency conditions within a period of 60 days following the end of the emergency. 
Section 710. - Erosion and sediment control. 
Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be required on all sites adjacent to waterbodies or drainage ways in which one-half contiguous acre or more of land surface is to be uncovered. An applicant shall show erosion and sediment control measures between the uncovered areas and adjacent waterbodies or drainage ways on plans submitted for approval. (See the State of Georgia "Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control" for details.) The applicant must apply for a land disturbing activity permit in accordance with the requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.) and the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, as amended. 
Section 711. - Lakes, ponds and waterways. 
Artificial or natural waterways, lakes, or ponds for recreation shall not be accepted for maintenance by the county. 
Waterways, lakes, ponds, detention or retention basins shall be maintained by either an established homeowners association or individual property owner(s). In either case, the final plat must indicate who will be responsible for maintenance. The county will not accept maintenance of drainage basins. 
Private maintenance provisions must be made to the satisfaction of the county engineer. The developer is not allowed to be designated as the responsible provider of maintenance. Placing responsibility on the owner(s) of the property where the feature is located is allowed, if suitable notes and easements are provided on the final plat and other legal instruments. 
Section 712. - Drainage details. 

 
  






(Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
ARTICLE 8. - PAVEMENT DESIGN 
Where curb and gutter is a part of the road design, the following will be observed: 
The maximum linear gutter line distance stormwater can traverse shall be 300 feet unless the applicant's engineer can substantiate that for a 25-year storm: 
(1)  Stormwater carried in the gutter will not over top the curb; and 
(2)  Stormwater will not rise on the paved surface to obscure the centerline and a width of one foot each side of the centerline of the roadway maintained. 
"Asphalt wearing surface course for all roads shall consist of two inches of GDOT 9.5 mm Superpave. All asphalt installation shall comply with all provisions of the Georgia Department of Transportation criteria for material and placement. 
Pavement base section design shall be based on road classification in accordance with article 9, Road Standards, as follows: 
Major thoroughfare/arterial roads shall consist of six inches graded aggregate base and four inches 25 mm Superpave, or approved equal with a minimum structural coefficient of 2.6. 
Collector roads shall consist of eight inches graded aggregate base course and two inches 19 mm Superpave, or approved equal with a minimum structural coefficient of 2.0. 
Local roads shall consist of eight inches graded aggregate base or approved equal with a minimum structural coefficient of 1.12." 
Sub-base shall be a minimum of 12 inches of granular material compacted to a 100 percent standard proctor density. Additional lifts below the first 12 inches shall be compacted to a 95 percent standard proctor density or greater. All roads shall be proof rolled and witnessed by a representative of the county engineering and inspection department prior to the base material being placed. All unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2012) 

Section 800. - Residential and local road design. 
Minimum centerline pavement grade with curb and gutter shall be 0.50 percent. 
Maximum centerline pavement grade shall be 4.0 percent. 
Minimum road elevation shall be 8.0 feet MSL. 
Minimum roadway cross slope shall be 2.00 percent. 
Maximum road design speed: 30 miles per hour. 
Minimum sight distance: 200 feet. 
Minimum centerline radius of curve: 100 feet. 
Minimum tangent between reverse curves: 50 feet. This may be reduced to zero feet with the approval of the county engineer. 
The minimum required separation from the pavement base material and seasonal high water table shall be two feet as specified by the USDA Soil Conservation Manual. Any deviations from this standard must be approved by the county engineer. 
(Ord. of 3-4-2008; Ord. of 6-19-2012) 
Section 801. - Curb and gutter. 
Curb and gutter shall be constructed with Portland cement concrete having a 28 day strength of 3,000 psi. Slip form or machine curb and gutter shall have expansion material minimum of one-half inch thick with a maximum spacing of 100 feet and abut a solid structure where one day's pour abuts a previous day's pour. Construction joints one-fourth to one-third the depth of the gutter shall be sawed or tooled at a maximum spacing of 20 linear feet. 
Concrete gutters may be 12 inches, 18 inches or 24 inches wide; and combined curb and gutters may be 18 inches, 24 inches or 30 inches wide, respectively. 
Where roadside ditches are permitted and pedestrian ways are provided, crosswalks shall be provided when road lengths exceed 600 feet. Crosswalks should have a minimal interval of 500 feet. This interval may be modified based on design of subdivision road layout, block length, design speed, etc. The ditch or ditches on both sides of the road shall be piped and the pipe covered with compacted fill. A concrete six-foot wide pedestrian way shall be provided across the ditch and shall connect the pavement to the proposed pedestrian way in the subdivision. The road shall be marked with reflector paint and striped. The speed limit shall be reduced to 15 miles per hour. 
Residential curb and gutter shall have a minimum gutter thickness of six inches. Commercial curb and gutter shall have a minimum gutter thickness of eight inches and shall be thicker as required by its location, soil conditions and traffic load. 
Section 802. - Paving details. 
Typical Standard Local Road — PD-1 

ARTICLE 9. - ROAD STANDARDS 
For the purpose of these engineering standards, roads shall be defined based on the number of vehicle trips per day as follows: 

 
  
Utility installation (electrical, telephone, cable television and gas) are encouraged to be placed underground in all new subdivisions, except where overhead service can be provided to adjoining properties without the addition of new poles. 
See detail for preferred locations of underground utilities and services. 
Road standards not specifically addressed or where conditions warrant, the design shall conform to the standards of practice in Traffic Engineering Handbook, Institute of Transportation Engineers, latest edition. 

Section 900. - Roads. 
(1)  Sight distance. No fence, wall, tree, terrace, building, sign, shrubbery, hedge, other planting or structure or object capable of obstructing driver vision will be allowed at intersections. 
(2)  Clear right-of-way. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be required that the right-of-way be cleared, all surface improvements removed from the right-of-way, and all sub-surface improvements parallel to the pavement be re-located from under the pavement. All areas disturbed during construction and shoulders and slopes shall be seeded to obtain permanent vegetation for controlling erosion. 
(3)  Clear zone. The maximum possible clear zone within the proposed right-of-way shall be provided. Guardrails shall be provided if obstructions cannot be eliminated. Also, guardrails shall be provided at bridge ends, along slopes steeper than 4:1 exceeding ten feet [in] height, and at other hazardous locations. 
(4)  Roadside parking. All roads shall be considered to provide roadside parking unless plans clearly state that roadside parking will be prohibited. Where roadside parking is prohibited, the applicant shall provide for "No Parking" signage as part of the design. Where roadside parking is provided, a nine-foot wide paved surface will be provided for each lane. 
(5)  Roadside shoulders. Except as otherwise provided herein, roadside shoulder shall be a minimum of eight feet wide for arterial roads and collector roads and 6.5 feet for local roads, except where roadside parking is permitted. 
(6)  Roadway drainage. The roadway drainage shall be adequate with sufficient outfall. 
(7)  Roadside subgrade drains. Parallel roadside sub-drains shall be a six-inch diameter perforated pipe surrounded with graded aggregate, surrounded with an approved geotextile material in a 24-inch wide trench with a minimum of two-foot depth. See detail herein. 
(8)  Roadside signs. All signs, structures, and appurtenances located within the shoulder shall be of break-away construction. 
(9)  Geometry. The geometry (vertical and horizontal) shall conform to the following requirements: 
Sight distance for vertical curves. 

 
  
Horizontal curves. Where a deflection angle or more than ten degrees occurs in the alignment of a marginal access or minor road or road, a curve of reasonable radius shall be introduced. A curve shall be introduced at any change in direction of a collector road or major thoroughfare. On major thoroughfares, the centerline radius of curvature shall be determined by the county engineer. On collector roads, the centerline radius of curvature shall not be less than 350 feet. On local roads, the centerline radius of curvature shall not be less than 100 feet unless the topography of the land to be subdivided makes this impractical. 
(10)  Access to adjacent property. Each road must connect to an existing public road or an approved private road system. The road must not possess any unusual features that will cause the construction or maintenance cost to be abnormal. 
(11)  Roads located on dams. If a road is located on a dam, the dam must be declared safe in accordance with the Dams and Reservoirs Safety Act. 
(12)  Reserved strips prohibited. A road intended to be dedicated to the county shall not be located so that a narrow buffer strip is maintained between the right-of-way of such road and adjacent property in such a manner as to deny access to another adjacent property. 
(13)  Access to arterial roads. No residential road, driveway, or other access point shall enter an arterial road at a point nearer than 500 feet from an existing highway, road, driveway, or other access point; except where an existing lot of record would be rendered unusable by the strict application of this provision. 
(14)  Roadside ditches. Roadside ditches over three feet deep shall be piped, and a parallel sub-drain system shall be provided as deemed appropriate by the county engineer. 
Section 901. - Property access. 
(1)  Permits for all driveways, curb cuts and roadside culverts shall be obtained from the engineering director. 
(2)  Installation of new driveways on curb and gutter roads must conform with the driveway curb cut detail herein. 
Section 902. - Curb cut location and design. 
Where the lowering or cutting away of curbs, or the placement of driveway pipe and/or asphalt on non-curb sections is required for the purpose of ingress and egress to a lot or subdivision, such work shall be subject to the following provisions. The county engineer may require submission and review of an access plan. Access to each parcel in PUD developments and commercial/industrial properties shall be reviewed during construction plan review. 
(1)  Residential curb cuts. 
(a)  No more than two combined entrances and exits shall be allowed for any lot, having a frontage less than 200 feet on any one local road. Additional entrances or exists for lots having a frontage in excess of 200 feet may be permitted at the rate of one entrance/exit for each additional 100 feet of frontage. 
(b)  For local road intersections (corner lots), no curb cuts shall be located within 25 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or such lines extended, or within 15 feet of the end of curb radius, whichever is more restrictive. On collector roads, no driveway shall be within 70 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or curb lines extended or 55 feet of the intersection of the two right-of-way lines, or within 50 feet of the end of curb radius. 
(c)  The distance between any two curb cuts on the same side of the roads shall not be less than ten feet on local roads and 25 feet on collector roads. Where is [the] posted speed limit on any road is 50 miles per hour or greater the minimum distance shall be 350 feet, or the greatest distance obtainable from pre-existing driveways. When necessary, shared driveways between lots will be required at the right-of-way line. Said distance shall be measured between the points of tangency of the curb return radii. 
(d)  The width of the driveway shall not exceed 20 feet at the right-of-way line and 24 feet at the edge of the pavement. 
(e)  Curb cuts for abandoned sites, or where access is obstructed due to parking lots, buildings, or other permitted structures, the old driveway shall be removed, the sidewalk (if existing) shall be replaced, the curb and gutter shall be replaced, fill dirt backfilled to its natural state and grassed; where it is a piped drive to a dirt or paved road, said pipe shall be removed, asphalt removed, and the shoulders and ditch regraded to its previous state. 
(2)  Commercial and multi-family curb cuts. Commercial and multi-family curb cuts shall be installed by the property owner in accordance with the approved plans by the county engineer. 
(a)  No more than two combined entrances and exits shall be allowed for any parcel where the frontage is less than 300 feet on any one road. On parcels with less than 150 feet of frontage, only one combined entrance and exit shall be allowed (two one-way driveways shall be allowed in lieu of the one two-way). Additional entrances or exits for parcels of property having frontage in excess of 300 feet may be permitted at the rate of one entrance/exit for each additional 150 feet of frontage. 
(b)  For local road intersections (corner lots), no curb cuts shall be located within 25 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or such lines extended, or within 15 feet of the intersection of two right-of-way lines or such lines extended, or within 15 feet of the end of curb radius, whichever is more restrictive. On collector roads, no driveway shall be within 70 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or curb line extended or 55 feet of the intersection of the two right-of-way lines, or within 50 feet of the end of curb radius. 
(c)  The distance between any two curb cuts on the same side of a road shall be not less than 25 feet on local roads and 25 feet on collector roads. Where the posted speed limit on any road is 50 miles per hour or greater the minimum distance shall be 350 feet, or the greatest distance obtainable from pre-existing driveways. When necessary, shared driveways between lots will be required at the right-of-way line. Said distance shall be measured between the points of tangency of the curb return radii. 
(d)  All driveways shall be constructed so as to be at least 12.5 feet radius for multi-family and at least 25 feet radius for commercial development. 
(e)  Maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 35 feet measured at the end of the radii, minimum of 12.5 feet radius. 
(f)  Curb cuts for abandoned sites, or where access is obstructed due to parking lots, buildings, or other permitted structures, the old driveway shall be removed, then sidewalk (if existing) shall be replaced, the curb and gutter shall be replaced, fill dirt backfilled to its natural state and grassed; where it is a piped driveway to a dirt or paved road, said pipe shall be removed, asphalt removed and the shoulders and ditch regraded to its previous state. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2014) 
Section 903. - Roads within subdivisions. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, roads within subdivisions shall have a standard road width of 27 feet back to back with curb and gutter and a shoulder width of 6.5 feet. When roadside swales or ditches are permitted, the road width shall be 24 feet wide with a 6.5 foot shoulder or greater. Where roadside parking is required, the paved road width will be increased nine feet for each lane. 
Section 904. - Traffic control plan. 
An applicant shall furnish a traffic control plan for all subdivisions involving public or private rights-of-way for review and approval. This requirement applies to all subdivisions which increase the traffic [of the] county and/or have an impact on traffic routing. Traffic counts shall be determined to be equal to five vehicles per day (vpd) per lot. Other counts will be accepted that are in conformance with the most current edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineer's Trip Generation Manual (ITE Manual). 
The traffic control plan shall indicate all traffic control/warning signs and devices required for the safe and orderly flow of traffic. This plan shall include, but not be limited to, signs such as: NO PARKING, STOP, DEAD END, SPEED LIMIT, SLOW-CHILDREN PLAYING, YIELD PEDESTRIAN CROSSING, ROAD NAME, and pavement striping. 
An applicant shall also be responsible for any changes or additions required in the road from which access to the subdivision is authorized. The county engineer may require additional information and traffic engineering studies to determine impact on the neighboring road system by the proposed subdivision. The improvements to the neighboring road system that may be required include turn lanes, passing lanes, acceleration lanes, deceleration lanes, by-pass lanes, signs, pavement markings, etc. 
All traffic control signs, devices, and striping shall conform with the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition. All traffic control and warning signs shall be of engineering grade reflectorized quality, made on extruded aluminum sign blanks and mounted on galvanized U-channel posts. All installations shall be compatible with the standards used by the county's engineering and inspections department. All incidental hardware for signage shall meet or exceed specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Concrete control monuments shall be placed on the lot property lines intersections with the road right-of-way lines shown on a site-specific basis determined during the construction review process. 
Section 905. - Exceptions from paving width and required right-of-way clearing requirement. 
If the following criteria are met, the required paving width within a proposed subdivision can be reduced by 20 percent and any such road shall have a minimum of six-foot cleared shoulders: 
(a)  The combined acreage of all lots is not more than the balance of acreage in the subdivision, excluding from the lots and balance of acreage: marshlands, wetlands and roads; 
(b)  The roads within the subdivision are designated as an approved private road system; 
(c)  The number of lots is no more than 20; 
(d)  No subsequent subdivision of lots shall be permitted and the county engineer must approve the documentation of such prohibition. 
Section 906. - Road details. 

 
  











Section 907. - Bryan County Dirt Road Standards. 
(1)  Materials. Soil shall be Class II-B-3 or better as defined in Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications Construction of Roads and Bridges, section 810.01. Where this soil is not naturally available it shall be stabilized with graded aggregate or sand. 
(2)  Compaction. The entire surface of the in-place material shall be plowed, harrowed and mixed to a depth of six inches, brought to grade and compacted using a sheepsfoot roller. In areas predominantly sand, the engineering director may permit the use of a vibratory roller. 
(3)  Elevation. The minimum elevation shall be eight feet [above] mean sea level. 
(4)  Crown. The road shall slope form the centerline to the edge at three-eighths inch per foot or shall drop a minimum of 0.3 feet. 
(5)  Drainage. The road shall have adequate drainage provided by means of roadside swales or ditches. Where there are low points in the road topography, drainage shall be provided using a minimum 18-inch diameter reinforced concrete pipe across the road laid on grade with the existing ditch profile and the road constructed over the pipe. There shall be a minimum of 12 inches of clearance between the top of the pipe and the top of the fill over the pipe. 
(6)  Design criteria. 

 
  
ARTICLE 10. - PEDESTRIAN WAYS 

Section 1000. 
When required in the subdivision regulations, pedestrian ways shall be shown on the construction plans, which shall indicate the location of pedestrian ways and provide the typical pedestrian way detail. 
(1)  Pedestrian ways situated within dedicated rights-of-way. 
(a)  Residential subdivision. 
(i)  The location of the pedestrian ways shall be placed one foot inside the right-of-way or as otherwise approved by the county engineer and in a logical terminus and with wheelchair access. 
(ii)  Pedestrian ways shall be four feet wide, four inches thick, broom-finished, Portland cement concrete with a minimum 28-day strength of 2,500 psi. The slope shall not be less than one-fourth inch per foot. 
(b)  Non-residential subdivision. 
(i)  Pedestrian ways shall be a minimum of six feet wide and shall have minimum thickness of four inches, broom-finished, Portland cement with a minimum 28-day strength of 2,500 psi. The slope shall not be less than one-fourth inch per foot. Thickness of commercial sidewalks shall be determined by applicant's engineer to accommodate the use at the location of the feature. 
(c)  Multi-family, parks, recreational areas, or campus. 
(i)  Pedestrian ways in areas other than residential and commercial shall have a minimum width of eight feet or wider to accommodate the requirements of the facility and serve the purpose intended, and shall meet all other requirements of non-residential pedestrian ways. 
(2)  Pedestrian ways not situated within dedicated rights-of-way. 
(a)  Any such pedestrian way shall be restricted as part of a subdivision common open space when on a residential site; on a non-residential site, a permanent easement shall be reserved and maintenance assigned to a specific entity. 
In any event, the county engineer must approve the plan for ownership and maintenance of pedestrian ways. The pedestrian way may be counted toward the requirement in the subdivision regulations for recreation tracts. 
(b)  Choice of surface materials include concrete, bituminous mixes, soil cement, stabilized earth, treated wood planking, and pavers, and shall depend upon use and users of the pedestrian way and its relationship to other amenities. Other material may be approved by the county engineer depending on the location and ability to be relatively maintenance free. 
(c)  Pedestrian ways may be sized on the probable volume of pedestrian traffic, and in consideration of the site's location with respect to recreation tracts, parks, schools, and commercial areas. Pedestrian ways shall be a minimum of eight feet wide. 
Section 1001. - Bikeways and bicycle lanes. 
(a)  If provided by the applicant, bikeways may be sized on the probable volume of bicycle traffic, and in consideration of the site's location in relation to other populated areas or its location with respect to an overall bike route plan adopted by the planning commission. Bikeways shall be minimum of eight feet paved width provided for two-way bicycle traffic and a five-foot width for one way bicycle traffic. 
(b)  If provided by the applicant, bicycle lanes shall be at least four feet wide, or wide enough to allow safe passage of bicycles and motorists. Bicycle lanes are not allowable on arterial roads. 
Section 1002. - Pedestrian way detail—PW-1. 

ARTICLE 11. - PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS 

Section 1100. - Water supply. 
(1)  The electrical supply for all private water systems shall be protected with lighting arrestors. 
(2)  All private water systems serving 100 lots or more shall provide a master water meter at the well site. 
(3)  All private water systems serving 200 lots or more shall provide a backup well and pump. 
(4)  All electrical control systems for private water systems shall provide surge and phase protection with automatic restart in the control cabinet and shall provide for the connection of an emergency standby generator. Where emergency standby power provisions are provided, a warning label shall be provided stating the phase, voltage, delta or wye service and any other information necessary for safety and emergency service by others. 
(5)  All water systems shall supply at least the maximum instantaneous demand plus 500 gallons per minute for fire flow with a residual pressure at the end of the system of 20 psi. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Section 1101. - Water distribution. 
(1)  General. 
(a)  Manholes, pits, or vaults containing valves, blow-offs, meters, pressure reducing valves, or other appurtenances in the distribution system shall drain to the surface of the ground where they are not subject to flooding by surface water, or to absorption pits underground. Under no circumstances are such to be connected to storm or sanitary sewer systems. 
(b)  Water mains shall be laid at least ten feet horizontally from any existing or proposed sewer. 
(c)  Where water mains and sewer cannot be laid to the above standard, the mains shall be laid to conform with the Georgia Environmental Protection Division's Rules and Regulations and as a minimum shall comply with the recommended standards for water works as promulgated in the "Ten State Standards." 
(d)  All water mains shall have a minimum diameter of eight inches. All systems shall be designed to provide a minimum fire flow of 500 gpm. 
(e)  All water distribution systems shall have three-way type fire hydrants a minimum of 800 feet apart and shall be no more than 500 feet from each house. Multifamily, commercial, and industrial fire hydrants shall be a minimum of 500 feet apart. Dead end streets and cul-de-sacs shall have a fire hydrant installed so that the primary entrance to the most distant building is not greater than 300 feet. 
(f)  Dead end water mains that exceed 300 feet and 600 feet in length shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter and ten inches in diameter, respectively; except where plans for a future development allow for the main to be tied into an existing system, and a performance bond is submitted for the proposed improvement. 
(g)  New water mains installed in conjunction with a subdivision shall extend to the farthest lot line owned by the developer, or in the case of a phased development, to the farthest lot line of that phase of development. If mains terminate 300 feet or less from an existing water main, the developer shall be required to connect to the existing water main in order to loop the system. 
(2)  Underwater crossings. 
(a)  A minimum cover of two feet shall be provided over the pipe. When crossing water courses which are greater than 15 feet in width, the following shall be provided: 
(i)  The pipe shall be of special construction, having flexible watertight joints. Pipe shall be wrapped with a protective covering to be specified by the county engineer. 
(ii)  Valves shall be provided at both ends of the water crossing so that the section can be isolated for testing or repair. The valves shall be easily accessible and not subject to flooding. The valves shall be installed in a manhole or vault. 
(iii)  Permanent taps shall be made on each side of the valve on the source side to allow insertion of a small meter to determine leakage and for sampling purposes. 
(3)  Above-water crossings. The pipe shall be adequately supported and anchored, protected from damage, freezing, accessible for repair and with expansion and contraction joints. 
(4)  Dead ends. Dead ends shall be minimized by looping of all mains whenever practical. Where dead ends occur, they shall be provided with a fire hydrant within 500 feet of all residences if flow and pressure are sufficient, or with an approved flushing hydrant or blow-off for flushing purposes. Flushing devices should be sized to provide flows which will give a velocity of at least 2.5 feet per second in the water main being flushed. The water system shall be extended to the county right-of-way with a minimum of six-inch main and terminated with a valve the size of the main. 
(5)  Distribution system design. All water mains, including those not designed to provide fire protection, shall be sized after a hydraulic analysis based on flow demands and pressure requirements. The system shall be designed to maintain a minimum pressure of 20 psig at ground level at all points in the distribution system under all conditions of flow. 
(6)  Fire hydrant service. The minimum size of the pipe between the fire hydrants and the water main serving fire hydrants shall be six inches in diameter. All hydrants branch water mains must be equipped with a six-inch valve as shown in detail. 
(7)  Air release valves. Air release valves or hydrants shall be required at all high points in the water distribution system. Automatic air release valves shall not be used in situations where flooding of the manhole or chamber may occur. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2010; Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Section 1102. - Service connections. 
Any time a private water system is installed in a subdivision, water services shall be provided to each lot and shall be marked with a metal stake. Service connections shall consist of a tap to the water main, corporation stop, one-inch pipe size polyethylene or polybutylene tubing, and one-inch curb stop. Taps to mains shall be at a 90-degree angle. Service lines shall have a minimum of 24-inch cover and the cover shall reduce to 12-inch at the point of connection to the meter. Each dwelling service shall be marked with a three-fourths-inch to one-inch PVC pipe taped to the curb stop and extending a minimum of 18 inches above ground. Measurements to the service lines must appear in the record drawings. Curb stops shall not be left protruding from the ground, but must be terminated at the end of the PVC pipe. Where marked with a "W" engraved one-fourth inch into the curb to locate the water service lateral. 
Section 1103. - System structures location. 
(1)  Water lines shall be designed to minimize pavement crossings to the greatest degree practical. 
(2)  Valve boxes, manholes, and other appurtenances shall not be located in the paved portion of the right-of-way. 
(3)  Fire hydrants, valve boxes, manholes and other structures shall be located at adjoining property lines, if possible. 
(4)  Water services shall be shown on the construction plans and referenced to structures or other identifiable objects of permanence. 
(5)  Depth of the water lines and services shall have a minimum depth of bury of 36 inches and shall have a minimum of 24 inches of cover at the invert of roadside swales and ditches. Where this cannot be obtained, the line shall be ductile iron pipe or encased in concrete the width of the swale or ditch. 
Section 1104. - Water materials. 
All water materials shall meet the following specifications, except where the system is an extension of an existing public water system. Where extensions to public water systems are proposed, the owner of the system shall approve the extensions and concur with the proposed location and design. A letter from the owner of the system stating the above is required. 
Lead content: Any pipe, valve, meter, appurtenance, solder or flux used shall be lead free. "Lead free" is defined as less than 0.2 percent lead in solder or flux and less than 8.0 percent lead in pipes and fittings. 
(1)  Pipe. All pipe shall be marked as to type, class or nominal thickness, weight, manufacturer, and date of production. Pipe not properly marked shall be unacceptable and removed from the job. 
(a)  Ductile iron pipe (DIP). DIP shall conform to the requirements of ANSI Specification A21.51 (AWWA C-151) latest revision. The pipe shall be designed for the actual cover installed over the pipe. Joints shall be push-on which conform to the requirements of ANSI Specifications A21.11. Ductile iron fittings shall conform to the requirements of ANSI Specifications A21.10. Joints for fittings shall be mechanical joints conforming to the requirements of ANSI Specifications A21.11. All ductile iron pipe and fittings shall have a cement-mortar lining of 45 mils thickness minimum conforming to the requirements of ANSI Specifications A21.4. Ductile iron fittings are required regardless of the type of pipe on three-inch size and larger. All fittings shall be American made. 
(b)  Poly vinyl chloride (PVC). PVC pipe and joints shall conform to all requirements of the AWWA/ASTM Specifications D-2241 and shall be C-900. Joints shall be "push-on" type utilizing synthetic rubber ring gaskets conforming to the requirements of AWWA/ASTM Specifications D-1869. Pipe shall bear the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) seal of approval. PVC fittings may be used only on pipe smaller than three inches in size. 
(c)  Polyethylene pipe. Polyethylene pipe (service connection pipes) shall conform to the requirement of AWWA/ASTM D-2239 - SDR 11.5 and shall be IPS PE 3408 pipe. The pipe shall be designed for 100 psi and shall bear the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) seal of approval. The joints shall be "push-on" type utilizing synthetic rubber ring gasket conforming to the requirements of AWWA/ASTM Specification D-1869. 
(2)  Valves. Gate valves shall be used for all sizes two inches through 12 inches in the main distribution line. Butterfly valves shall be used where the diameter exceeds 12 inches or if determined necessary by the county engineer. All valves shall open counter clockwise. All butterfly valves shall have a 450 foot lbs. actuator minimum. All valves shall have a cast iron screw type valve box and a four inch thick concrete collar. All valves are to be designed for a minimum working pressure of not less than 150 psi. 
(a)  Butterfly valves shall be the resilient seated type which meet the requirements of AWWA/ASTM Specification C-504. 
(b)  Main line gate valves shall be the resilient seated iron body type which meet the requirements of AWWA/ASTM Specification C-509. Unless otherwise specified, gate valves shall be designed for a working pressure of not less than 150 psi. 
(c)  Ball valves shall be used in lieu of two-inch gate valves only as a meter stop at the meter location. 
(3)  Marking tape. All PVC water mains and service lateral installations shall include the installations of a continuous magnetically detectable tape buried directly over the pipe at a depth of 12 inches below the finish grade. The tape shall be at least two inches wide, and be boldly labeled every 18 to 32 inches as follows: "CAUTION WATER LINE BURIED BELOW." The tape shall be designed to last as long as the pipe it is installed over, even in adverse soils. 
Section 1105. - Fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall be as specified by the emergency services director. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2010) 
Section 1106. - Hydrostatic tests. 
Hydrostatic tests shall consist of two parts; pressure test and leakage test at which a representative of the county's engineering and inspection department shall be present. These tests shall be supervised by the applicant's engineer. 
(1)  Pressure test. 
Prior to any pressure testing, the contractor must clean out and flush the line of dirt and foreign material. After the water mains and lines have been laid or erected and the necessary anchors installed, all newly laid pipe or any valved section thereof shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure not less than 50 percent above the normal operating pressure, but not less than 150 psi and not greater than the pressure rating of the pipe. 
Test pressure shall be based on the elevation of the lowest point of the section under test and corrected to the elevation of the test gauge. 
All valves shall be completely opened and closed several times during the test period. 
If permanent automatic air release valves are not located at all high points, brass corporation stops shall be installed and shall remain as part of the work. All air shall be vented from the main prior to testing. 
Test duration shall be a minimum of two hours. 
(2)  Leakage test. 
After the water system pressure test has been completed satisfactorily, the leakage test shall be conducted in conformance with AWWA C600. 
The duration of each test shall be two hours at a pressure of 150 psi. 
No installations shall be accepted until the leakage is less than the number of gallons per hour as determined by the formula: 
L = SD√P/ 133,200; where: 
L = Allowable leakage in gallons per hour 
S = Length of pipeline tested in feet 
D = Diameter of pipe in inches 
P = Average test pressure in psig 
Exceptions: All visible leaks shall be corrected regardless of the amount of leakage. 
(3)  Sterilization. All new, cleaned, repaired or affected water mains shall be disinfected in accordance with AWWA C601. These results must be submitted with applicant's engineer's letter of certification. 
Section 1107. - Water Details. 

 
  







ARTICLE 12. - PRIVATE SEWERAGE SYSTEMS 

Section 1200. - General. 
(1)  Any private sewerage systems providing service to two or more units must be approved by the county engineer. 
(2)  Land disposal of any treated or partially treated wastewater by means of an absorption field, low pressure system, drip irrigation, overland flow, spray irrigation or constructed wetland shall be approved by the county engineer. Such systems shall conform to the State of Georgia regulations for land application, and shall include a preliminary site assessment, groundwater monitoring, redundant application area or sufficient storage for a five-day period. 
(3)  Private sewerage systems shall have an operation and maintenance manual prepared by applicant's engineer. 
(4)  Sewer mains shall be designed to minimize pavement crossings to the greatest degree practical. 
(5)  Manholes shall not be located in the paved portion of the right-of-way and shall be located in relation to adjacent property lines as possible. 
(6)  Horizontal separation between water and sewer shall be in accordance with EPD-DNR. 
(7)  The minimum horizontal separation between the edge of the pavement and the sewer main shall be ten feet in 60-foot rights-of-way. 
(8)  Sewer lines shall be tested with a "Go-No-Go" mandrel, with a maximum allowable five percent deflection. A representative from the county's engineering and inspections department must be present at all such testings. 
(9)  Sewer laterals shall be installed to the property line of each lot and its location shall be shown on the construction plans for the subdivision. Each unit shall be marked with a three feet steel rod driven flush with the ground. Measurements to the sewer lateral must appear in the construction plans. 
(10)  The sewer lateral shall have a minimum depth of bury of 36 inches and shall have a minimum of 24 inches of cover at the invert of roadside swales and ditches. Where this cannot be obtained, the lateral will be encased in concrete the width of the swale or ditch. 
Section 1201. - Testing. 
The contractor shall perform the following tests: 
(1)  Pipe deflection. After backfilling trenches, all PVC sewer pipe shall be tested for initial diametric deflection by the use of a five percent mandrel which is acceptable to the engineering director. The initial diametric deflection shall not exceed five percent. 
(2)  Soil compaction. All trenches determined by the engineering director not to meet the compaction requirements stated previously for roads shall be tested for conformance by a testing laboratory approved by the engineering director at the locations and depths requested by the engineering director. 
(3)  Pressure test. All force mains shall successfully pass a pressure test of one and one-half (1½) times working pressure, but in no case less than 100 psig. 
The formula for allowable pressure loss will determine if a force main is acceptable. No installations shall be accepted until the leakage is less than the number of gallons per hour as determined by the formula: 
L = SD√P/133,200; where: 
L = Allowable leakage in gallons per hour 
S = Length of pipeline tested in feet 
D = Nominal diameter of pipe in inches 
P = Average test pressure in psig 
Section 1202. - General. 
(1)  Match crowns of all lines when different size lines enter a manhole. 
(2)  Service laterals shall be connected to the sewer main. Under special conditions and with prior approval, service laterals may be connected to manholes with the crown of the sewer lateral matching the crown of the sewer main. A concrete slide from the incoming pipe invert to the MH invert must be constructed. 
(3)  Service laterals longer than 150 feet shall be six inches in diameter and shall not exceed 200 feet in length. Service laterals less than 150 feet may be four inches in diameter on single unit or where approved by the county engineer. Lateral is defined as the pipe laid from the sewer main to the property line of the unit. Sewer lateral shall be marked with a one-half inch iron rod 18 inches in length driven flush with the finish grade at the end of the lateral. 
(4)  Connections to existing manholes shall be made in the presence of the representative of the county's engineering and inspections department. The contractor shall notify the county's engineering and inspections department 48 hours before starting on the connection. All connections made to precast reinforced concrete manholes shall be cored and have installed a flexible manhole sleeve. 
(5)  Pipe protection: Sewer pipe which, when completed, will have less than three feet of cover shall be constructed of ductile iron pipe. 
(6)  Manhole tops should be above the ten-year flood elevation. Manhole tops in pavement lower than the ten-year flood elevation shall have a watertight ring and cover. Manholes constructed in public rights-of-way or easements shall have top a maximum of six inches above grade. 
(7)  All sewers shall be so designed and constructed to have the following minimum slopes and where possible greater slopes are desirable: 

 
  
(8)  All dead-end sewers (eight-inch diameter) shall be laid at a minimum slope of 0.70 feet per 100 feet. 
(9)  No more than two units shall be connected to one six-inch sewer lateral. Both laterals must be equipped with cleanouts at the connection to the six-inch line. 
Section 1203. - Underwater force main crossings. 
A minimum cover of two feet shall be provided over the force main. When crossing water courses which are greater than 15 feet in width, the following shall be provided: 
(1)  The pipe shall be of special construction, having flexible watertight joints. Pipe shall be wrapped with a protective covering to be specified by the county engineer. 
(2)  Valves shall be provided at both ends of the water crossing so that the section can be isolated for testing or repair. The valves shall be easily accessible and not subject to flooding. The valves shall be installed in a manhole or vault. 
(3)  Permanent taps shall be made on each side of the valve on the source side to allow insertion of a small meter to determine leakage and for sampling purposes. 
Section 1204. - Sewer material. 
(1)  Pipe. Pipe size and type selection 
(a)  On depths of one to three feet, use DIP. 
(b)  On depths of three to 12 feet, use PVC SDR-35. 
(c)  On depths of 12 feet and greater, use PVC SDR-18, PVC SDR-26 (ASTM D-3034), or DIP at applicant's engineer's option. 
(d)  Any pipe above 16-inch diameter shall be DIP, regardless of depth. 
(e)  Pipe enclosed in casing shall be DIP only. 
(2)  Pipe material specifications. All pipe shall be marked as to the type, class or nominal thickness, weight, manufacturer, and date of production. Pipe not properly marked shall be unacceptable and removed from the job. 
(a)  Ductile Iron Pipe (DIP): DIP shall conform to the requirements of ANSI Specifications A21.51. The pipe shall be designed for the actual cover installed. Joints shall be "push-on" which conform to the requirements of ANSI Specifications A21.11. Ductile iron fittings shall conform to the requirements of ANSI Specifications A21.10. Joints for fittings shall be mechanical joints conforming to the requirements of ANSI Specifications A21.11. All ductile iron pipe and fittings shall have a cement-mortar lining of 45 mils thickness minimum conforming to the requirements of ANSI Specifications A21.4. Ductile iron fittings must be used on pipe sized three inches or larger. 
(b)  Poly Vinyl Chloride (PVC): PVC pressure sewer pipe shall conform to the requirements of ASTM Specifications D-2241, Class 160 - SDR 26. Joints shall be mechanical joint type utilizing synthetic rubber ring gaskets conforming to the requirements of ASTM Specifications D1869 and shall be ductile iron. 
PVC gravity sewer pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM Specifications D3034 - SDR 35 for pipe four inches to 15 inches and ASTM Specifications F-679 for pipe 18 inches to 24 inches. Pipe shall be designed for a maximum long term deflection that shall not exceed five percent. PVC fittings may be used on pipe smaller than three inches in size. 
(c)  Magnetically Detectable Tape. All PVC sewer mains and lateral installations shall include the installation of a continuous electronically or magnetically detectable tape buried directly over the pipe at a depth of 12 inches below the finished grade. The tape shall be at least two inches wide, and be boldly labeled every 18 to 32 inches as follows: "CAUTION SEWER LINE BURIED BELOW." Tape marking sanitary sewer lines shall be green striped; force mains, reclaimed water mains, and effluent lines shall be brown striped. The tape shall be designed to last as long as the pipe it is installed over, even in adverse soils. 
(3)  General information. 
(a)  All materials used in the construction of sewers shall be new and unused when delivered on-site and shall be suitable for installation and operation under the conditions for which they are to be used. 
(b)  Casing pipes shall be installed at: 
(i)  Railroad crossings, as directed by the railroad; 
(i)  State highway crossings, as directed by the Georgia Department of Transportation; or 
(ii)  As designated by the engineering director. 
(c)  No sewer line of any type shall be allowed to pass through any storm drainage structure. 
Section 1205. - Manhole construction. 
(1)  Sections. Manhole sections shall be precast reinforced concrete sections with tongue and groove joints and shall conform to ASTM Specification C478, latest revision. The number of manhole joints shall be minimized. Riser sections for manholes shall be made as long as practical to accomplish this requirement. 
Alternative 1. Concrete used in their manufacture shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C-150 (Type II) and shall be manufactured with 100 percent calcareous aggregate (limestone) conforming to the requirements of ASTM C-33 with a concrete alkalinity of not less than 0.80 and shall have a 28-day compressive strength to not less than 5,000 pounds per square inch and the absorption shall not exceed four percent. The minimum wall thickness of the manhole riser section shall be: 

 
  
Cone sections shall be eccentric and have a minimum wall thickness of eight inches at the top and shall have a side thickness to match the section with which it is associated. 
Base riser sections shall be monolithically cast and have minimum bottom thickness of: 

 
  
Alternative 2. Concrete used in their manufacture shall be made with granitic stone only and shall have a 28-day compressive strength to not less than 5,000 pounds per square inch. Alkalinity shall be adjusted to provide a Life Factor, Az = calcium carbonate equivalent times cover over reinforcement, no less than 0.35. Calcium chloride or admixtures of calcium chloride shall not be used. Manhole interior and exterior walls shall be coated with one-eighth inch of Coal Tar Epoxy, Koppers 300 M, or equal. The minimum wall thickness of the manhole riser section shall be: 

 
  
Cone sections shall be eccentric and have a minimum wall thickness of eight inches at the top and shall have a side thickness to match the section with which it is associated. 
Base riser sections shall be monolithically cast and have minimum bottom thickness of: 

 
  
(2)  Openings. Suitable openings for inlet and outlet sewer pipe shall be cast into the base sections and into riser sections for drop connections. These openings shall be circular, accurately made, and located as required for each manhole. Base riser sections shall be set on compacted pipe embedment material 12 inches in thickness. 
(3)  Joint sealant. A flexible plastic joint sealant shall be applied to manhole section joints. The sealant shall be a factory extruded formulation of 100 percent solids with top-quality partially vulcanized butyl rubber which provides shape retention in combination with adhesion and cohesion. The sealant shall conform to the requirements of Federal Specifications SS-S-210A. It shall be applied to clean, dry surfaces only. After manhole sections are jointed, the inside of the joint shall be covered with a smooth tapered coat of non-shrink grout to thickness of one-half inch at the joint. The outside of the joint shall be covered with a six-inch wide strip of polyethylene backed flat butyl rubber sheet no less than 1/16 inch thick and shall over lap at the ends a minimum of six inches. 
(4)  Flexible manhole sleeves. 
Flexible manhole sleeves of flexible manhole entrance joints shall be installed on all pipe entering and leaving manholes. Flexible manhole sleeves shall be installed on all pipe 21 inches in size and smaller. Flexible manhole sleeves shall be Type I or Type II. Type I sleeves shall be of a high quality synthetic rubber terminating in a substantial serrated flange of the same material. The flange shall be cast into the wall of the manhole base or section to form a tight water-stop. Minimum thickness of the sleeve material shall be three-eighths inch. Sleeve material shall comply with the requirements of ASTM Specification C923. Sleeves shall be secured to the sewer pipe to make a watertight union with stainless steel strap clamps, draw bolts, and nuts. Type II sleeves shall be high quality synthetic rubber having a minimum thickness of three-eighths inch which complies with the requirements of ASTM Specification C923. Manhole openings shall be accurately core drilled. The sleeve shall be secured to the manhole by a stainless steel band with self-locking toggle to make a watertight union. The sleeve shall be secured to the sewer pipe to make a watertight union with stainless steel clamps, draw bolt, and nuts. 
Manhole sections shall be scored or stamped with the date of castings and the date shall appear on the inside of the cone section. 
(5)  Manhole inverts. Manhole inverts shall be constructed of cement grout and shall have the same cross-section as the invert of the sewer which they connect. The manhole invert shall be carefully formed to the required size and grade by gradual and even changes in sections. Changes in direction of flow through the sewer shall be made to a true curve with as large a radius as the size of the manhole will permit. Inverts shall be "U" design with top of the "U" even with the crown of the pipe. Invert piping shall not extend inside the manhole any further than two inches. Slope of inside of invert bench shall be a minimum of two inches higher than the crown of the pipe. When dissimilar pipe sizes occur, the elevation of the crown of the pipe shall be the same. 
(6)  Manhole frame and covers. 
After the manhole has been set in the final position, the cast iron frame for the cover shall be carefully set at the required elevation and properly bonded to the masonry with cement grout. Where manholes are constructed in paved areas, the top surface of the frame and cover shall be titled so as to conform to the exact slope, crown and grade of the existing pavement adjacent thereto. 
Manhole frame and covers shall be made of cast iron conforming to the minimum requirements of ASTM Specification A48, Class 35. There shall be a clear opening of 23¾ inches through the frame. All casting shall be made accurately to the required dimensions and shall be sound, smooth, clean and free from blisters and other defects. The contact surfaces between the cover and its corresponding supporting ring in the frame shall be machined so that the cover will rest on the ring for the full perimeter of the contact surface. Castings shall be thoroughly cleaned by shot blasting and shall remain unpainted. There shall be no holes or perforations in the cover. 
(7)  Leveling and final grade. Leveling and final grading of manhole frames and covers shall be accomplished by using a maximum of two concrete grade rings. Concrete grade rings shall not exceed four inches in thickness. Grade rings shall be laid in a full bed of non-shrink grout and covered after laying with a smooth coating of non-shrink grout or hydraulic cement a minimum of one-half inch thick. 
(8)  Manhole steps. All manhole steps shall comply with the current requirements of OSHA. 
(9)  Lifting loop or holes. Lifting loops shall be ASTM A416 steel strand and shall not penetrate through the walls of the section. When holes are employed for lifting, the holes shall conform to the recommended design in accordance with OSHA Standard 1926.704. Lifting holes shall be sealed using a butyl rubber plug driven to resistance and covered with a coal tar epoxy, Koppers 300M, or equal. 
(10)  General. 
(a)  All manholes over 12 feet deep shall be reviewed during design by the county engineer. 
(b)  Where the difference in the invert elevation of two or more sewers intersecting in one manhole is two feet or more, a drop manhole shall be constructed. Drops shall be made outside of the manhole and made of ductile iron and supported by Class B concrete. 
(c)  Where different size pipes intersect, the crowns of the pipes shall be set at the same elevation. Inverts shall be constructed to provide for a smooth transition. 
(d)  Where work requires special stream, railroad, highway, or other extraordinary conditions, or where alternate types of construction are required not covered by these engineering standards, the materials and construction method shall be submitted for approval to the county engineer. 
(e)  All manholes shall be eccentric design unless prior approved by the county engineer. 
(f)  Minimum depth of end manhole shall be four feet. 
(g)  Transition top sections shall provide an eccentric transition from 60 inches and larger manholes to 48 inches in diameter risers and cone top sections. Transition top sections shall not be used in areas subject to vehicle traffic. 
(h)  All manholes constructed in an area of vehicle traffic shall be designed for the maximum load expected and shall be designed for a minimum HS-20 traffic loadings as defined by ASTM C890. 
Section 1206. - Sewage air and vacuum release valves. 
Sewage air and vacuum release valves shall be installed at all high points in the force main and shall be laid to grade. 
Valves shall automatically exhaust large quantities of air and gases while the pipeline or system is being filled and allow air to re-enter during draining or whenever a negative pressure exists. Applicant's engineer shall submit design consideration for selection of valves based on operation of the system and proper sizing [of] the orifice diameter. 
Valves shall be housed in manholes or vaults that allow sufficient working area. 
Section 1207. - Sewer detailed drawings. 

 
  







Section 1208. - Lift station construction. 
This section of the engineering standards is provided for the purpose of outlining items required in a majority of lift stations, but is not intended to cover all special conditions of applicant's engineer's special requirements. 
General: 
Site dimensions shall be sufficient to provide a space for the wet well, electrical control panel, hose bib, yard lighting, and service manhole. 
The site shall be fenced. 
The entire site shall be covered with Mirafix 600X filter fabric covered with four inches of clean stone. This covering should extend one foot outside the fenced area. Stone shall be No. 57. 
A power pole should be located in such a manner so the electric meter can be easily read from outside the fenced area and the service pole used for yard lighting. 
All power lines within the site shall be underground. No overhead power line will be allowed to cross the site. 
The site shall be serviced by an all-weather road with the top of road above the 25-year flood elevation. The road and site drainage shall be approved by the county engineer. 
A yard hydrant shall be supplied with locking capability and with approved vacuum breaker installed on outlet. The applicant must provide a gate valve and valve box in the water line and a reduced pressure backflow preventer valve prior to the yard hydrant at the supply main. The yard hydrant shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate volume and pressure to facilitate washing down of pump and maintenance of the wet well. 
A service manhole must be located in the fenced area of each pump station for by-pass pumping. 
Section 1209. - Design considerations. 
Applicant's engineer should submit the following design considerations: 
(1)  Station service area ultimate loading. 
(2)  Floatation calculation (weight of station without pumps vs uplift). 
(3)  Cycle time calculation maximum ten cycles/hour. 
Section 1210. - Pumps and motors (submersible stations). 
(1)  Pumps shall be designed to handle peak flow with the largest pump out of service. Minimum design peaking factor shall be 2.5. 
(2)  Motors shall be non-overloading over entire pumping range and have a 1.10 service factor. 
(3)  No "add-a-phase" systems shall be allowed. 
(4)  Unbalanced voltages on motors under load shall not exceed one percent when measured at the motor disconnect terminals. Voltage measurements shall be read with an accurate digital volt meter; and readings shall be recorded as part of the final inspection. Systems will not be accepted until unbalance has been corrected. Applicant's engineer shall supply certification that the station has passed this requirement. 
(5)  Lift stations shall be equipped with emergency stand-by power connections and piping connections for by-pass pumping. 
Section 1211. - Testing. 
(1)  Start up service shall be provided by the manufacturer's representative prior to acceptance of the pump station. Simplex and duplex draw-down test shall be performed by applicant's engineer prior to final acceptance of the pump station. Specifications to include completion of pump station start-up procedures in the presence of a representative of the county's engineering and inspections department and the pump supplier. 
(2)  Applicant's engineer shall provide a certification that the work has been completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. 
Section 1212. - Lift station details. 

 
  

ARTICLE 13. - ENVIRONMENTAL SITE ASSESSMENTS 
When required by the subdivision regulations, an environmental site assessment (ESA) shall be prepared by an engineer, state licensed geologist, or other state licensed professional experienced in geo-technical investigations and the assessment of real property for environmental concerns. The ESA shall meet the minimum requirements of ASTM 1527 "Standard Practice for Environmental Site Assessments: Phase I Environmental Site Assessment Process." The ESA shall consist of a record review of records, site reconnaissance, interview, and report. The following guidelines shall be used in the preparation of the ESA. 

Section 1300. - The record review portion of the ESA shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Review available site plans, surveys, current and historical aerial photos. Consider adjacent property and its current use. 
(2)  Review available real estate and topographical maps, geologic information, and hydrological data for the site and vicinity. 
(3)  Review published surface and subsurface information for the site vicinity, including previous geo-technical boring logs, well logs, utility plans, and site zoning. Consider geologic data regarding to the potential for naturally occurring methane gas. 
(4)  Review records of the clerk's office to identify site ownership for at least 50 years and to identify prior uses of the site and adjacent properties, where possible. 
(5)  Identify and locate, within one mile of the proposed development: any National Priority List Superfund Cleanup Sites, any facilities engaged in the treatment, storage, or disposal of hazardous wastes, and any disposal sites that have been identified in the county. 
(6)  Access public records to obtain information about the site's regulatory history as revealed by permits issued, citations from local, state, or federal agencies. 
(7)  Interview appropriate public officials with respect to waste disposal at or in the vicinity of the site; make inquiries to determine if there may be any records about underground tanks. 
(8)  When possible, interview parties who may be familiar with past uses of the site or adjacent sites. 
Section 1301. - The site reconnaissance portion of the ESA shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Walk over the site and view it also from adjacent public right-of-way. 
(2)  Note and record information about the locations and sizes of structures, if any, evidence of any below-grade tanks, distressed vegetation, signs of chemical production or storage, the nature of any trash or rubble on site, the types of businesses and activities operating in the area, and evidence of any illegal disposal practices. 
(3)  Note and record appropriate information gained by observing adjacent sites, from conversations with site personnel, or from other sources. 
Section 1302. - The interview portion of the ESA shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Interview owners and occupants of the property. 
(2)  Interview local government officials. 
(3)  Interviews with adjacent property owners. 
Section 1303. - The report portion of the ESA shall consist of the following: 
(1)  After the completion of the historical review, site reconnaissance, and soil borings; the findings required in the previous subsections shall be prepared and included in the ESA report to the county engineer for his review and approval. 
(2)  The ESA report shall document each source that was used, even if a source revealed no finding. Sources shall be sufficiently documented, including name, date request for information was filled, date information provided was last updated by source, date information was last updated by original source so as to facilitate reconstruction of the research at a later date. 
(3)  The ESA report shall contain a statement of the opinion of the individual responsible for the report as to the suitability of the site for the proposed development. 
(4)  The ESA must be submitted to and approved by the county engineer prior to approval of construction plans. 
If, in the opinion of the individual responsible for preparing the ESA, it would be necessary to develop additional information by the use of soil borings, then the ESA report shall include the results of the soil borings. 
If the soil borings reveal a potential problem, then additional subsurface exploration and chemical testing will be required as determined by the county engineer. 
ARTICLE 14. - SUBDIVISION ENTRANCE SIGNS 

Section 1400. - Subdivision entrances signs location. 
All subdivision entrance signs must be located outside the limits of the public right-of-way, with the exception of median signs located in the subdivision's median which will not be maintained by the county. Entrance signs are to be placed in a location that will not obstruct the vehicle sight distance. All proposed signs are to be approved by the engineering director and the planning director. 
Section 1401. - Entrance signs within medians. 
Signs located within the median of subdivisions roads must be located outside the limit of the intersecting right-of-way and must be less than 3.5 feet in height measured from the road centerline intersection elevation. 
ARTICLE 15. - CONSTRUCTION APPROVALS AND ACCEPTANCE 

Section 1500. - General. 
(1)  The county has the right to require changes in the work that are not in accordance with the engineering standards or the approved construction plans and which would, in the opinion of the county engineer, negatively impact the ability of the county to provide normal maintenance in the county right-of-way. 
(2)  Any work rejected by the county's engineering and inspections department shall be removed and redone to the satisfaction of such department. 
(3)  The county's engineering and inspections department shall have the right to require any work be uncovered, if the work was covered contrary to such department's request. If defective work is suspected or to correct defects discovered during inspection, the county's engineering and inspections department may require testing of such work. 
Section 1501. - Applicant's engineer's responsibility. 
(1)  Applicant's engineer will review all phases of the work in progress and will be responsible for ascertaining whether or not the work is performed in accordance with applicant's plans and specifications and the county's requirements. 
(2)  Applicant's engineer shall promptly furnish the county engineer with pertinent information concerning changes made during the progress of the work. No changes which are deemed major by the county engineer shall be performed without the prior approval of the county engineer. 
Section 1502. - Construction inspection. 
(1)  The engineering director shall be given at least 48 hours' notice prior to the need for all road construction inspections. 
(2)  Proof-rolling of the sub-grade base shall be performed in the presence of a representative of the county's engineering and inspections department. Any unsatisfactory areas shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the county's engineering and inspections department prior to proceeding with the next pavement course. 
(3)  Prior to backfill of any cross-drain pipe, the installation shall be inspected and approved by the county's engineering and inspections department. 
(4)  When requested by the engineering director, pavement design reports prepared by an independent laboratory shall be submitted to him for approval prior to paving. 
(5)  Laboratory compaction, stability and density testing is required for pavement. Compressive strength testing is required for concrete curb and gutter. Pavement core sample reports are required at 500 feet spacings to show thickness of bases and surface. Reports shall include a map showing core locations. Sub-grade laboratory compaction testing may be required by the county if adequate compaction cannot be determined by other methods. 
(6)  All tests results must be submitted to the engineering director prior to proceeding with the next sequence of construction. Specifically, compaction results must be submitted and approved prior to placement of curb and gutter, all sub-grade test results prior to placement of base material, and base thickness and compaction results prior to asphalt surface pour. 
(7)  If any of the above tests show substandard conditions, then additional tests may be required by the engineering director to reveal the extent and cause of the substandard condition. All tests shall be performed by a qualified independent testing laboratory approved by the county engineer. 
(8)  A proposed plan to correct substandard conditions shall be submitted by applicant's engineer for approval by the county engineer prior to beginning work. 
(9)  A final inspection of all constructed improvements shall be scheduled and performed by the county's engineering and inspections department after certification is received from applicant's engineer confirming that the improvements have been built in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. 
Section 1503. - Criteria for requiring replacement of curb and gutter. 
(1)  Improper contraction joints. 
(2)  "Y" cracks. 
(3)  Spalling cracks. 
(4)  Off-grade or misaligned sections. 
(5)  Any crack within two feet of an expansion or construction joint (remove half, with saw cut joint). 
(6)  Two or more cracks of any size within ten feet. 
(7)  Failure to meet strength or location specifications. 
(8)  If any crack exceeds one-eighth inch in width. 
Section 1504. - Construction failures. 
County approval of the constructed improvements shall not relieve the developer of responsibility for construction failures. The developer shall repair any failure or deficiencies that occur during the warranty period. 
Section 1505. - Certification of improvement by private water and sewerage systems. 
Section 1506. - Record drawings. 
(As used herein, "record drawings" means the construction plans as modified to reflect field changes.) 
Record drawings of the subdivision to be delivered to the engineering director on reproducible Mylar are required prior to approval of the final plat. Additionally, an AUTOCAD drawing file and DXF on 3.5 inch diskette shall be delivered to the engineering director. The record drawings shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Drainage. 
(a)  As built manhole invert, inlets, pipe inverts, frames, headwall, and end treatments elevations (MSL). 
(b)  As built length, grade, diameter, pipe material between structures, manholes, inlets and end treatments. 
(c)  Locations of structures, headwall, manholes, inlets, and end treatments in relation to right-of-way lines, property lines, and other permanent structures. 
(d)  As built locations of line, slope, width, and depth of ditches, swales, canals, and drainage basins. 
(2)  Pavement. 
(a)  Edge of pavement where it differs more than two feet from approved plan. 
(b)  Pavement profiles where grade of installed paving differs more than 0.1 percent from proposed grades. 
(c)  Areas where conditions require alternative bases or subgrade material or treatment. 
(3)  Water. 
(a)  As built location of water mains, depth, grade, and diameters. 
(b)  As built locations of valves, blow-offs, fire hydrants locations in relation to property lines, road intersections and other permanent structures. 
(c)  As built locations of all service laterals. Measurements shall be from permanent structures and shall indicate the location of the connection at the main and the location at the property line with the depth to the end of the service lateral at the property line. 
(4)  Sanitary sewer. 
(a)  As built manhole invert elevations (MSL), invert elevations of all mains at the manhole and elevations of all manhole tops. 
(b)  Lateral locations measured from the downstream manhole at the main, and at the property line if the lateral is not perpendicular to the main. 
(c)  As built length, grades, size and type of material between manholes. 
(d)  Locations of manholes in relation to the right-of-way lines, property lines, and other permanent structures. 
(5)  Other. Locations of all special construction requirements in addition to the above such as sheeting left in place, concrete cradles, concrete encasement, end of casings, and section of casing and carrier pipe depicting the material and installation requirement if different from the approved plan. 
Section 1507. - Request for inspections. 
Just prior (1—2 months) to the end of the one year warranty period as provided in chapter 13 [appendix A] article IX, the developer or the surety shall forward a written request by certified mail to the county engineer to provide a final inspection of all bonded improvements for the project. Should all of the bonded improvements be found by the county engineer, or his designated representative, to be in satisfactory condition, then this obligation shall become null and void upon the surety's receipt of written release of the bond from Bryan County. Otherwise, this bond is to remain in full force and effect until the principal and surety place the improvements in satisfactory condition as confirmed by county inspection or until the amount of the bond or the cost of the necessary improvement is paid to the county. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2014) 
Section 1508. - Recommendation for acceptance. 
The engineering director will provide to the county commission a report on any subdivision improvements dedicated to the county. The report will indicate whether the work is acceptable. If the work is acceptable to the county, the engineering director will recommend that the warranty be released. If the report indicates that the work is unacceptable, the engineering director shall make an estimate of the cost to make the work acceptable. The county commission will determine whether or not to release the warranty. 
Section 1509. - Developer's certification of non-litigation. 
Prior to county acceptance of subdivision improvements for maintenance, the developer shall certify that there are no pending or threatened actions of law that involve the subdivision improvements, including any liens from contractors, sub-contractors, suppliers or material and equipment, and all providers of labor or services associated with the subdivision improvements. If any such actions of law or liens remain unresolved, the county will not accept the subdivision improvements for maintenance until releases or waivers are provided. 
ARTICLE 16. - BUFFERS 
Enhancements such as walls, fences, berms, trees, and shrubs are allowed in a buffer when an alternative buffer plan is approved under the subdivision regulations. 
When enhancements are proposed, they shall meet the following requirements: 

Section 1600. - Wall and fences. 
Any fence or wall shall be constructed in durable fashion of brick, stone, or other masonry material or wood posts and planks or metal or other materials specifically designed as fencing materials or a combination thereof. Wall and fences shall be a minimum height of six feet. No more than 25 percent of the fence surface shall be left open and the finish side of the fence shall face the abutting road or property. A chain link fence with plastic, metal or wooden slats may not be used to satisfy this requirement. 
Section 1601. - Berms. 
Berms shall be a minimum height of four feet with a maximum slope of 3:1. Berms in excess of six feet in height shall have a maximum slope of 4:1 as measured from the exterior property line. Berms shall be stabilized to prevent erosion and shall be landscaped. 
Section 1602. - Trees. 
All trees must have a minimum caliper of two inches. Forty percent of the trees must be "large maturing" trees. Trees must be on the list of "Native Trees of Bryan County" published by the Georgia Agricultural Extension Service. 
Section 1603. - Shrubs. 
Shrubs must be evergreen and at least 2.5 feet tall when planted with an average height of five to six feet to be expected as normal growth within four years. Shrubs must be listed on the "Landscape Plant Materials of Georgia" as published by the Georgia Agricultural Extension Service. However, 25 percent of the shrubs may vary from the standard. 
Allowed variations are: 
(1)  Shrubs may be deciduous. 
(2)  Shrubs may be two feet tall when planted, provided an average height of three to four feet is expected within four years. 
(3)  Shrubs planted on a berm may be of lesser height, provided the combined height of the berm and plantings is at least six feet after four years. 
ARTICLE 17. - RECREATION TRACTS 
The developer shall indicate to the planning commission the type of recreation tract that is proposed for his subdivision. 

Section 1700. - Required components. 
Recreation tracts shall be scaled to meet the needs of the residents of a subdivision. The recreation tract shall provide a minimum of the following: 

 
  
(1)  Active recreation tract components. 
Community building; 
Swimming pool; 
Concave tennis backboard; 
Basketball court; 
See saw platform; 
Tennis court; 
Suspended balance beam; 
Gymnastic bars; 
Parallel bars; 
Sliding board; 
Ball field; 
Whirl-a-go-round; 
Bikeways; 
Swing-sets (minimum of four swings); and 
Other recreational equipment as approved by the planning director. 
(2)  Passive recreation tract components. 
Park shelters; 
Bench and picnic table; 
Park grill - tilt back stove; 
Swing bench; and 
Other recreation equipment as approved by the planning director. 
ARTICLE 18. - TREE PROTECTION PLAN FOR BRYAN COUNTY 

Section 1800. - Purpose and intent. 
The county deems it necessary and desirable in the interest of public health, safety and welfare to enact a tree protection plan that shall be included as a component part of Bryan County's Engineering and Design Manual. The plan calls for the conservation, planting and replacement of trees and to prevent the indiscriminate removal of trees in the county without denying the reasonable use and enjoyment of real property. The importance of trees is recognized for their shade, cooling, noise and wind reduction, soil erosion prevention, oxygen production, dust filtration, carbon dioxide absorption, aesthetic and economic enhancement of all real property, and their contribution to the general well-being and quality of life of the citizens of Bryan County. Consistent with the expressed purpose of this article, all persons shall make reasonable efforts to preserve and retain certain existing, self-supporting trees as defined herein. It is also the intent of this article that all applicable sites within the county maintain or obtain a 40 percent minimum tree canopy coverage. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007) 
Section 1801. - Applicability. 
The provision of this plan shall apply in all areas of the county except those areas of the county which are presently developed as single-family and general residential. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007) 
Section 1802. - Definitions. 
All words in these standards have their customary dictionary definition except as specifically defined herein. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. Technical terms used are defined as follows: 
a.  2000 ANSI A300 - Pruning standards set forth in the Standard Practices for Trees, Shrubs, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance. 
b.  Arborist - Means a person or firm, who has been trained in the business of diagnosing, treating, pruning and removing trees, including landscape architects, and persons with a formal knowledge of trees, such as cooperative extension service agents. Also includes foresters registered with the Georgia Secretary of State's Office. (Pembroke) 
c.  Basal area - The cross-sectional area of a tree trunk at diameter breast height (DBH) expressed herein in terms of "units" per acre. 
d.  Buffer - Land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance. 
e.  Caliper; single stem - The thickness of trees measured in inches. A caliper measurement for trees shall be measured 12 inches above the soil line or across the stump if the tree has been severed at less than 12 inches above the soil line. 
f.  Canopy - The foliar cover in a forest stand consisting of overhead branches and leaves. 
g.  County arborist - Means arborist selected by the county as a consultant on decisions/issues concerning trees within the County of Bryan. 
h.  County land planner - The individual employed within the county planning and zoning department charged with reviewing subdivision plats and site plans. 
i.  Critical establishment period - The first two years after a tree is planted. 
j.  Dead tree - A tree that does not contain any live tissue, i.e., green leaves or live limbs. 
k.  Deciduous tree - Any tree which naturally loses its leaves in the fall. 
l.  Diameter-at-breast-height (DBH) - The tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height 4.5 feet above the ground. If a tree forks into multiple trunks below 4.5 feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the forks. Measurements shall be made by use of a circumference to diameter conversion tape. 
m.  Diameter, tree - The diameter of a tree measured as follows: 1) for existing preserved trees, at a point 4.5 feet above the ground; 2) for new replaced trees, at a point six inches above the ground. For multi-trunk trees diameter breast-height (DBH) above. 
n.  Dripline - The vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy to the ground. 
o.  Green space - Any area retained as permanently vegetated land. 
p.  Hardwood tree - Any tree botanically classified as an angiosperm. 
q.  Large maturing tree - Large maturing tree species shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and have a caliper of at least two inches immediately after planting. These species shall have an average mature crown spread of at least 40 feet when grown in Bryan County, Georgia. See appendix E. 
r.  Natural area - An area of natural vegetation that is generally undisturbed, unmaintained, and is self-perpetuating. It includes not only trees, but also native shrubs, ground covers, wildflowers, vines, and grasses. 
s.  Overstory trees - Those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
t.  Planting season - The time period or season during which newly planted trees will have the best opportunity for survival. The planting season begins on November 1 and ends on March 31. 
u.  Private tree - A tree that is located on lands for which the county does not have responsibility for tree management. 
v.  Proper pruning - As defined by the 2000 ANSI A300 standards. 
w.  Pruning - The cutting or removing any part of the branching structure of a tree in either the crown, trunk or root areas. 
x.  Public tree - Any tree located on property belonging to the County of Bryan. 
y.  Removal - The physical removal of a tree. 
z.  Replacement tree - A new tree planted on a site to meet minimum site density factor requirements (regardless of whether trees existed prior to any development). 
aa.  Retention tree - Any tree that is designated on a tree survey or tree management plan to be retained on a site. 
bb.  Root protection zone - The minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The circular area above and below ground with a radius equivalent to the greater of six feet or 1.0 feet for every inch in trunk diameter at 4.5 feet above the ground. 
cc.  Site plan - A plan provided that reflects existing and proposed conditions on a site that is intended for construction. This may include, but is not limited to, topography, structures and/or additions, grading, drainage, erosion control measures, trees to be saved or planted to comply with the requirements of this ordinance, best management practices, parking requirements, streets and other type improvements. 
dd.  Small maturing tree - Small maturing tree species shall have an average mature crown spread of at least 15 feet when grown in County of Bryan County, Georgia. See Understory tree. 
ee.  Softwood tree - Any tree botanically classified as a gymnosperm. 
ff.  Tree - Any self-supporting, woody perennial plant which normally attains a single trunk diameter of five inches or more and which normally attains a mature height of a minimum of 15 feet. 
gg.  Topping - The severe cutting back of branches to a stub, bud, or a lateral branch not large enough to assume the terminal role. 
hh.  Tree board - The body established pursuant to the County of Bryan. 
ii.  Tree management plan - A to-scale map or site plan prepared in accordance with this ordinance, showing among other items, a detailed plan designed to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of two years after construction. 
jj.  Tree removal - The cutting or removing of 50 percent or more of the crown, trunk or root system of a tree, or causing the death of a tree through damaging, poisoning or other direct or indirect action. 
kk.  Tree planting specifications - Are attached as appendix C and are to be followed when replanting. 
ll.  Tree species selection list - The recommended species of trees for planting within the county maintained and updated periodically by the tree board. Said list will also include species that are determined by the tree board to be discouraged for reasons to be determined by the tree board, including, but not limited to, trees that are detrimental to the native environment or in conflict with this ordinance. However, trees indigenous to Coastal Georgia may be planted. 
mm.  Understory tree - Those trees that grow beneath the overstory, and will generally reach a mature height of less than 40 feet. 
nn.  Wetland - Means land that falls under the jurisdiction of one or more of the following agencies: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources or the United States Army Corp of Engineers (US COE). 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007) 
Section 1803. - Tree board. 
(a)  A tree board is hereby established to be composed of planning and zoning board members. All appointments shall be for the term of their appointment to the planning and zoning board. 
(b)  The tree board shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, establish meeting dates and keep minutes of its proceedings. The board rules and regulations shall be approved by the county attorney's office and a copy shall be forwarded to the clerk of the county commission. A majority of the total members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(2)  To prepare or update, annually, this document that guides the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees on public lands; such plan shall consider existing and future utility locations and environmental factors in relation to existing and future tree species on public lands or on private lands, as provided in this ordinance or other ordinances; such plan shall be recommended to the commissioners and upon their acceptance and approval shall be implemented as the "Tree Master Plan." 
(3)  To grant appropriate variances and hear appeals from any decision of the county representative regarding the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(4)  To make recommendations to the county commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia. 
(5)  To act on other matters designated by this chapter or by the county commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007) 
Section 1804. - Minimum canopy requirement. 
(a)  A basic condition of the Bryan County tree management plan is that all applicable sites maintain a minimum tree canopy of 40 percent. Trees may be tiered and grouped with understory trees planted under the overstory shade canopy of a new or existing tree. Total canopy coverage shall be computed from sum of the understory and overstory trees planted. Applicable sites, for this section, include, but are not limited to, land upon which: 
(1)  A residential subdivision (including planned developments) being developed; 
(2)  A commercial project (including planned commercial) being developed; 
(3)  Any activity requiring issuance of a land disturbance permit where applicable as determined by county representatives. 
(b)  The tree management plan shall be submitted as part of the construction plans and preliminary plats for subdivision. The tree management plan will be reviewed concurrently with the construction plans and preliminary plats. The developer is responsible for developing and submitting the tree management plan, the plan shall be based on the gross area to be developed. Once the developer sells individual lots, the builder/owner is responsible for implementing the plan for the lots he purchased. If the board of commissioners approved construction plans and preliminary plats for a subdivision before the date this ordinance is approved, the developer/builder will not be required to implement a tree management plan. However, developer/builders are encouraged to provide plantings on lots and recreational parks. 
(c)  The canopy requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development or disturbance of the applicable site. The canopy may be achieved by preserving existing trees, by planting new trees according to the minimum standards in this tree management plan or by a combination of the two. Minimum tree canopy shall be calculated and established pursuant to the formula and analysis set forth in appendix A to this tree management plan. Any existing tree of not less than six inches DBH left in good growing condition on the property is eligible to be counted toward the minimum required canopy and has to be protected. The property owner shall be subject to the minimum tree canopy requirement set forth in this section. Fifty percentage of the canopy coverage in wetlands can be utilized to satisfy the canopy coverage requirements. If canopy coverage in wetlands meets the 40 percent gross canopy coverage required by the tree plan, developer/builder will still be required to plant a minimum of one tree per residential lot with two-inch DBH. On areas of highland credit for Individual or grouping of trees preserved will be allowed for meeting canopy requirement calculations. The property owner shall base the canopy calculation on the gross site area. 
(d)  Trees replanted to achieve canopy requirements are to be selected species from the County of Bryan tree species selection list - appendix E (which list values of canopy coverage in square feet for various groups of trees and minimum areas for planting), on file with the county. Any species naturally growing in our area can be selected for replanting even though it may not be included in appendix E. In addition, replanting shall be at the ratio of not less than one overstory tree for every three understory trees. Canopy credit may be met by planting all overstory trees, but not by planting only understory trees. No more than 40 percent of any one genus may be included in any replanting plan. All replacement trees will be maintained properly to ensure their survivability. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007) 
Section 1805. - Procedure for trees approved for removal. 
(a)  Canopy recovery for development plans. 
(1)  Development plans shall include a canopy recovery plan for replacement of trees and vegetation approved for removal. A canopy recovery plan shall include the following: 
1.  Areas to be clearing and areas preserved; 
2.  The number of trees required for replacement, to achieve 40 percent canopy coverage. 
(2)  In order to promote diversity, no more than 15 percent of the replacement trees shall be of the same species. 
(3)  Where the county representative determines that a site cannot sustainably support the required replacement, due to the size and shape and/or structures and/or other viable site constraints, the county representative may determine the requirements, and 
(4)  If a property owner has preserved extensive overstory trees and clusters of native trees and vegetation, in such a manner as to provide extensive shading within the built environment, value shall be 100 percent of the drip line area of groupings. An exhibit depicting the aforementioned shall be submitted that calculates the canopy spread on species of a tree. (See illustration) 

Tree maintenance for public protected trees. 
A.  Pruning and trimming. All trees designated for trimming shall be trimmed in accordance with the International Society of Arboriculture Standards and the following standards: 
1.  Trees trimmed for clearance from utility lines may be trimmed in such a manner as to provide clearance from lines for a designated period of time or cycle, not to exceed two years. In all cases where conditions permit, drop crotch or side trimming methods shall be used to obtain necessary clearance. Topping is prohibited. The individual or business trimming the tree is responsible for the disposal of wood residue and trimmed parts of the tree to include chips, logs, and limbs; 
2.  Whenever trimming harms the visual shape of the tree, additional trimming shall be performed to achieve satisfactory shape and appearance. Where possible, all cuts shall be of appropriate cut taken back to the trunk of the tree, in order to eliminate excessive sprouts and unsightly stubs. All cuts shall be made in a manner that prevents rips to the bark. 
3.  Thinning and pruning of a mature tree that exceeds more than 25 percent of the leaf surface, on both the lateral branch and the overall foliage that is pruned within a growing season is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007) 
Section 1806. - Tree protection plan. 
(a)  The tree protection plan shall be a detailed plan designed to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of two years after construction. Any trees designated for retention of the tree protection plan that die or are severely damaged within the first two years after construction shall be replaced in accordance with this document. The builder/developer is only responsible for maintenance of trees not located on private property. This applies to properties that have been sold to private individuals and are no longer under the control of the developer/builder. These replacement trees shall be maintained for a minimum of two consecutive years after planting or replacement. 
(b)  Tree protection barriers shall be erected around all existing trees to be preserved to meet standards set by the International Society of Arboriculture, Georgia Forestry Commission, and the county's requirements for protection of street trees or other trees required by county tree plan. 
(See appendix D) 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007) 
Section 1807. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Property in violation of this ordinance shall be subject to a stop work order and/or fines and penalties until such time as the county determines remedial actions have been satisfied as follows: 
a)  Where trees have been removed in violation of this ordinance, the county shall require mitigation in one or more options in accordance with appendix B. 
1)  Plant replacement trees on site; and/or 
2)  No more than 15 percent of any one species shall be permitted for replacement trees. Species must be indigenous or native and comply with the acceptable county planting list. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007) 
Section 1808. - Severability. 
Should any part of provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of the competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect he validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than part held to be invalid. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007) 
Section 1809. - Indemnification. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the County of Bryan, or upon any of its officers or employees, or to relieve the owner or occupant of any private property from the duty to keep in safe and healthy condition the trees upon their property or upon a public right-of-way over their property. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007) 
Appendix A 
CANOPY ANALYSIS 
A basic condition of the County of Bryan tree protection plan is that all applicable sites have a potential minimum canopy of 40 percent by area. The canopy requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development. The canopy may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved or actual canopy of preserved trees or groupings, planting new trees, or some combination of the two. For canopy analysis, the following formula shall apply. 
CR=SA x .4 
Where: 
CR = canopy area requirement 
SA = site area 
PROCEDURE FOR CALCULATING THE REQUIRED TREE REPLACEMENT: 
Step 1: Area of total site from boundary survey. 
Step 2: Multiply area (in square feet) by 0.4. 
Step 3: Subtract preserved tree area from Step 2. 
Step 4: Select enough overstory and understory trees to equal area remaining after Step 3. (Note: not more than three understory trees for each overstory tree. Not more than 15 percent of one species and not more than 40 percent of one genus.) 
NOTE: All replacement trees must be two-inch caliper or greater. Replacement trees must have minimum area for growth as shown in appendix E. 
Square footage value placed on a two-inch caliper tree for calculating replacement trees: 
a)  Overstory trees value; 
1)  Large growth trees = 1500 sq. ft./tree planted. 
2)  Medium growth trees = 550 sq. ft./tree planted. 
b)  Understory trees value; 
1)  Small growth trees = 250 sq. ft./tree planted. 
Example 1: Following site to be developed: 
Step 1: 10 acre site = 435,600 sq. ft. 
Step 2: 40 percent canopy cover figure. 
435,600 X .4 = 174,240 sq. ft. to meet 40 percent canopy cover. 
Step 3: Preserved trees left on site = 108,900 sq. ft. (2.5 acres) 
174,240 minus 108,900 = 65,340 sq. ft. of replacement trees. 
Step 4: Replacement trees required to meet 40 percent canopy cover (CC) 
65,340 sq. ft. of area to be planted in trees. 
a.  Overstory trees = 1500 sq. ft./tree planted. 

 
  
b.  Understory trees = 250 sq. ft./tree planted. 

 
  
c.  Total square footage of trees planted: 65,450 sq. ft. 
THE 65,340 SQ. FT. OF PLANTED TREES HAS MET 40 PERCENT CANOPY COVER  REQUIREMENT. 
Appendix B 
(RESERVED) 
Appendix C 
PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS 
Trees shall conform to the American Standard for nursery stock for proper relations of height, caliper and root ball diameter. 
(1)  The diameter of the planting hole shall be a minimum of three times the diameter of the root ball. 
(2)  The planting hole sidewalls shall be scored or roughened to eliminate the smooth, slick surface caused by the shovel or auger. 
(3)  If containerized material is to be planted, any circling roots shall be cut by slicing the root ball vertically from top to bottom in two to three well-spaced lines around the root ball with a sharp knife. 
(4)  The root ball shall rest on undisturbed soil in the planting hole with the top of the root ball on level with the natural ground level or slightly raised (not to exceed a height of two inches above the natural ground level). 
(5)  Any tree planted with the top of the root ball below natural ground level shall not be counted towards the required canopy replacement for the property. 
(6)  The soil used to backfill around the root ball shall be un-compacted, native soil free of rocks, trash, or any construction debris. 
(7)  Stakes and guy wires should only be installed when absolutely necessary. Supporting devices shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian movement and shall be removed after 12 months. 
(8)  Mulch in the form of pine straw, pine bark, or wood chips shall be evenly distributed over the planting hole to a settled depth of two inches. 
(9)  Permanent built-in or temporary watering systems shall be installed to ensure the plants will survive the critical establishment period. 
(10)  Out-of-season planting is discouraged. Property owners/developers may submit a "Request for Delay Affidavit" to allow for plant installation to occur at a time which better coincides with the normal planting season (November 1st to March 31st). 
Appendix D 
STANDARD TREE PLANTING DETAIL 
Example of planting details: 

Notes: 
1.  All trees are to be nursery grown and locally adapted, ball and burlap (B&B) preferred. Minimum tree size is two-inch caliper 
2.  Remove all treated or plastic-coated burlap, strapping, wire or twine from root ball. 
3.  For container grown trees, carefully remove the plant from the container and cut any matted or circling roots. 
4.  Water tree after planting. For mulch, use pine needles or seasoned mulch and use no more than three to four inches deep. 
5.  Tree wrap is optional. 
6.  Staking is optional. Rubber hose and rope or wire for staking is not recommended. Three-fourths-inch nylon strap or tree trace strap is preferred. Staking should be removed after one growing season. 
Example of tree protection details: 

Notes: 
1.  See plans for location of all tree protection fences. 
2.  All tree protection devises must be installed prior to land disturbance, including the cutting of any trees. 
3.  No grading is to occur in the tree conservation areas or tree critical root zones. 
4.  Remove all barriers upon completion of project. 
Appendix E 
Large canopy trees for overstory: (Count for 1500 sq. ft. of area for planting - minimum two-inch caliper) 

 
  
Medium canopy trees: (Count for 550 sq. ft. of area for planting - minimum two-inch caliper) 

 
Small canopy trees - Understory: (Count for 250 sq. ft. of area for planting - minimum two-inch caliper) 

 
  
ARTICLE 19. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Section 1900. - Interpretation. 
The regulations expressed in the engineering standards shall be considered as the minimum provisions for the protection of the health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience and welfare of the general public. 
Section 1901. - Severability. 
Should any section or provision of the engineering standards be declared by a court to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the engineering standards as a whole, or any other part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Section 1902. - Effective date. 
The engineering standards shall take effect on and after August 1, 1995. 
Section 1903. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Section 1904. - Conflicts. 
In the event of a conflict between a provision of the engineering standards and a provision of the subdivision regulations, the provision in the subdivision regulations shall control. 
Section 1905. - Jurisdiction. 
The jurisdiction of the engineering standards shall be all the unincorporated area within the limits of the county. 
Section 1906. - Attachments. 
The sample engineering and inspections services letter, sample certification of non-litigation and the attached drawings and details are all made a part of the engineering standards by specific reference. In the event of a conflict between the text of the engineering standards and any of such drawings or details, the text shall control. 
SAMPLE ENGINEERING INSPECTION SERVICES LETTER 
On Engineer's Letterhead 
Bryan County Board of Commissioners 
Director of Planning & Zoning 
P.O. Box 
Pembroke, Georgia 31321 
Re: (Name of Subdivision) 
Dear Sir: 
This letter shall certify that I have been retained by (name of the developer) to provide construction inspection services for the referenced subdivision development. The scope of the inspection services to be provided conform with those stipulated in the Bryan County Engineering Design Standards. 
Furthermore, I agree that if at any time prior to county acceptance of Subdivision Improvements in the Subdivision for maintenance, my construction inspection services are discontinued for any reason, I will notify you in writing immediately. 
Signed: ____________ 
(GA P.E. Seal) 
SAMPLE CERTIFICATE OF NON-LITIGATION 
CERTIFICATE OF NON-LITIGATION 
I (We) hereby swear that there are no pending or threatened actions of law that will affect the dedication of the Subdivision Improvements in the below named project to Bryan County. I (We) further swear that all attorneys, engineers, surveyors, contractors, sub-contractors, material suppliers, equipment suppliers, or other persons, firms or corporations retained for the purpose of designing, planning and constructing the project have been paid in full. 
Project Description 
______________________________________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________________________ 
Sworn to and subscribed  before me this ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day  of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . 

 
  
ARTICLE 20. - GIS DIGITAL SUBMISSION ORDINANCE FOR PLATS 

Section 2000. - Purpose. 
Bryan County has developed the digital plat submittal format and data standards contained in this document. The standards were developed to standardize all digital plat submissions and to streamline the integration of this digital information into geographic information systems (GIS) datasets. Upon receipt of any electronic files the Bryan County GIS department will import the file(s) into the geo-database for review. All of the electronic data submitted will not be rotated or scaled to fit the existing basemap/geo-database. The data will be held as true over the existing line work depicted in the property basemap/geo-database. 
(Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Section 2001. - Submission requirements. 
As of the enactment date of this ordinance, each plat(s) or subdivision map(s) delivered to Bryan County as required by the ordinance or departmental policy will be delivered digitally, in addition to the standard submission medium on hardcopy and PDF files. 
Digital submittals that do not conform to the guidelines or files not readable by the Bryan County GIS department will need to be re-submitted. 
Each applicant will be given two resubmittals to correct technical issues without additional fees. Following the second re-submittal the applicant will be billed $200.00 for each resubmittal to cover additional time required by GIS staff to process resubmittals. Bryan County will not record plats for surveys that do not meet the surveying requirements contained herein and can be subjected to further processing fees. 
The purpose of the digital record plat submittal is to maintain the integrity of the county GIS property base map/geo-database. Digital submittals will be accepted only if they adhere to the criteria as specified in this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Section 2002. - Digital Files. 
(1)  A complete original digital CAD drawing of the submitted paper document for final plats as well as as-builts shall be submitted. Digital files should be submitted in CADD DXF, DWG, DGN or GIS shape file coverage format. The latest and most up to date software must be used to ensure compatibility with the county GIS computing systems. This digital format drawing shall be an exact replica of any required and or included data represented on the submitted hard copy drawings/documents. The digital files will adhere to the standards as described in the subdivision ordinance for Bryan County for submission of all requirements on the standard plats. All requirements for all layers will also be submitted digitally to meet Federal, FEMA, EMS 911, GEMA and other government standard required for digital submission. All plat submissions are governed by the Georgia State Plat Act. All digital data will require and accompanying text (metadata) file. This file will be in ACSII (.txt extension) format using the same naming convention as the subdivision file being submitted. 
(2)  This data must be provided on standard transfer media or by electronic transfer (FTP site, flash drive, external hard drive, USB drive or DVD/CD-ROM or E-mail attachment). The submitted transfer media shall be labeled with the project name (subdivision name, or accepted job name, etc.), filing date, registered land surveyor or professional engineer's name and any other established project identifier. 
(3)  Digital linework must be topologically clean. Lines must be geometrically continuous and boundaries must be geometrically closed with no "undershoots" or "dangles" where boundaries intersect. The digital linework must not include "sliver polygons" (gaps or overlaps between properties). All traverse features will be "snapped" closed at intersections. Essentially, the digital version of the map must be of a high precision so that it can be easily converted to a GIS format. 
(4)  All features must be closed polygons (polylines) or annotation (text) with the exception of benchmarks which are point features and road centerlines which are line features. 
(Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Section 2003. - Revisions. 
If the final plat is revised after approval and contains any major changes to the geometry of the layer(s), then the new digital submission should be resubmitted with all revised information. If the revisions change attribute or text information, the list of revised items should be submitted via email, carrier mail or hand delivery to the Bryan County planning department. 
(Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Section 2004. - Data standards/survey control. 
All drawings will be constructed in the Georgia State Plane East Coordinate System in feet (FIPS 1001) using the North American Datum 1983 (NAD83), Projection is Transverse Mercator, and Linear Unit is Foot (US), and tied to two known monuments. See projection parameters and geodetic control network for further information. Known control monuments will be supplied as requested and as known monuments exist. Otherwise two control monuments will be created/constructed as required to establish proper vertical and horizontal control. All Control Points/GPS Points will be in NAVD88. GPS procedures shall be followed to ensure survey grade compatibility with the nearest geodetic control monuments. Survey grade GPS receivers shall be used with a manufactures stated accuracy of at least &pm; 5 cm &pm; 2 ppm. It is realized that the nearest station may not always be suitable for occupation by GPS because of obstructions, property owners permission or other reasons. The intent here is to make ties to network stations within ten kilometers (6.214 miles) of the project and to establish new coordinates on property corners to a spatial accuracy of 0.2 feet. Distances shall be ground distances (not grid distances). Problems arising in obtaining property Geodetic Control shall be addressed to the county engineers office and all solutions and workarounds approved in advance from the county engineers office. Bryan County required survey monument locations will be visible and referenced on CAD drawings. Bryan County GIS requires all monument identifier numbers to be referenced on CAD drawings. All monuments on submitted plans should be included in the GCP layer. 
(Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Section 2005. - General survey standards background. 
Bryan County has made a substantial investment in a modern, computerized, multipurpose land information system. This system is referred to as the Bryan County Geographic Information System (GIS). The GIS is primarily a foundation of geographic information to support and improve County operations and community decision-making. As such, this information is a representation of geographic features that comprise Bryan County. These data are not intended to represent legal boundaries of any kind and are for information purposes only. The signed and sealed plat of record shall be referenced for all legal matters. Property surveys affected by this ordinance will be referenced to their geographic locations, and therefore can be placed in their proper position on the state plane coordinate based county mapping system. Additionally, referencing property corners to state plane coordinates will improve county land records by allowing ground surveys to be properly translated to the GIS. 
In addition to referencing property surveys to state plane coordinates, a key to streamlining the translation from ground surveys to the county's GIS is leveraging the advanced techniques surveyors, engineers, and land-development professionals are currently using. Specifically, property surveys are created using computer-aided design and drafting (CAD) tools and stored in a digital format, conceptually similar to the county's GIS. Submission of property surveys, affected by this article, will be in a digital or electronic format. This requirement will expedite the design, plan review, and data maintenance processes within the county as well as improve data quality. For electronic submission to bring these expected benefits, standards must exist to ensure efficient data translation while preserving the integrity and accuracy of the original measurements. 
Digital linework must be topologically clean. Lines must be geometrically continuous and boundaries must be geometrically closed with no "undershoots" or "dangles" where boundaries intersect. The digital linework must not include "slivers polygons" (gaps or overlaps between properties). All traverse features will be "snapped" closed at intersections. Essentially, the digital version of the map must be of a high precision so that it can be easily converted to a GIS format. 
All features must be closed polygons (polylines) or annotation (text) with the exception of benchmarks which are point features and road centerlines which are line features. 
Disclaimers and limiting statements may be placed in electronic submissions, provided such disclaimers do not direct liability to the county or create indemnification by the county to the party submitting electronic files. 
The submitted drawing file will include features and text classified by the standard layer and naming convention shown in Exhibit 1 below. Drawing features and associated text shall not be combined in one layer. Text included in drawing files will use standard fonts that can be read without third-party software. 
(Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Section 2006. - Layer names, feature types, descriptions. 
Each applicant may utilize unique layer names in lieu of the preferred layer names. Subsequent submittals from the same firm must use the previous layer names. 
1.  BLDG (Polygon) - All existing building/structure footprint areas. 
2.  BM (Point) - All benchmark and geodetic monument locations. 
3.  BSL (Polygon) - All building setback areas. 
4.  BUFFER (Polygon) - All exclusion areas as required by ordinance(s). 
5.  COMAREA (Polygon) - All common areas inside the subdivision. 
6.  AS (Polygon) - All existing and proposed easement areas located either inside or adjacent to the subdivision. 
7.  ESBWANNO (Annotation) - All text describing easements, setbacks, buffers, and wetlands. 
8.  MISCANNO (Annotation) - Any additional (optional) plat text not included in the other required annotation layers defined in these standards. 
9.  PARCEL (Polygon) - All parcel boundary areas within the subdivision. 
10.  PARCELANNO (Annotation) - All new PINS, lot numbers and street addresses for subdivision lots (individual or tabular). 
11.  ROW (Polygon) - All existing and new road and drainage right-of-way areas, located either inside or adjacent to the subdivision. 
12.  ROWANNO (Annotation) - All existing and new street names and right-of-way widths. 
13.  SUBDIV (Polygon) - Subdivision boundary areas. 
14.  SURVEYANNO (Annotation) - All survey data (bearings, distances, curve data, tie lines, etc.). 
15.  WETLAND * 
——- 
* Note: In AutoCAD, island areas would be created by three or more polylines. Multiple polylines do not translate to one polygon in ArcGIS. In order to create a correct polygon of the right-of-way it is necessary to make an AutoCAD block of all the associated right-of-way polylines. Any deviation from this standard will have to have prior approval from the county/city engineer or his/her appointee. 
——- 
(Polygon) - All existing delineated wetland areas either inside or adjacent to the subdivision (see Figure 1). 
(Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Section 2007. - Tables. 
Tables for sewer and stormwater information will be submitted in spreadsheet (.xls), .dbf, or text format (spreadsheet is preferred) and will contain the following information: 
(1)  All layers must be named exactly as specified in appendix A and should only include features appropriate to that layer. 
(2)  All layers must be created according to the geometry type and CAD feature type as specified in appendix A. The geometric feature type defines how the data will be represented in the "real world" model (e.g., parcels look like polygons, fire hydrants look like points). The CAD feature type defines how the data will be represented digitally (i.e., a PROPERTY_LINE is a line/polyline and a FIRE_HYDRANT is a BLOCK INSERT). 
The digital file for plan amendments, final plats and as-builts should be submitted to the planning department according to policy. Digital data may also be emailed before or on the day of paper submission. 
Bryan County Planning Department 
66 Captain Matthew Freeman Drive 
Richmond Hill, GA 31324 
Ph: 912-756-7964 or 912-653-3895 
Email: gissupport@bryan-county.org 
Questions about the Digital Data Submission Standards should be referred to: 
Bryan County GIS Department 
66 Captain Matthew Freeman Drive 
Richmond Hill, GA 31324 
Ph: 912-756-5260 or 912-653-3889 
Fax: 912-756-3890 
Email: gissupport@bryan-county.org 
(3)  All line features should be digitized as continuous solid lines with the following exceptions: 
-  Water lines should be split and snapped at all system valves, control valves, and fittings. 
-  Sanitary sewer lines are straight two point lines that are split and snapped at manholes. See appendix B, Figure 3. 
-  Stormwater pipes are straight two point lines that are split and snapped at catch basins, junction boxes/manholes, and headwalls. 
(4)  All point features (e.g., manholes) will be inserted as blocks. The pick point will be the center of the block and should be snapped to the associated line features. 
(5)  Line/Polyline features that are modeling polygons (e.g., parcel boundaries) will be snapped closed at nodes or endpoints appendix B, Figures 1 and 2. Lines/polylines may need to be duplicated on more than one layer. 
(6)  Lot numbers (LOT NUMBER_TEXT) and proposed address numbers (ADDRESS_TEXT) text will be labeled inside of associated parcel. These text layers will include numbers only. No special character should be used (e.g., "#"). 
(7)  When displaying coordinates, the whole number for the coordinate will be shown (i.e., no constants will be applied). 
(Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Section 2008. - Review of digital data. 
All digital data will be reviewed for the following criteria: 
1.  Correct and complete layering. 
2.  No duplicate linear or point elements. 
3.  Closure of the geometry of all logical areas. 
4.  Verification that digital and hardcopy maps are consistent. 
5.  Correct geographical position (i.e., correct coordinate values for final submission). 
6.  Evidence of proper geodetic control. 
The submitting party will be responsible for correcting any errors and delivering the new correct digital file prior to final plat approval. 
(Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Appendix A 
GRAPHIC FILE (.DXF) LAYOUT SPECIFICATIONS 

 
  
Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Appendix B 
DIGITAL SUBMISSION FIGURES 

(Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Appendix C 
REQUIRED TABLES 
Example Table: Sewer Line 

 
  
Example Table: Storm Line 

 
  
Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Appendix D 
METADATA FILE 
METADATA.TXT 
1.  Subdivision name/phase/pod/revision date. 
2.  File name. 
3.  Submittal date. 
4.  Parent pin. 
5.  Number of lots. 
6.  Reference monument name/number. 
7.  Software/version used. 
8.  Company name. 
9.  Contact name. 
10.  Phone number. 
11.  Surveyor information if other than company name. 
12.  List of digital layers from appendix A used in this project. 
(Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Appendix D - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix is the county development impact fee ordinance, being an ordinance adopted on December 12, 2017. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering and capitalization has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Short Title, Authority, and Applicability. 
1.1.  Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Bryan County, Georgia," or, for brevity, the "Impact Fee Ordinance." 
1.2.  Authority. 
This ordinance has been prepared and adopted by the board of commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia, in accordance with the authority provided by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq. as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
1.3.  Applicability 
1.  The provisions of this ordinance shall not be construed to limit the power of Bryan County, Georgia, to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this ordinance. 
2.  This ordinance shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of Bryan County, Georgia, and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
Section 2. - Findings, Purpose, and Intent. 
2.1.  Findings. 
The board of commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia, finds and declares: 
1.  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Bryan County; and 
2.  That certain public facilities as herein defined have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development; and 
3.  That it is fair and equitable that new growth and development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. 
2.2.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this ordinance is to impose impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined. 
2.  It is also the purpose of this ordinance to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in Bryan County and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
2.3.  Intent. 
This ordinance is intended to implement and be consistent with the Bryan County Comprehensive Plan, as it may be adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 et seq.); and the applicable Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning and the Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements, both as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
Section 3. - Rules of Construction and Definitions. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Bryan County. 
3.1.  Rules of Construction. 
Unless otherwise stated in this ordinance, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this ordinance: 
1.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between words or phrases as used in this ordinance and as used in other codes, regulations or laws of Bryan County, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this ordinance. 
2.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
3.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
4.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
5.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other legal or similar entity. 
6.  The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
7.  The conjunction "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
8.  The use of "either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
9.  The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
10.  The article, section, and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this ordinance are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this ordinance. 
3.2.  Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below. 
1.  Administrator means the county administrator of Bryan County, Georgia, or the county administrator's designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this ordinance. 
2.  Board of commissioners means the board of commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia. 
3.  Building permit is the permit required for new construction, completion of construction, or an interior finish pursuant to the applicable Building Code. As used herein, the term shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase in the demand placed on those public facilities as defined herein. 
4.  Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
5.  Capital improvements element means that portion of the Bryan County Comprehensive Plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement, as most recently adopted or amended by the board of commissioners. 
6.  Commencement of construction , for private development, means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development or building permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project. 
7.  Comprehensive plan means the Bryan County Plan or Planning Elements as adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 et seq.) and the applicable Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs. 
8.  County means Bryan County, a legal subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
9.  Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
10.  Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
11.  Development means any action which creates demand on or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; any change in use of land, a building, or structure; or the connection of any building or structure to a public utility. 
12.  Development approval means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, land disturbance permit or other approval for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction. 
13.  Development impact fee means the payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
14.  Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of Bryan County, Georgia. 
15.  Excess capacity means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
16.  Feepayor means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his or her legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this ordinance has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. 
17.  Individual assessment determination means a finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this ordinance or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
18.  Individual assessment study means the engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
19.  Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by Bryan County, Georgia in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
20.  Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of "net present value." 
21.  Project means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or other development approval, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
22.  Project improvements means site specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on- site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by Bryan County, Georgia shall be considered a project improvement. 
23.  Property owner means that person or entity that holds legal title to property. 
24.  Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
25.  Public facilities means: (A) Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; (B) Public safety facilities, including sheriff, inmate housing, fire, emergency medical, emergency management and rescue facilities; (C) Libraries and related facilities; (D) All county roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping, and any other components of state or federal highways; (E) Water supply production, treatment, and distribution facilities; (F) Waste-water collection, transmission, treatment, and disposal facilities; (G) Storm-water collection, retention, detention, treatment, and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection improvements. 
26.  Service area means a geographically defined area as designated in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
27.  System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three percent of the total of all other system improvement costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
28.  System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
29.  Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc. 
30.  Unused or excess impact fee means any individual impact fee payment from which no amount of money or only a portion thereof has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of this ordinance. 
Section 4. - Imposition of Development Impact Fees. 
Any person who after the effective date of this ordinance engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this ordinance except as provided below or exempted herein. 
4.1.  Construction Not Subject to Impact Fees. 
The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this ordinance, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
1.  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development as defined in this ordinance, legally in existence any time prior to permit application, that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property legally in existence any time prior to permit application. 
2.  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
3.  Replacing a residential housing unit, legally in existence any time prior to permit application, with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
4.  Placing or replacing a manufactured home in a manufactured home park on a prepared manufactured home pad in existence, previously occupied and operational prior to permit application. 
5.  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
6.  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential housing unit that does not increase the number of housing units. 
7.  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool. 
4.2.  Grandfathered Projects. 
1.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
2.  Any building for which a valid and complete application for a building permit has been received prior to the effective date of this ordinance may proceed without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this ordinance, provided that: 
a.  All fees and development exactions in effect prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be or have been paid in full; and, 
b.  Said construction shall be commenced, pursued and completed within the time established by the building permit, or within 180 days, whichever is later. 
4.3.  Method of Calculation. 
1.  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this ordinance shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, shall be calculated on the basis of the establishment of service areas, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development, as established in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this ordinance, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of credits for the present value of ad valorem taxes or other revenues as established in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan, and which: 
a.  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new growth and development; and 
b.  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category and in the same service area for which an impact fee is imposed. 
3.  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this ordinance shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of Bryan County, Georgia, and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
4.  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee may also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities, as established in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
5.  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Section 5. - Fee Assessment and Payment. 
5.1.  Fee Schedule. 
1.  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule as established by resolution by a majority vote of the Bryan County Commission for a property located inside of Bryan County, shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by Bryan County, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
2.  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. 
3.  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
a.  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee. 
b.  In making such determination, the administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
c.  If a land use designation is not in a category contained in this Ordinance, then an appropriate new category may be added by the administrator and an appropriate fee established under the county's current impact fee methodology, subject to annual confirmation by the board of commissioners. 
d.  Appeals from the decision of the Administrator shall be made to the board of commissioners in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this ordinance as well as the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A 36-71-1). 
5.2.  Timing of Assessment and Payment. 
1.  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of application for a building permit. 
2.  All development impact fees shall be collected no earlier than the time of issuance of a building permit, and no later than as a prerequisite to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building. 
3.  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction or to commence use of a property. 
4.  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the actual use prior to issuance of an interior finishes permit or approval of a certificate of occupancy. An adjustment may result in a refund to the feepayor or payment of the marginal increase of the adjusted fee over the amount already paid. 
5.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, any future change in demand for public facilities in excess of the average demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the building permit shall be assessed such additional fee as would otherwise have been due. Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined herein), or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
6.  All impact fees calculated/assessed herein shall be valid for a period of 180 days. After which, the administrator may require the resubmittal of the land development activity or permit application. 
5.3.  Individual Assessment Determinations. 
Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
1.  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project in lieu of the fee established herein and recorded in the "Bryan County Schedule of Fees" on file with and maintained by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
2.  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. Each individual assessment study shall: 
a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or, 
b.  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in Bryan County or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and, 
c.  Provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. 
3.  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this ordinance. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the board of commissioners in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this ordinance. 
4.  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by Bryan County, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
5.4.  Fee Certification. 
Upon application to the administrator, a developer may receive a certification of the development impact fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. Such certified schedule or fee shall establish the development impact fee due for a period of 180 days from the date of certification, even if new or revised rate schedules are adopted in the interim. 
Section 6. - Exemptions 
6.1.  Exemption Policy 
Bryan County recognizes that certain office, retail trade and industrial development projects provide extraordinary benefit in support of the economic advancement of the county's citizens over and above the access to jobs, goods and services that such uses offer in general. 
1.  To encourage such development projects, the board of commissioners may consider granting a reduction in the impact fee for such a development project upon the determination and relative to the extent that the business or project represents extraordinary economic development and employment growth of public benefit to Bryan County, in accordance with adopted exemption criteria. 
2.  It is also recognized that the cost of system improvements otherwise foregone through exemption of any impact fee must be funded through revenue sources other than impact fees. 
6.2.  Process for Exemption Approval 
An application for exemption shall be considered under the following procedures: 
1.  Application for exemption approval must be made by the building permit applicant to the administrator. A building permit may be issued upon approval of an exemption, or may be issued without payment of applicable impact fees following receipt of a complete exemption application and pending its approval, but a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until a decision regarding the exemption has been made, or until such time that the application for exemption is otherwise withdrawn by the applicant and payment of impact fees have been paid. 
2.  Documentation must be provided to the Administrator that demonstrates the applicant's eligibility for an exemption. This documentation shall address, but need not be limited to, all applicable exemption criteria adopted by the county. This documentation constitutes the application for exemption. 
3.  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall determine whether an application for exemption addresses the exemption criteria adopted by the county and is complete. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the board of commissioners in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this ordinance. 
4.  The administrator or the board of commissioners shall determine the eligibility for and extent of exemption, in accordance with the standards and procedures contained in the exemption criteria adopted by the board of commissioners. If action by the board of commissioners is required, the application for exemption shall be considered at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners that falls at least two weeks after a complete application for exemption has been received by the administrator. 
Section 7. - Deposit and Expenditure of Fees. 
7.1.  Maintenance of Funds. 
1.  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this ordinance shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. 
2.  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements within each service area wherein fees are collected. 
3.  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this ordinance. 
7.2.  Expenditures; Restrictions. 
1.  Expenditures from the impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements within the service area for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
2.  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
3.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this ordinance, the following shall be considered general revenue of Bryan County, and may be expended accordingly: 
a.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
b.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Bryan County for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and, 
c.  Any portion of the impact fee (but not to exceed three percent of the total) collected and allocated by the administrator for administration of the impact fee ordinance, and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
7.3.  Annual Report. 
1.  The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the board of commissioners as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility and service area. 
2.  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), and submitted to DCA in conjunction with the annual update of the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Section 8. - Credits. 
When eligible, feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. 
8.1.  Credits; Restrictions. 
1.  Except as provided in paragraph 2 below, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this ordinance. 
2.  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his or her predecessor in title or interest) prior to the effective date of this ordinance for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this ordinance, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of Bryan County, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
3.  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements, or for system improvements not included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
8.2.  Granting of Credits. 
1.  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
a.  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan; 
b.  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the Capital Improvements Element; and, 
c.  The Board of Commissioners shall have explicitly approved said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
2.  The credit allowed pursuant to this section shall not exceed the impact fee due for such system improvement unless a greater credit is authorized under a private agreement executed under the provisions of section 9 of this ordinance. 
8.3.  Guidelines for Credit Valuation. 
Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
1.  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the administrator of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
2.  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
3.  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that Bryan County, Georgia would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
4.  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest accepted by the county, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
5.  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned on a State of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the board of commissioners in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
8.4.  Credits; Application. 
1.  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the administrator. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the administrator at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
2.  The administrator, in his or her sole discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
3.  Any credit approved by the administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
8.5.  Credits; Abandoned Building Permits. 
In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the county, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
Section 9. - Refunds. 
9.1.  Eligibility for a Refund. 
1.  Upon the request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
a.  Capacity is available in the public facilities for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or, 
b.  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
2.  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
9.2.  Notice of Entitlement to a Refund. 
When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Bryan County within 30 days after the expiration of the six year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." No refund shall be made for a period of 30 days from the date of said publication. 
9.3.  Filing a Request for a Refund. 
All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. 
9.4.  Payment of Refunds. 
1.  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
2.  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
3.  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, for any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Bryan County for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Section 10. - Private Contractual Agreements. 
10.1.  Private Agreements; Authorized. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the county and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including inter-project transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project, provided that: 
1.  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan; and, 
2.  The amount of any credit or reimbursement granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
10.2.  Private Agreements; Provisions. 
A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
1.  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the county to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this ordinance. 
2.  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
3.  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this ordinance, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable Letter of Credit from a bank authorized to do business within the State of Georgia, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
10.3.  Private Agreements; Procedure. 
1.  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this Section shall be submitted to the administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the board of commissioners. 
2.  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the board of commissioners of Bryan County, Georgia prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
3.  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording. 
Section 11. - Periodic Review and Amendments. 
11.1.  Ordinance Amendments. 
1.  This ordinance may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. 
2.  Interim amendments to the impact fee schedule regarding the establishment of new land use categories by the administrator under Section 5.01.3.c are expressly authorized, and shall be confirmed by the board of commissioners when this ordinance is subsequently amended. 
11.2.  Capital Improvements Element Periodic Review. 
1.  Update. At least once each year, the board of commissioners shall review and may update the Capital Improvements Element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The Capital Improvements Element Update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The Capital Improvements Element Update shall be submitted to the Regional Development Center for their review, in accordance with the Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia. 
2.  Amendment. In conducting a periodic review of the Capital Improvements Element and calculation of development impact fees, the board of commissioners may determine to amend the Capital Improvements Element. Amendments to the Capital Improvements Element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the board of community affairs of the State of Georgia, and shall be required for any change to the Capital Improvements Element that would: 
a.  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the Capital Improvements Element; 
b.  Add new public facility categories for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas or make changes to system improvement projects; 
c.  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area; or 
d.  Make any other revisions needed to keep the Capital Improvements Element up to date. 
11.3.  Continuation of Validity. 
Failure of the board of commissioners to undertake a periodic review of the Capital Improvements Element shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to periodically review such data shall not invalidate this ordinance. 
Section 12. - Administrative Appeals. 
12.1.  Eligibility to File an Appeal. 
Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the county or who have already received a written determination of individual assessment, refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. 
12.2.  Appeals Process. 
1.  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor (hereinafter, the "appellant") must file a written appeal with the administrator within 15 days of the decision or receipt of written determination from which the appeal is taken. 
2.  Such written appeal shall constitute an application for relief, shall be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought, and shall include: 
a.  The name and address of the appellant; 
b.  The location of the affected property; 
c.  A copy of any applicable written decision or determination made by the administrator (from which the appeal is taken); 
3.  Within 15 days after receipt of the appeal, the administrator shall make a written final decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. 
4.  Appeals from the final decision of the administrator shall be made to the board of commissioners within 30 days of receipt by the appellant of the administrator's decision. Delivery by hand or certified mail to, or posting upon the property at, the address given by the appellant in the application for relief shall constitute "receipt by the appellant" under this provision. 
5.  The board of commissioners shall thereafter hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days provided that at least two weeks written notice thereof can be given to the appellant. The board of commissioners shall decide the issue within a reasonable time following the hearing, but in no case more than 15 days following the hearing, unless the appellant agrees to an extension to a later date. Any party making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. 
12.3.  Payment of Impact Fee during Appeal. 
1.  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. 
2.  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a development approval, and by making such payment shall not be estopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
Section 13. - Enforcement and Penalties. 
13.1.  Enforcement Authority. 
1.  The enforcement of this ordinance shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel as the administrator may designate from time to time. 
2.  The administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this ordinance and shall have the right to issue a written notice, a stop work order or citation for violations, as the administrator in his or her sole determination may deem appropriate to the circumstances. Refusal of written notice of violation, stop work order or citation under this ordinance shall constitute legal notice of service. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. 
3.  The administrator may suspend or revoke any building permit or withhold the issuance of other development approvals. if the provisions of this ordinance have been violated by the developer or the owner or their assigns. 
13.2.  Violations. 
1.  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this ordinance shall constitute an actionable violation. 
2.  Proceeding with construction of a project that is not consistent with the project's impact fee assessment, such as the use category claimed or units of development indicated, shall constitute an actionable violation. 
3.  Failure to take corrective action following the receipt of a citation shall constitute an actionable violation. 
4.  A violation of this ordinance shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law, including the general penalty provisions of the Bryan County Code of Ordinances Section 1-11. In addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the board of commissioners shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this ordinance, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, including but not limited to injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this ordinance and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
Section 14. - Repealer, Severability, and Effective Date. 
14.1.  Repeal of Conflicting Laws. 
Any and all ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
14.2.  Severability. 
If any sentence, clause, part, paragraph, section, or provision of this ordinance is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any other part hereof shall not be affected. 
14.3.  Incorporation by Reference of Georgia Law. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that the development impact fee ordinance of Bryan County, Georgia comply with the terms and provisions of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq. as amended). To the extent that any provision of this ordinance is inconsistent with the provisions of said Chapter 36-71, the latter shall control. Furthermore, to the extent that this ordinance is silent as to any provision of said Chapter 36-71 that is otherwise made mandatory by said Chapter 36-71, such provision shall control and shall be binding upon the county. 
14.4.  Effective Date. 
This ordinance shall take effect on January 1, 2018. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1996 CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1996 Code, as supplemented through April 12, 2016 that are included herein. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Local Acts and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 

 