CODE OF THE CITY OF ROME, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1992 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
Adopted March 22, 1993  Effective March 22, 1993 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
ROME, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
George Pullen 
Commission Chairman 
____________ 
Napoleon Fielder, Pro Tem 
Jim Harrington 
Ernie Smith 
Bill Fricks  Robert Steinbruegge  George Griffin  Martha Kennedy  Leon "Red" Wade 
Commissioners 
____________ 
John Bennett 
City Manager 
____________ 
Robert Brinson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Joseph F. Smith 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1981 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Robert Brinson, City Attorney, Mr. John Bennett, City Manager, Mr. Joe Smith, City Clerk, and Mr. Branson Gayler, former City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
Adopting Ordinance 
Ordinance No. 93-3-4 
An Ordinance of the City of Rome, Georgia, Adopting and Ordaining a New Code for Rome, Georgia; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective; Providing Certain Penalties; Repealing Conflicting Provisions; and For Other Purposes. 
Be It Ordained by the Rome City Commission, and it is hereby ordained by authority of the same, as follows: 
Section 1. The document entitled "Code of the City of Rome, Georgia," a copy of which accompanies this ordinance and is incorporated herein and made a part hereof, is hereby adopted and is intended to be, and shall be treated and considered as, a new and original comprehensive ordinance. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of Rome, Georgia, enacted on final passage on or before February 17, 1992, and not in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; nor shall this repeal affect any zoning ordinance or subdivision regulation of the city; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance of the city promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; nor shall this repeal affect any rights or franchise granted by any ordinance of the city to any person, firm or corporation; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; nor shall this repeal affect the present annual appropriation of the city, nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance levying or imposing charges, fees or taxes now due or accrued; nor shall this repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as provisions of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, are intended, and shall be considered, as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Section 5. Any and all additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city commission to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into the Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Rome, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6. A copy of the Code shall be kept on file in the office of the secretary of the commission, and preserved in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the secretary of the commission may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the secretary of the commission or someone authorized by the secretary of the commission to insert in their designated places all amendments and ordinances which indicate the intention of the city commission to make those provisions a part of the Code, when those provisions have been reprinted in page form, and to extract from the Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the city commission. A copy of the Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it and shall be considered the official Code of Rome, Georgia. 
Section 7. As pages of the Code are replaced because the matter contained on them shall have been repealed, amended, or otherwise shall have been superseded or rendered obsolete or inoperative, the secretary of the commission shall retain copies of the complete Code so superseded, rendered obsolete or otherwise rendered inoperative in a file so that the former provisions of the Code may be readily available and easily found. The purpose of this section is to permit anyone desiring to do so to ascertain the precise status of any section of the Code as of any given date. 
Section 8. In case of the amendment of any section of the Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in the general penalty provisions of the Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed thereby. 
Section 9. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed. 
Section 10. This ordinance shall be in force and take effect on March 22, 1993. 
Certificate of Secretary 
I do hereby certify that the above and foregoing ordinance was duly passed at the regular meeting of the City Commission of Rome, Georgia, March 22, 1993. 
Witness my hand and seal of the City of Rome this 23rd day of March, 1993. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter, as adopted by the General Assembly in 1918 Georgia Laws, page 813. Where not otherwise stated, references to sections in parentheses are to the sections of the above act. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the language has been changed as instructed by the city during the preparation of this Code or the 1981 Code. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. A uniform style of headings and catchlines, and citations to the state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
This codification reflects a technical compilation of the charter. Those provisions of the 1918 Act and subsequent amendatory acts which have been superseded by general law or which were of a transitory nature and have expired have been deleted. The remaining provisions have been arranged according to subject matter and renumbered for the user's convenience. 
Those sections which include no historical note represent the substance of former sections as they have been simplified or modernized to bring them into line with current practices or requirements. However, since these sections have not been adopted by the legislature, where required, or by home rule ordinance, they are not, in fact, law. Therefore they should not be relied upon by the city from a legal standpoint until such time as they are adopted by law either as amendments to the 1918 charter or as part of a totally new, revised charter. 
The codified charter as contained in part I should not be used in any pleadings in any court involving litigation in which the city is a party. This is a codification of the charter, as amended. The official legal charter of the city can be found in 1918 Ga. Laws, page 813, and amendments thereto. Such amendments will be found in the session laws of the General Assembly and in the official minutes of the city commission in the case of home rule amendments. 

ARTICLE 1. - INCORPORATION, BOUNDARIES AND WARDS 

Section 1-1 - Incorporation, name and style, general rights, powers and privileges. 
The inhabitants of the territory hereinafter described, all of which is located in Floyd County, State of Georgia, be and are hereby incorporated under the name and style of the "City of Rome," a body politic and corporate, and by that name shall have perpetual succession, and is hereby vested with all the rights, powers and privileges incident to municipal corporations in the State of Georgia, and all rights, powers, titles, property easements and hereditaments, within or without its corporate limits, now belonging to the City of Rome; shall be and are hereby vested in the City of Rome as created by this act and the City of Rome, as created by this act, may, by its corporate name, sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with, plead and be impleaded, have and use a common seal, make and enact through its commissioners such ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations and resolutions for the transaction of its business and the welfare and proper government of the city as the commissioners may deem proper, not in conflict with this charter, nor in conflict with the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, nor in conflict with the constitution and laws of the United States of America. And the City of Rome shall have the right and power to purchase, hold, rent, lease, sell, exchange, enjoy, possess and retain in perpetuity, or for any terms of years, any property, estate, real or personal, land, tenements and hereditaments of whatsoever kind, within or without the limits of the city for corporate purposes, and the City of Rome shall have the right to rent, lease or operate any and all public buildings for any purpose whatsoever; and the city shall have the right and power to receive gifts, donations, bequests and public trusts and agree to conditions and terms accompanying the same, and the commission of the city is herein empowered to bind the city to carry out the same. The City of Rome, as created by this act, shall succeed to all the rights and remedies of and is hereby made responsible as a body corporate for all the legal debts, liabilities and undertakings of the present City of Rome, and its former governing authorities or the former board of public works of the city as a body corporate, as heretofore incorporated. 
(§ 1) 
Section 1-2 - Wards. 
The City of Rome shall be composed of three (3) wards to be known as Ward no. 1, Ward no. 2, and Ward no. 3. Ward no. 1 shall include all of the property lying within the City of Rome at the present time, or which may hereafter be incorporated within said city, lying between the center line of the Etowah River and thence generally westerly and northwesterly to the center line of the Oostanaula River. Ward no. 2 shall include all of the property lying within the City of Rome at the present time, or which may hereafter be incorporated within said city, lying between the center line of the Etowah River and thence generally westerly and southwesterly to the center line of the Coosa River. Ward no. 3 shall include all of the property lying within the City of Rome at the present time, or which may hereafter be incorporated within said city, lying between the center line of the Coosa River thence generally north and northeast to the center line of the Oostanaula River. 
(§ 112; 1929 Ga. Laws, page 1254; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 2379) 
Section 1-3 - Corporate limits. 
The boundaries of the city are as now or hereafter fixed and established by law. 
ARTICLE 2. - CITY COMMISSION 

Section 2-1 - Vesting of governing and legislative authority; commission members, eligibility, compensation, Mayor, legal process; election and terms. 
(a)  The governing and legislative authority of the city shall be vested in a commission of nine members. Three members of said commission from each ward of the city shall be elected by a plurality of the consolidated vote of the entire city. The members of said commission shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall have been residents of said city for at least 12 months next preceding their election. The members at the time of and during their continuance in office shall be bona fide residents and citizens of the city and the ward for which they are elected and must at the time of their qualification for election have been a registered voter and elector of the city at least 90 days prior to qualification for election, and have been a resident and citizen of the ward in which they seek office for at least 90 days prior to, and at the time of, qualification for election. Each member of said commission shall receive a salary of $8,400.00 per annum. At their first meeting, or as soon thereafter as possible, the members of said commission shall elect one of their members as mayor, who shall receive a salary of 110 percent of the salary of a city commissioner, and one as mayor pro tempore. The mayor, or in his or her absence the mayor pro tempore, shall preside over the deliberations of the commission and shall have the right to vote on all questions; shall preserve order and decorum at all meetings of the commission and shall enforce the rules of the body; shall have power to punish all persons for contempt of such rules; and shall perform all other duties incident to his or her office, Service of legal process directed to or against the city shall be served upon the mayor of the commission. 
(b)  An election shall be held in the city on the first Tuesday in December, 1984, to elect commissioners who shall serve and hold office from January, 1985, until the time hereinafter set forth and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(c)  Candidates from Wards 1 and 3 who are elected shall serve and hold office from the first Monday in January, 1985, until the first Monday in January, 1988, and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(d)  Candidates from Ward 2 who are elected shall serve and hold office from the first Monday in January 1985, until the first Monday in January, 1990, and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(e)  At the expiration of the terms of the commissioners elected on the first Tuesday in December, 1984, commissioners shall be elected to terms of four (4) years thereafter and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Elections subsequent to the December, 1984, election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in the year next preceding the expiration of the respective terms and the commissioners elected shall serve and hold office for terms of four (4) years from the first Monday in January of the year they assume office and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(§ 3; 1949 Ga. Laws, page 2005; 1961 Ga. Laws, page 2282; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 2382; 1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 355), § 1; Ord. No. 84-8-1, § 1, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 87-6-11, § 1, 6-15-87; Ord. No. 97-8-1, § I, 8-4-97; Ord. No. 02-9-1, §§ I, II, 9-3-02; Ga. Laws (Act 587), § 1) 
Section 2-2 - Vacancy in elective offices, filling. 
In case of a vacancy in elective offices under this Charter, caused by resignation, death or other cause, such vacancy shall be filled by the remaining members of the Rome City Commission until the next regular election for the election of the Rome City Commission. 
Section 2-3 - Oath of office. 
Before entering upon the discharge of duty, each of the commissioners shall take and subscribe to the following oath, which shall be entered upon the minutes of the commission: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully and impartially demean myself as a commissioner of the City of Rome during my continuance in office; that I will discharge the duties of the office to which I have been elected to the best of my ability; that I will have due regard for the Charter of the City of Rome, the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and of the United States of America; I do further swear that I will not knowingly permit my vote in the election or appointment of any person to a position in the city government to be influenced by fear, favor or affection, reward or hope thereof, but in all things pertaining to my said office I will be governed by my convictions as to the public good, so help me God." 
(§ 12; Ord. No. 84-10-1, § 1, 10-1-84) 
Section 2-4 - Unlawful promises, penalty therefor. 
No candidate for commissioner shall, before his election, or in any party primary election, directly or indirectly promise any person to appoint or vote for such person, or any other person, to any office, agency or employment in the government of the city. For a violation of this provision, the candidate making the promise, and the person exacting the same, shall forfeit his [sic] office and either or both shall, upon conviction, be punished as for a misdemeanor, and upon the trial of any person for the violation of this section of this act, both the candidate making the promise and the person exacting the same shall be a [sic] competent witness, one against the other, and shall be compelled to give evidence, and nothing then said by the witness shall at any time be received or given in evidence against him in any prosecution except upon an indictment for perjury in any matter to which he may have testified. 
(§ 13) 
Section 2-5 - Devotion of time to duties, performance of duties. 
The commissioners of the city shall devote as much of their time to the duties of their office as may be necessary, and shall perform such duties as may be required of them by this charter and the laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the commission not repugnant to this act. 
(§ 19) 
Section 2-6 - Powers of magistrate. 
Each of the commissioners shall be to all intents and purposes a magistrate, so far as to enable them or any one of them to issue warrants for offenses committed within the jurisdiction of the city, or for a fugitive from justice found within the jurisdiction, which warrant shall be executed by any officer authorized under this charter, or the ordinances of the city, or the laws of the State of Georgia to make arrests, and the commissioners are empowered to commit such persons to the common jail of Floyd County, or admit to bail such offenders (provided the offense is bailable) for their appearance before the next superior or municipal court thereafter for the County of Floyd, and it shall be the duty of the jailer of the county to receive all such persons so committed and safely keep the same until discharged by due course of law. 
Section 2-7 - Meetings, regulations, minutes, quorum, adopting vote. 
The commission shall have power to fix regular meetings at such times as it may select by resolution; it may adopt such rules and regulations for control and guidance as it may see fit, with a right to change same at any time by a majority vote at two (2) separate meetings; or it may suspend such rules temporarily by unanimous consent. The commission may meet as often in extra session as the Mayor, or any two (2) commissioners, may designate or call, provided personal notice is given to each commissioner present in the city. Five (5) commissioners shall constitute a quorum at any meeting for the transaction of any business. It shall keep accurate minutes of its proceedings, and shall have all its acts and doings recorded thereon, and all votes taken shall be "aye" or "no," and shall be made to appear on the minutes. All meetings of the commission for the transaction of business shall be open to the public. 
(§ 21; 1927 Ga. Laws, page 1503, § 3; Ord. No. 85-5-3, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 02-9-1, §§ I, III, 9-3-02) 
Section 2-8 - Reserved. 
Section 2-9 - Legislative powers; passage of ordinances and resolutions. 
The commission shall be vested with full legislative power. It may pass ordinances, adopt resolutions, levy taxes and provide for their collection, fix licenses and provide for their payment, and perform all legislative rights and powers incident to the government of the city. All ordinances and resolutions shall first be reduced to writing, and shall be acted on by the commission, which shall have authority to approve, disapprove or amend the same. A resolution may be passed at the time it is offered, but in no case shall an ordinance be put upon its passage until it has been read at two (2) different regular meetings on two (2) separate days. Five (5) members of the commission must vote affirmatively to pass any ordinance, resolution, or motion. Unless inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or the Code of Ordinances passed thereunder, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern procedure before the commission. In case any proposed legislation is defeated or passed over the protest of the Mayor, he shall have authority within forty-eight (48) hours thereafter to suspend the operation of the same, and order a referendum thereon. The legislation shall be published in the official organ of Floyd County at least ten (10) days prior to said referendum. 
(Ord. No. 02-9-1, §§ I, IV, 9-3-02) 
Section 2-10 - Regulatory powers and jurisdiction. 
The commission shall be vested with full power and authority from time to time to make and establish such rules, bylaws and ordinances, and to impose penalties for failure to comply with same respecting city property, streets, lanes, alleys, bridges, cemeteries, public buildings and grounds, public houses, wharves, water courses, markets, railroads, telegraph and telephone companies, electric light and power companies, gas companies, erection of buildings, construction of houses, plumbing, drainage, sewerage, fire engines, pumps, forges, blacksmith shops, foundries, fertilizer plants, breweries, tanneries, lumber yards, warehouses, storage room, pawn shops, junk dealers, auctioneers, slaughter houses and all kinds of business places and enterprises operated in the city; they shall have power to regulate and prohibit the storage of all kinds of explosive and all combustible material in the city; they shall have full power and authority to pass all laws and ordinances they may consider necessary for the peace, good order, health, prosperity, comfort and security of the city, and of the inhabitants thereof, and that may be necessary to foster virtue and good morals in the city; to suppress lewdness, gambling, disorderly conduct and to enforce such laws and ordinances by such penalties as are authorized by this charter. The commission shall have full power to adopt and enforce any and all ordinances they may consider necessary or advisable to carry out the powers granted to the city and the commission by this charter, and to do any and all other acts and exercise all other powers conferred upon them by this act, or that may be done or exercised under the laws of this state, conferring powers upon municipal corporations; provided, said laws, ordinances, rules and regulations are consistent with the laws of this state. For these purposes the city is given jurisdiction for two (2) miles from the corporate limits thereof. 
(§ 28) 
Section 2-11 - Nuisances. 
The commission is hereby empowered to declare what shall constitute a nuisance and to pass such ordinances as may be necessary to prevent same; and by ordinance they may empower the municipal judge to abate same and authorize the removal of the nuisance by the proper officials; they may provide for the punishment for the person, persons, firm or corporation causing or suffering the nuisance to exist, and they may provide for the assessment of the expense of the removal of the nuisance against the person, persons, firm or corporation causing or continuing same, and provide for the collection of such expense by execution, said execution to have the same force and effect as city tax executions, and to be enforced in the same way. 
Section 2-12 - Penalties for offenses against laws and ordinances. 
The commission shall have power and authority to prescribe by ordinance adequate penalties for all offenses against the laws and ordinances of the city, and to punish offenders by fine not to exceed $2,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or sentence to work on the streets or public works of said city, or community service work, not to exceed six (6) months, any one or more or any part of any one or more of said punishments, in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court or any officer trying the offender. 
Section 2-13 - Codification of ordinances. 
The commission shall codify all ordinances and by-laws of the city, together with the charter of the city, into one book, to be known as the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia, and when same is adopted by the commission, the code shall be admitted in evidence in any of the courts of this state, upon the certificates of the secretary of the commission certifying the same to be the code of ordinances and laws of the city. 
Section 2-14 - Powers over streets, water courses, sewers, drains, bridges and public property, assessment of costs, right of condemnation. 
The City of Rome, through the city commission, shall have full power and authority to make contracts concerning and having exclusive power over the streets, alleys, water courses, sewers, drains, bridges, public grounds, levees or flood control structures and public buildings and any other public property within the city, except as afterwards provided in this charter and except such authority as has heretofore been delegated to the County of Floyd over certain bridges within the corporate limits of the city by special legislative enactment. The city authorities may also drain and fill up wells, ponds, cellars or low ground or compel the owners to do so, and may provide for the assessment of the cost of any such improvements upon the property thereby benefited or for the payment of such cost by the city; the city commission may also cause buildings, structures or other things in the way of any street, sewer, levees, flood control structures, or other public improvements, to be taken down, removed or appropriated upon payment of damages, as provided by law, and may enter upon, seize, appropriate and condemn for streets, alleys, sewers, drains, parks, cemeteries, levees or other flood control structures or other public purposes, or lands, easements or rights-of-way of any person, company or corporation owning, controlling or having an interest in any streams, railroad, electric or other street railway or any other property whether used for private or public purposes and whether such land, easement and right-of-way, or other public or private property, be occupied by any person, company or corporation, or not, upon payment of damages for the purpose so taken. In case the parties at interest cannot agree, then the city may proceed to condemn the property. 
Section 2-15 - Powers as to public property and eminent domain. 
The commission shall have full power and authority to lay out, establish, plot, open, widen, narrow, straighten, extend, grade, pave, or otherwise improve streets, lanes, alleys, public grounds, parks, public buildings, wharves, landings, docks, bridges, viaducts, markets and other places within the city, or to have same done under the direction of the city manager, and whenever the city commission shall exercise or desire to exercise the power of establishing, plotting, opening, widening, narrowing, straightening, extending or to do anything else which would involve the actual taking of private property, they shall proceed to do so in accordance with Georgia law. 
Section 2-16 - Condemnation of lands beyond corporate limits. 
The city shall have power to acquire by condemnation or other lawful means, rights-of-way for streets, lanes and alleys, sewers and drains through and upon lands outside of and beyond the corporate limits of the city, for the purpose of connecting the streets, lanes and alleys of the city with public highways outside of the city limits, and the sewers and drainage within the city with streams and water sheds beyond the corporate limits, whenever and wherever such connections are ordered by proper corporate action by the city authorities, with power and jurisdiction to build, construct, maintain, protect and police such extra urban streets, alleys, lanes, sewers and drains as complete as if they were located within the city limits. Whenever it is necessary to condemn any property for the purpose above indicated, the same shall be done in the same manner and under the same rules and regulations provided in this charter for the condemnation of property within the city limits. 
(§ 125) 
Section 2-17 - Authority to provide for and collect rental for sewer connections. 
The city commission of Rome may provide for and collect a monthly, bi-monthly or annual rental in an amount to be determined by the Rome city commission for each connection made to any sewer in the city from any resident and from any place of business in the city; and any connections made outside the city limits, terms, conditions and rentals thereof shall be determined before any such connections are made, but may be changed from time to time by the commission. 
Be it further provided that the rental for the connection, either inside or outside the city limits, of any trunk or main sewer to a sewer of the City of Rome by any person, including any political subdivision, shall be determined by the Rome city commission. 
(§ 82; 1960 Ga. Laws, page 2988, § 2) 
Section 2-18 - Damage bonds, authority to require. 
The commission is empowered to compel persons about to undertake any work which may be dangerous, or is likely to involve liability upon the city, to execute a bond with good and sufficient security, conditioned for the payment of any damage that may be sustained by any person by such work. 
ARTICLE 3. - CITY MANAGER 

Section 3-1 - Employment, administrative head of municipal government, compensation, qualifications, powers. 
It shall be the duty of the commissioners to employ a city manager, who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government, and shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments. He shall give his entire time to the city and shall be paid a salary as determined and fixed by the city commission. The powers of the city manager shall be: 
(a)  To appoint, except as otherwise provided in this chapter [sic], subject to the approval of a majority of the commissioners, the secretary of the commission, the city attorney, the city physician, the municipal court judge, and the heads of all departments of the municipal government. 
(b)  To remove any of his appointees, or the appointees of the head of any department whose appointment requires his approval, at any time, when he deems such removal necessary or advisable for the public good. 
(c)  To exercise control over all departments created herein or that may hereafter be created by the commission. 
(d)  The city manager shall have general supervision of all streets, lanes, alleys, and sidewalks in the city, the construction and upkeep of all public buildings and grounds in the city, the laying and construction of all sewers, drains and curbs in the city, the waterworks and all that is connected therewith, the electric lights and all that is connected therewith, and the performance of all other duties that may be required of him by ordinance or resolution. 
Section 3-2 - Duties of city manager. 
The duties of the city manager shall be: 
(a)  To see that the laws and ordinances are enforced. 
(b)  To attend all meetings of the commission with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote. 
(c)  To recommend to the commissioners for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(d)  To keep the commission fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(e)  To make the commission a budget each year, at the time of levying taxes, showing the estimated income and expenditures of the city for the ensuing year. 
(f)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter, or be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the commission. 
Section 3-3 - Control and supervision of public property and construction. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he is given full power and authority, to improve, keep in repair, light, sprinkle and clean, as far as the same is possible within the appropriations made by the commission for such purposes, the streets, sidewalks, crossings, bridges, lanes, alleys, waterworks, public buildings and grounds, sewers, drains and other property of the city, except where otherwise provided in this charter, either by contract or by agents and employees of the city, and shall have authority to purchase all necessary materials and implements for any and all such work to be done, and shall also have complete control and authority over any new construction work of any kind which may be determined upon and ordered by the commission. The city commission shall determine and pass resolutions providing for all new construction work upon the streets, sidewalks, crossings, bridges, lanes, alleys, sewers, drains, waterworks, public buildings and grounds, and other public property, and shall also specify the character and quality of materials to be used, and the work to be done under the supervision and control of the city manager. In the event any work is done by contract under the provisions of this section, such contract shall be made after advertisement once a week for two (2) weeks for proposals, with the right reserved to reject any and all proposals; and in the event of any contract being made, the contractors shall execute a bond payable to the City of Rome, in an amount equal to the contract price, by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, conditioned for the faithful performance of the contract. Before beginning to pave or otherwise improve any street, the commission shall fix and designate the location and position for telegraph, telephone, electric light and power and street-railway poles and wires and gas pipes thereon, and shall have power and authority to require the owners or persons using same to place the same as thus located. 
Section 3-4 - Reports. 
The commission may require the city manager to come before them at any regular or special meeting and answer questions, either orally or in writing, and they may require from the city manager at any time written reports upon any matter involving the city that they may deem proper; and the city manager shall report periodically to the commission his general acts and doings and shall file full and complete reports as the commission may require. 
ARTICLE 4. - MUNICIPAL OFFICERS GENERALLY 

Section 4-1 - Creation, powers, duties, compensation. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the commission, by ordinance, may create, abolish, merge or consolidate such offices, departments, boards and commissions of the city as they shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the commission, by ordinance, may prescribe the powers, duties, functions, composition, terms of office, manner of appointment and removal, compensation, and other matters relative to any such offices, departments, boards and commissions created pursuant to this section. 
Section 4-2 - Unlawful interest in contracts, commissioners disqualified from acting in certain matters. 
It shall not be lawful for any member of the commission or any officer of the city to be interested, either directly or indirectly, in any contract with the City of Rome, or any subordinate agency thereof, having for its object the public improvement of the city, or any part thereof, or the expenditure of its money. Any violator of this section, on conviction thereof by the municipal judge, upon such conviction becoming final, shall be punished as provided by section 2-12 of this charter, and all profits growing out of said contract shall be refunded to the city, and the city attorney is required to institute suit to recover the same and push said suit vigorously to a conclusion, or if the contract has not been executed, the same may be enjoined at the instance of citizens of the city. No commissioner or other officer of the city shall exercise any right to act or vote on any subject matter committed to him under this charter, when the result of such vote or action would promote his personal interests directly or indirectly; nor shall any commissioner or other officer under the city government, in the exercise of the power of appointment or election to any position, or the approval thereof, exercise said power in behalf of any person who is related to him, or in case of a member of the commission or of any city board, related to him or any other member of the commission or board of which he is a member, as near as or nearer than the second degree of affinity, or consanguinity, or any person who is wholly dependent upon him or any other member of the commission or board of which he is a member for maintenance and support, and any election or appointment within the foregoing specific degree shall be ipso facto void. 
Section 4-3 - Officers, department heads and employees, removal or discharge. 
All officers, heads of departments and subordinate employees shall be subject to removal or discharge by the person or persons appointing them, with or without cause, at any time, and the city manager may likewise remove any employee of any department whose original appointment required his approval under the provisions of this charter. 
Section 4-4 - Political activities restricted. 
No officer or employee of the city shall be an officer or member of any political party executive committee having control of primary elections for the election of city officers. 
(§ 123) 
Section 4-5 - Secretary of city commission; maintenance of records, appointment. 
The secretary of the Rome city commission shall be required to keep the books and records of all departments of the city government, except where otherwise provided in this charter, including the minutes and records of the commission. The secretary shall be appointed by the city manager, with the approval of the city commission. One of the assistants shall be the deputy secretary of the Rome city commission and in the absence of the secretary, the deputy secretary shall have all of the powers, rights and duties of the secretary. 
Section 4-6. - Auditor, appointment and duties. 
The commission shall select a city auditor whose duty it shall be to thoroughly examine and audit the books of all city departments and operations. 
ARTICLE 6. - CIVIL SERVICE 

Section 6-1 - Civil service board of appeals. 
There is hereby created a civil service board of appeals which shall be constituted and governed according to the personnel policies of the city. 
ARTICLE 8. - WATERWORKS 

Section 8-1 - Control of waterworks. 
The commission shall have full power and control of the waterworks system and sewer system of the City of Rome, lying within and without the city limits; to make such renewals, extensions and betterments thereof as can be paid out of any surplus income therefrom, or out of any appropriations that may be made by the commission for that purpose; to regulate the distribution and use of water in all places and for all purposes, and from time to time to fix the price and payment for the use thereof, including reasonable sums for maintenance and repair of the system, and for the retirement of the bonds issued, or which may hereafter be issued, for the construction or extension of the plant; to control and manage the system in all places and for all purposes; to regulate the disposal of sewage and from time to time to fix the price and payment for the use of said sewage disposal system; to expressly create automatic liens for the amount of unpaid water and sewer charges against the property served. The secretary of the commission shall issue execution against tenants and landlords, jointly and severally, for water and/or sewer charges due by them, or either of them, to be levied and collected by the chief of police and the city in the same manner and under the same rules and regulations as now apply to sheriff's sales in this state, and the cost thereof shall be the same as now apply to such sales. Defendants in such executions who are not indebted for water and/or sewer tax, may resist the payment thereof by affidavit of illegality, returnable to the Superior Courts of Floyd County. The city manager or his designate [sic] is authorized to require payment in advance, or at maturity, for water and/or sewer services furnished by the city in or upon any building, place or premises, and in case payment shall not be made as required, to shut off the water and/or sewer services from such building, place or premises and to keep the same, at his discretion, shut off until the arrears due for water and/or sewer services, with interest thereon, shall be fully paid; and by himself, officers or agents, to enter any dwelling or other house where water is taken or used and where unnecessary waste of water is known or suspected, and examine the cause thereof, to prevent any such waste; and to make or require to be made any alteration in the pipes, stop cocks or other apparatus necessary for such purpose; examine all surface pipes, stop cocks and other apparatus connected with the system, and to ascertain whether the same are of the character and dimensions fixed in the manner directed therefor and to shut off the supply of water until such examination and repairs are made. 
Section 8-2 - Water supply to nonresidents or beyond corporate limits. 
The governing and legislative body of the City of Rome is hereby vested with the right and power, by ordinance or otherwise, to regulate and control all city water supplied by the city to nonresident persons, firms or corporations, or to any person outside the corporate limits of the city, and to fix the rates to be paid by such persons, firms or corporations to the city for water, and to provide for the payment by such persons, firms or corporations for said water, and to provide how, when and where such persons, firms or corporations may connect with the water mains of the city and also to provide for disconnecting from the water mains of the city and pipes of such persons, firms or corporations now connected or hereafter connected with its water mains; however, nothing herein contained shall be construed to require or obligate the city to lay any water mains outside the corporate limits of the city, or to require or obligate the city to allow the water pipes of such persons, firms or corporations to be connected with its water mains, or those now connected to remain connected therewith. 
(1920 Ga. Laws, page 1479, § 2) 
ARTICLE 10. - FINANCE 

Sections 10-1, 10-2 - Reserved. 
Section 10-3 - Additional indebtedness authorized. 
The City of Rome shall have authority to incur additional indebtedness as provided for by the Constitution and general laws of the State of Georgia. There shall be levied by the governing authorities of the City of Rome, prior to the issuance of such additional debt, a tax upon all of the taxable property within the city collectible annually sufficient to pay in full the principal and interest of such additional debt when and as due. Such tax shall be in addition to and separate from all other taxes levied by the taxing authorities of the city and the collections of such tax shall be kept separate and shall be held, used and applied solely for the payment of the principal and interest of such additional indebtedness. 
Section 10-4 - Costs of work, assessment for same. 
When, in accordance with the provisions of this charter, except as may otherwise be specifically provided herein, any demolition, repair, cleaning, change, alteration or work of any kind is ordered done by the commission of the city, or any of its duly authorized agents or agencies, and the person, firm or corporation ordered to do the same, fails or refuses to do so within the time fixed, upon such default, the city may make such changes, alterations, or work, and the commission or its duly authorized authority shall have the power and authority to assess the total cost thereof against the person, firm or corporation in default, and it shall be the duty of the secretary to issue execution forthwith against such person, firm or corporation thereof, which execution may be enforced in the same manner as tax fi. fas.; the execution shall be a lien against the property of such person, firm or corporation next in dignity to taxes. 
ARTICLE 11. - BONDED INDEBTEDNESS 

Section 11-1 - Funds to pay bonds, duties of finance director. 
It shall be the duty of the finance director to keep separate all funds levied to pay the bonds of the City of Rome and the interest thereon, and to see that all such funds are applied to the payment of the principal and interest of such bonds as they mature; and such funds shall not be used for any other purpose than that for which they were levied. 
Section 11-2 - Reserved. 
Section 11-3 - Registration of bonds, cancellation of coupons. 
It shall be the duty of the finance director to provide records to control the issuance, recording, transfer, payment and cancellation of the bonds of the City of Rome. When any bonds are registered and the coupons are detached therefrom, the finance director shall report such fact to the commission and produce such coupons at the next meeting of the commission, and such coupons shall there be defaced and cancelled as provided in section 55 [article 5 of this compilation] hereof. 
Section 11-4 - Records of bonds. 
It shall be the duty of the secretary of the commission to record all bonds given by city officials on the minutes of the commission, and to thereafter file and preserve as a permanent record of his office the originals of such bonds. 
(§ 57; 1931 Ga. Laws, page 926, § 2) 
Sections 11-5, - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 12. - TAXATION 

Section 12-1 - Property taxes authorized. 
The commission is empowered and authorized to levy a tax upon all property, real and personal, within the city. 
(§ 66) 
Section 12-2 - Ad valorem tax, rate and apportionment. 
For the purpose of raising revenue for the support and maintenance of the government of the City of Rome, including the payment of bonds, interest on the bonded debt, and the creation of a sinking fund for the extinguishment of the bonded debt, and for paving and for exercising all city powers, and for all other purposes, the city commission shall have full power and authority for the assessment, levy and collection of ad valorem taxes on all real and personal property owned or held within the corporate limits of the city which, under the laws of the state, is subject to taxation, provided that one and five-tenths percent (1.5%) of the assessed value of all such property shall be used only for the support and maintenance of the public school system of the City of Rome, including buildings, repairing buildings and improving school grounds. 
(Ord. No. 99-6-1, § I, 6-7-99) 
Section 12-3 - Payment of taxes. 
The city commission may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for the payment of ad valorem property taxes in installments or in one lump sum, and may authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due, and may provide for interest on late installments. 
Section 12-4 - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city commission may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city pursuant to authority granted by this charter or by the constitution and general laws of Georgia or by any other authority not precluded by the constitution and general laws of Georgia. This authority shall include providing for the dates when the taxes, fees or other revenues are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes, fees and other revenues, personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes, fees or other revenues imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes, fees or other revenues; allowing exceptions for hardship; providing for the assignment or transfer of executions and collection of transferred executions; providing for the billing and collecting of principal, interest and costs of delinquent executions as an addition to and a part of the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
Section 12-5 - Executions, issuance, advertisement of levy and sale, redemption, title taken by city. 
(a)  All executions in favor of the city for the enforcement and collection of any fine, forfeiture, assessment, taxes or other claims, demand or debt, shall be issued by the secretary of the commission and shall be directed to the chief of police, and shall state for what issued and made returnable to the City of Rome City Commission 90 days after issuing the same; and it shall be the duty of the chief of police, to advertise the sale of such real estate or personal property as may have been levied upon to satisfy the execution in the same manner respectively as sheriffs' sales are required by law to be made. Whenever any land is sold for taxes, the owner thereof shall have the privilege of redeeming it within one (1) year by paying the purchaser the amount thereof, with 10 percent premium thereon. 
(b)  Whenever at such sales no one present shall bid for the property put up for sale as much as the amount of such execution and all costs, and after such property shall have been cried for a reasonable time, then any duly appointed or authorized agent of the city may bid off such property for the city, and the chief of police or such other officer making the sale shall make the City of Rome a deed to the property so sold and deliver the same, and the title thus acquired by the city shall be perfect and valid after the period provided for redemption by the owner shall have expired, and the chief of police or other officer making the sale shall put the city in possession. The secretary shall enter on his execution docket all executions, giving the date, amount of each and to whom delivered, and all proceedings thereunder. The execution shall be returned to the office of the secretary after being satisfied. All sales and conveyances made under execution as provided in this section shall have all the force and effect of sales and conveyances made by sheriffs of this state, and the officer making the sale shall have the power as the sheriff to put purchasers in possession of property sold by them. 
Section 12-6 - Tax to retire bonds. 
The City of Rome shall have authority to levy and collect, in order to retire all bonds issued by the city, such taxes as are allowed by the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
Section 12-7 - Reserved. 
Section 12-8 - Improvements and assessments therefor. 
(a)  Whenever the Rome City Commission shall deem it necessary to grade, pave, drain, curb, gutter or otherwise improve any street, avenue, alley, lane, or any part thereof within the limits of the City of Rome, the commission shall by resolution declare such work or improvement necessary to be done, which resolution may combine and provide for the doing of any one or more of said improvements as being a part of and include the same in the one and same improvement project, and such resolution shall be published at least once in a daily newspaper published and having a general circulation in the City of Rome, and a copy of the resolution shall be served personally or by mail upon the owners of the land liable to assessment to pay for the improvements, if resident in the City of Rome, or upon their agent if not resident in the City of Rome, and if no agent service shall be perfected by mailing a copy to the owners direct to the last known address of such owners; and such owners shall have the right at any time within 10 days from the date of the service of such notice to protest in writing the doing of such improvements, which protest shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the commission held after such protest is filed, and if such protest be decided adversely to the owner by the commission, or if no such protest be filed, then the commission shall have power to cause the improvement to be made and to contract therefor, and to levy assessments or liens as hereinafter provided for. Any number of streets, avenues, alleys, lanes, or other public places or parts thereof, to be so improved, may be included in one resolution, but any protest or objection shall be made as to each street, avenue, alley, lane, or other public place, or other highway separately. If a majority of the owners of the land liable to assessment for any such improvement shall petition the Rome City Commission for such improvement of any street, alley, lane, or avenue or other public place or any part of either, describing in such petition the character of the improvement so desired, the width of the same, and the materials preferred by the petitioners for such improvements, the commission may, in its discretion, promptly cause the improvement to be made, in accordance with the prayer of the petition, and the commission shall, by resolution, provide for the improvement and proceed as in this section provided; provided, however, that if all of the owners of land liable to assessment for such improvement shall join in the petition, then it will not be necessary to either publish or serve a copy of the resolution, as hereinbefore provided. 
(b)  Except as hereinafter provided with reference to sidewalks, curbs, and gutters, as a separate project from the paving as provided in subparagraph (j) of this section, the lots, pieces or parcels of land fronting and abutting on both sides of the improvements shall be charged with the cost thereof according to the just pro rata share of the entire cost of the improvement for the frontage on basis of lineal-foot frontage; provided, that the frontage of intersecting streets, avenues, lanes or alleys, including headers, aprons, and intakes, drainage or storm sewers, shall be assessed to or against real estate abutting upon the street, lane, alley, or avenue paved or otherwise improved, pro rata on the basis of lineal-foot frontage; and provided further, that street-railway companies now having or which may hereafter have tracks running through the street, lanes, alleys, or avenues paved, or otherwise improved, shall be assessed so much of the paving, macadamizing, or other improvement, as is occupied by its tracks and two (2) feet on each side of the rail thereof, and in case there are two (2) or more tracks on the same street, the street-railway company shall pay the cost of paving or other improvement for not more than four and one-half (4½) feet between such tracks, except in cases where the street-railway companies voluntarily locate their tracks wider apart than four and one-half (4½) feet, in which event they shall pay for the paving or other improvement of all space between the tracks, and the pro rata share to be paid by the street-railway companies to be deducted from the total cost, and the balance to be paid by the abutting property owners, as hereinbefore provided. 
(c)  Upon the completion of one or more sections of paving or other improvement, the city commission shall, by resolution, ascertain and assess the proportional cost of such pavement, including, if any, street intersection, headers, curbing, gutter, drainage and storm sewers, and intakes chargeable to abutting owners, railroads, street-railways, or other public-service corporations, or other persons occupying or using the streets, and shall cause the secretary of the commission to give written notice of such result to the abutting owners, public-service corporations, or other persons, and the amounts so assessed shall be and become immediately due and payable; a copy of which notice shall be served upon the owner, agent, or occupant thereof by any officer of the city and return thereof made on the original, which original shall be kept in the secretary's office and recorded on the minutes, together with the entry of service thereon, and the city shall proceed immediately to collect the same; provided such abutting owners, railroad, street-railway or other public service corporations, or such other persons may, at their election, under the procedures authorized by law, pay the amount assessed against them in annual installments, with interest thereon at the rate authorized by law, payable annually from the date of such notice; provided further, that on default of any of the installments, the remaining installments shall become immediately due and payable and may be collected as herein provided. 
(d)  A special lien superior to all other liens except the general liens for taxes is hereby created on and against the land of abutting owners and on and against the land and all other property of such railroads, street-railway companies or public service corporations and others within the city for assessments so made against them; and on failure to pay the full amount of such assessment in cash within thirty (30) days after the service of such notice, the city commission shall, by its secretary, cause executions to be issued against such abutting owners, railroads, street-railways or other public service corporations or others for the amounts of such assessment or assessments, bearing seven (7) per cent interest from the date of such notice; but if such abutting owners, street-railway or public service corporations, or others shall elect to pay their assessment on the installment plan, then in that event the secretary shall issue executions for the unpaid installments, to be held in abeyance, subject to transfer, as part payment of the contract price, or to be held by the city, should the city on any account be entitled thereto, but not to be levied or collected unless and until default shall be made in the payment of any one or more of the installments. 
(e)  All executions authorized to be issued under this act or under any provisions of the Charter of the City of Rome, relating to the subject matter herein referred to, shall be levied and collected as tax executions in favor of the city are now levied and collected. 
(f)  The secretary of the commission may, by direction of the commission, transfer the executions by suitable entry thereon, and they shall be docketed as state and county tax executions are docketed when transferred under the laws of this state, and the liens herein created thereby preserved. On the payment of all installments the executions shall be fully satisfied by the holders thereof. 
(g)  Should any abutting owner, street-railway company or public service corporation, or other person desire to contest the amount of their assessment or the legality of any proceeding growing out of or connected with the paving, or other improvement of the streets, sidewalks, avenues, alleys, lanes, or other public places of the city, they may do so by filing with the levying officer an affidavit of illegality and stating therein the cause of such illegality and the amount which he admits to be due, which amount so admitted to be due shall be paid to the levying officer before the affidavit shall be received, and the affidavit shall be returned to the superior court of Floyd County, Georgia, and there tried and the issue determined as in the cases of illegality, subject to the penalties provided as in cases of illegality filed for delay. 
(h)  The method herein provided for the collection of the proportionate parts of paving or other improvement accounts from any and all persons and corporations liable therefor, in favor of contractors and other transferees of execution, is for their use and benefit, and shall not be held or taken in any event to make the city liable on account thereof, or for court costs in contested case, or on any claim. 
(i)  The secretary of the commission may transfer and assign, without recourse on the city, any execution or executions issued under this act or any of the other provisions of the Charter of the City of Rome, and in that event the owners of such executions shall be entitled to any and all the remedies herein provided for levy and collections of such executions by and through the officers of the city as though no transfer or transfers had been made, and all rights and remedies heretofore existing in favor of such owners prior to the passage of this act are herein expressly preserved. 
(j)  Whenever, in the judgment of the city commission it shall be deemed necessary to construct sidewalks, curbing and guttering only, or curbing only or guttering only, as an improvement project independent of street paving or other improvements on any street of the city, the commission may, by resolution, declare such work or improvements necessary to be done, which resolution shall be published at least once in a daily newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Rome, and thereafter the owner or owners of any of the land liable to assessment for such improvement shall have the right, at any time within ten (10) days from the publication of such notice, to protest in writing the doing of such improvement, which protest shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the commission held after such protest is filed; and if such protest be decided adversely to the owner by the commission, or if no such protest be filed, then the commission shall have power to cause the improvement to be made, and to contract therefor, and to levy assessments or liens as hereinafter provided for. The commission shall, therefore, have the rights and powers to fix by resolution, and collect as provided in subsection (e) of this section, the costs of such sidewalks, curbing, and guttering, or sidewalks only, or curbing and guttering, or curbing only or guttering only, the total of which shall be assessed against the abutting property owners only; and when the costs of such sidewalks, curbing and guttering, or sidewalks only, or curbing or guttering, or curbing only or guttering only, has been ascertained the city shall, through the city manager, give ten (10) days' notice to the abutting property owners of the amount that will be due by them for such sidewalks, curbing and guttering, or sidewalks only, or curbing and guttering, or curbing only or guttering only. The abutting property owners shall pay said assessment as follows: 
(a)  In full upon receipt thereof; or 
(b)  On the date established as the due date for the city ad valorem taxes at least twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of said assessment and at least twenty-five (25) percent of the remainder on each of the three (3) subsequent anniversary dates of said tax bill. 
Unless said assessment is paid in full on the due date, there shall be further assessed on the unpaid balance thereof interest at a rate equal to the then-current rate being assessed for delinquent ad valorem taxes (said rate being presently twelve (12) percent); provided, that on default in the payment of any one of the installments, the remaining installments shall become immediately due and payable, and may be immediately collected. A special lien is hereby created on and against the land of abutting owners for any and all assessments made against them under the provisions of this section of this act relating to such sidewalks, and/or curbing and/or guttering, and all the rights, remedies and powers of the City of Rome for issuing, collecting and transferring executions for any such improvements, and all rights and remedies of abutting property owners relating thereto, shall be in all respects the same as laid down and provided in subsections (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), and (i) of this section of this act. 
(k)  The Rome city commission, upon the passage of the resolution confirming and levying the assessments for the paving or otherwise improving the streets, avenues, alleys, lanes, or any parts thereof of the city, may, by resolution, provide for the issuance of bonds in the aggregate amount of such assessments remaining unpaid, bearing date fifteen (15) days after the passage of the resolution levying the assessments, and of such denominations as the commission may determine, which bond or bonds shall in no event become a liability of the City of Rome. The bonds shall be payable in equal annual installments over the same period of years, not less than two nor more than ten, as has been fixed and provided by the city commission for the payment of the assessments in installments. The bonds shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding ten (10) percent per annum from their date until maturity, payable annually, and shall be designated as street improvement bonds, and shall, on the face thereof, recite the street or streets, part of street or streets, or other public places for the improvement of which they have been issued as herein provided, and that they shall be payable solely from assessments levied upon the lots and tracts of land benefited by the improvement under authority of this act. The bonds shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the secretary of the commission, and shall have the impression of the corporate seal of such city thereon, and shall have interest coupons attached, and all bonds issued by authority of this act shall be payable at such place either within or without the State of Georgia as shall be designated by the Rome city commission. The bonds shall be sold at not less than par, and the proceeds applied to the payment of the contract price or other expenses of the improvements on which they are issued by the Rome city commission; or such bonds, in the amount that shall be necessary for that purpose, may be turned over and delivered to the contractor at par value in the payment of the amount due him on his contract, and the portion thereof which shall be necessary to pay other expenses incident to and incurred in providing for the improvements shall be sold or otherwise disposed of as the Rome city commission shall direct. The bonds shall be registered by the finance director in a book to be provided for that purpose, and certificates of registration by the finance director shall be endorsed upon each of the bonds. Such bonds may be validated by proceedings in the superior court held for that purpose, and shall be incontestable after such validation. 
(l)  The assessments provided for and levied under the provisions of this act, whether or not executions have been issued thereon, shall be payable by the person owning the lots or tracts of land, as the several installments become due, together with interest thereon, to the finance director, who shall give proper receipts for such payments. It shall be the duty of the finance director to keep an accurate account of all such collections made by him, and such collections shall be kept in a special fund to be used and applied for the payment of such bonds, and the interest thereon and expenses incurred in connection therewith, and for no other purpose. 
(m)  In all cases where the Rome city commission shall deem it necessary to repave, redrain, or otherwise reimprove any street, alley, avenue, lane, or other public place, which had been paved or improved prior to the passage of this act, or which shall hereafter be paved or drained under the provisions of this act, such repavement or reimprovement is hereby authorized to be done under and in pursuance of the provisions of this act, and in such cases all provisions of this act providing for making such improvements and levying assessments therefor and the issuance of bonds shall apply. 
(n)  In all cases where a sewer shall be laid in the City of Rome, by or under authority of the city, in any street, the just pro rata share of the entire cost as provided by law per lineal foot shall be assessed upon the property respectively abutting on the street on each side of the street in which the sewer is laid, the abutting owners upon each side to be subject to the full assessment of such share against each of them, and in consideration of the payment of the assessment the owners of such abutting property shall have the right to connect their drains from the abutting property for the discharge of sewage into the sewer; provided, that where such sewer abuts property which is unimproved, the city commission may postpone the collection of such assessment until such time as the owner or owners of the abutting property shall improve such property or until such time as the city commission shall direct that such assessment be collected, at which time the assessment shall be enforced against them. Before any such owners shall be permitted to connect their drains to such sewer, all assessment due shall be paid by them. 
(o)  Whenever, in the judgment of the city commission, it shall be deemed necessary to construct sewers on any of the streets of the City of Rome as an improvement project, the commission may, by resolution, declare such work or improvements necessary to be done, which resolution shall be published at least once in a daily newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Rome; and thereafter the owner or owners of any of the land liable to assessment for such improvement shall have the right, at any time within ten (10) days from the publication of such notice, to protest in writing the doing of such improvement, which protest shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the commission held after the protest is filed; and if the protest be decided adversely to the owner by the commission, or if no such protest be filed, then the commission shall have power to cause the improvement to be made and to contract therefor, and to levy assessments or liens as hereinafter provided for. The commission shall thereupon have the right and power to fix by resolution, and collect as provided in subsection (e) of this section, the assessment for such sewers provided for in subsection (n) of this section; and when the sewers shall have been laid and completed, the city shall, through the city manager, give ten (10) days' notice to the abutting property owners of the amount that will be due by them for such sewers. The abutting property owners shall pay one-fourth (¼) of the amount assessed against them in cash within ten (10) days from the service of the notice, and the remaining three-fourths (¾) in three (3) annual installments with interest thereon at the rate authorized by law payable from date of the service of such notice; provided, that on default in the payment of any one of the installments, the remaining installments shall become immediately due and payable, and shall be immediately collected. Provided, the city commission may, by resolution, postpone the collection of such assessment against improved property as provided in subsection (n) of this section; and when such resolution shall be adopted, such assessment shall not thereafter become due until payment be demanded by resolution of the city commission; and provided further, that no limitation shall extend or operate against the liability for such assessment until payment thereof shall be so demanded. The rights and remedies of abutting property owners and of the City of Rome, as laid down and provided in subsections (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), and (i) of this section of this act, shall apply to and be in force in regard to all sewers laid under this subsection, insofar as the subsections are not in conflict with this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 02-9-1, § V, 9-3-02) 
State Law reference— Street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; basis of assessments for improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-4; interest on assessments, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-14; street improvement bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-25 et seq. 
ARTICLE 13. - LICENSES 

Section 13-1 - Occupational licenses and taxes therefor. 
The commission shall have full power and authority to require any person, firm, company or corporation, whether resident or nonresident, of the city, who may engage in, prosecute, or carry on, or who is engaged in prosecuting or carrying on any trade, business, calling, vocation or profession in the corporate limits of the city by themselves, or their agents, to register their names, business, calling, vocation or profession annually, and to require the person, company or corporation to pay for the registration and for license to prosecute, engage in or carry on any business, calling or profession, such amount as the commission may provide by ordinance or resolution. The commission may provide by ordinance or resolution for the punishment of all persons, firms, companies, or corporations required by ordinance or resolution to pay such taxes or to take out such licenses for the same, who shall engage in such business, profession or occupation, before paying such taxes, or taking out such licenses, who fail to comply in full with all requirements of such ordinances or resolutions made in reference thereto. 
Section 13-2 - Vehicles for hire. 
The commission shall have full power and authority to condemn, regulate, tax and license all automobiles, buses, trucks, limousines and all other vehicles, whether motorized or not, using the streets in the city for hire. 
Section 13-3 - Places of public entertainment, stables, garages, etc. 
The commission may, by ordinance or resolution, license, tax, regulate or prohibit billiard rooms, inns, taverns, hotels, restaurants, lunch stands, cafes, social clubs, saloons, theaters, moving picture shows, dance halls or other places kept for public entertainment. They are also empowered to license and regulate livery stables, garages, or other places of this kind for the use and benefit of the public. 
ARTICLE 15. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Section 15-1 - Municipal court, jurisdiction and powers. 
There is hereby established for and in the city a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Rome, Georgia, to be presided over by the judge of the municipal court, who shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to approval of the commission, with jurisdiction to try all violations of the ordinances of the city, and such other offenses as by general law provided. Said municipal court judge shall have power and authority to punish for said violations and for contempt of court. The judge shall have full power and authority to compel attendance of parties and witnesses at the court, and for this purpose shall have full power and authority to require bail to secure such attendance, and to issue appropriate orders for the forfeiture of recognizance given in pursuance of this charter; all warrants, summons, subpoenas or other process issued, requiring appearance or attendance at said municipal court, shall be issued by the judge or clerk of the municipal court, directed to the chief of police, any policeman or other arresting officer of said city, and bear teste in the name of the municipal court judge; said municipal court shall be governed by the rules of the superior courts of the State of Georgia insofar as they may be applicable to such court, and a sound construction of this charter and the laws of the city. The commission may, from time to time, pass such further rules and regulations regarding the court, not in conflict with this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia. Authority to punish for said violations or contempt shall be as provided by section 2-12 of this Charter. 
Section 15-2 - Judge. 
It shall be the duty of the judge of the municipal court to preside over the municipal court, with full power and authority to issue warrants for the violation of any municipal ordinance, and to hold such court, and at such times and places and under such rules and regulations as are prescribed by this charter, or by ordinance or by court rule for the trial of offenders, and to impose such penalties for a violation thereof as may be prescribed by ordinance, and he shall have full power and authority incident to or belonging to the office of the magistrate, except for the trial of civil cases. 
Section 15-3 - Forms of process. 
The municipal court is empowered to provide such forms of accusations, warrants, summons and other papers necessary in trials for the violations of the laws and ordinances of the city. 
Section 15-4 - Witnesses, compulsory attendance, bail-bonds. 
The commission and the municipal court shall have power and authority to compel the attendance of parties and witnesses at the municipal court, and upon meetings of the commission, and shall have full power and authority to provide for the taking and receiving from parties and witnesses of such bail as may be necessary to secure the attendance of parties and witnesses; and the commission is further empowered to provide for the forfeiture and collection of such bail-bonds in the same manner as such bail-bonds are now forfeited in the Superior Courts of this state. 
Section 15-5 - Standby associate judge. 
Whenever, from any cause, the judge of the municipal court of the city cannot be in attendance to hold municipal court, or if it should appear that he is disqualified in any case, it shall be the duty of the city manager to appoint a standby associate judge to preside in the court in place and stead of the municipal judge, and all actions of the appointee shall be as binding as if performed by the municipal judge. 
Section 15-6 - Appellate review. 
The orders, verdicts, judgments and sentences of the court shall be subject to application for writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Floyd County or as otherwise provided by general law. 
Section 15-7 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 16. - FRANCHISES 

Section 16-1 - Power to grant, maximum term. 
The commission shall have power and authority to grant franchises, permits, easements and rights of way in or under and over the streets, alleys, lanes, sidewalks, parks and other property of the city upon such terms, reservations and conditions as the commission may fix; provided, however, that the same shall not be granted for a longer term than 35 years, nor without compensation to the city. 
Section 16-2 - Records to be kept. 
The secretary of the commission shall keep a book, to be known as the "Record of Franchises," which shall be a public document and properly indexed, and each and every franchise granted by the City of Rome shall be recorded in said book, together with the petition therefor, and all proceedings and references thereto and reference by page to the proceedings in other books; said record shall be made within 30 days after said franchise is finally granted, or such franchise shall be null and void. 
(§ 115) 
Section 16-3 - Reserved. 
Section 16-4 - Application for franchise and action thereon. 
Each and every applicant for a public franchise or renewal of franchise to go upon, along, through, over or under any of the streets of said city, shall file such application as may be required by the City Commission, which said application shall be published at the expense of the applicant in at least one daily newspaper in said city immediately after filing. Thereupon said city commission shall, at a regular meeting, have power and authority to act upon such franchise or special privilege. Said application as finally approved by said commission, containing the full terms and stipulations of such application and grant, shall at once be published, at the expense of the applicant, in the official organ of Floyd County, once a week for four (4) weeks; said grant shall not become operative for a period of 30 days from the time of its adoption by the said commission. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This table shows the location of the sections of amendments to the Charter adopted by ordinance. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - RELATED STATE LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are local constitutional amendments and state laws of local application that apply to the city but are not a part of the city charter. Amendments to the included provisions are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original law. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. A uniform style of headings and catchlines, and citations to the state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended by a later provision, only the current language is included. The editor has added section numbers and catchlines to facilitate indexing and the use of this compilation. This compilation is not an official codification of any act, but is presented here for convenient reference by the users of the Code. Formal citations should always be to the original act and not to this compilation. 

ARTICLE I. - ROME-FLOYD COUNTY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— This article is derived from 1962 Ga. Laws, page 1067, which amended Ga. Const. (1945), art. VII, § VII, par. V. See Ga. Const. (1983), art. IX, § VI. 

Section 1-101 - Authorization to issue revenue obligations; purposes. 
In addition to the purposes for which revenue anticipation obligations may be issued by counties, municipal corporations and political subdivisions as provided in said article VII, section VII, paragraph V of the Constitution of the State of Georgia [of 1945, now article IX, section VI, of the Constitution of 1983], the Rome-Floyd County Development Authority, hereinafter created, is hereby authorized to issue revenue obligations to provide funds to be used by said authority in assisting, promoting, establishing and developing new industries, and assisting, promoting and expanding existing industry, agriculture, trade and commerce within the territorial limits of Floyd County, Georgia, as hereinafter provided. Said purposes are hereby found, determined and declared to be for the benefit of the citizens and residents of said county and to be an essential governmental function in relieving unemployment, improving the economy, limiting poor relief assistance, developing natural resources and otherwise promoting the general welfare. 
Section 1-102 - Creation; purposes; scope of authority. 
In furtherance of the purposes for which such issuance of revenue anticipation obligations is authorized there is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Rome-Floyd County Development Authority," which shall be deemed to be a creature of the State of Georgia, an instrumentality of the County of Floyd, and a public corporation. The name of said authority may be changed from time to time by an act of the General Assembly. The said authority is created for the purpose of assisting, promoting, establishing and developing new industry, and assisting, promoting and expanding existing industry, agriculture, trade and commerce within the territorial limits of Floyd County, Georgia, both within and without the limits of municipalities therein, for the public good and general welfare of said county and its citizens. The scope and jurisdiction of the authority is restricted to the territorial limits of Floyd County, Georgia. The authority shall not be operated for profit, is an institution of purely public charity, and is an industrial development agency qualified to receive loans and other assistance from the industrial development commission of the State of Georgia, or other governmental agencies. 
Section 1-103 - Functions authorized. 
In carrying out the foregoing objectives, the authority shall be deemed to be engaging in such functions of government, activities and transactions as the County of Floyd, the City of Rome, and the City of Cave Spring are by law authorized to undertake. 
Section 1-104 - Members; appointment, terms of office and oath. 
The said authority shall consist of seven (7) members, one (1) of whom shall be the chairman of the city commission of the City of Rome; one (1) of whom shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners of roads and revenues of Floyd County; one (1) of whom shall be the president of the chamber of commerce of Rome and Floyd County, or its successor; one (1) of whom shall be the chairman of the industrial development committee of the chamber of commerce of Rome and Floyd County, or its successor; and three (3) of whom shall be appointed by the other four (4) members first above mentioned. 
(1)  The terms of office of the members who are the chairman of the city commission of the City of Rome, the chairman of the board of commissioners of roads and revenues of Floyd County, the president of the chamber of commerce of Rome and Floyd County, or its successor, and the chairman of the industrial development committee of the chamber of commerce of Rome and Floyd County, or its successor, shall run concurrently with their respective tenures of such offices in said bodies, and their respective successors in such offices shall succeed them as members of the said authority. 
(2)  The three (3) members initially appointed by the other four (4) members first mentioned shall be appointed for terms expiring December 31, 1963, December 31, 1964 and December 31, 1965, respectively; and thereafter their respective successors shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. In the event of the death or resignation of either one (1) of said appointed members, his successor shall be appointed by the remaining members for the balance of the unexpired term. No vacancy shall impair the power of the authority to act. 
(3)  Prior to taking office the members shall subscribe to the following oath, to wit: "I do solemnly swear that I will fully and fairly perform the duties as a member of the Rome-Floyd County Development Authority, So Help Me God." 
(4)  The members of the said authority shall be entitled to no compensation. 
Editor's note— The words "of roads and revenues" in the above section are obsolete. (O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20) 
Section 1-105 - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  The word "authority" shall mean the "Rome-Floyd County Development Authority," created hereby. 
(2)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the property, real and/or personal, acquired or held by the authority for the assistance, promotion, establishment or development of a new industry or industries, or the assistance, promotion or expansion of existing industry, trade or commerce in Floyd County, or any combination thereof; the acquisition of any such property for any such purpose or purposes; the improvement of any such property or properties; and/or the construction, installation and/or expansion of one (1) or more buildings, plants and/or articles of equipment for the purpose of using, selling, donating, leasing and/or renting such land, properties, improvements, structures or equipment to public or private persons, firms, corporations and/or associations for such purposes. 
(3)  The term "cost of project" shall embrace: the cost of lands, buildings, improvements, machinery, equipment, properties, easements, rights, franchises, materials, labor and services acquired and/or contracted for; the cost of financing charges and/or of interest prior to and during construction; architectural, accounting, engineering, inspection, fiscal and/or legal expenses; cost of plans and/or specifications; and/or any other expenses necessary or incident to construction and/or improvements, and/or to determining the feasibility and/or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and/or the acquisition, construction, equipping and/or operating any project or any part thereof. 
Section 1-106 - Quorum. 
Any four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of ordinary business of the authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the authority must be approved by not less than four (4) affirmative votes. 
Section 1-107 - Powers. 
The powers of the authority herein created shall include, but are not limited to, the power, for its corporate purposes: 
(1)  To have a corporate seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
(2)  To contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead or be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity; to contract with the State of Georgia and any instrumentality thereof, any county or municipality thereof and any other political subdivisions, and with private persons, firms, corporations and associations. 
(3)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts. 
(4)  To buy, acquire, receive as gifts, own, improve, expand, develop, operate, maintain, sell, donate, lease as lessor or lessee, mortgage, pledge, convey to secure debt and/or otherwise encumber and/or dispose of land, buildings, equipment, furnishings and/or property of all kinds, real and/or personal, within Floyd County, Georgia, and to make a contract or contracts and/or to execute any instrument or document for the accomplishment thereof, or other purposes. 
(5)  To make contracts, and to execute any and all instruments necessary or convenient to, or in aid of, the accomplishment of any of the purposes of said authority, and/or the exercise of any power or powers of said authority. 
(6)  To enter into any contract or contracts for any period of time not exceeding 50 years. 
(7)  To appoint and select officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
(8)  To construct, erect, buy, receive as a gift, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, equip, furnish, extend, expand, develop, improve, donate, sell, lease as lessor or lessee, add to, operate and manage projects and to pay the costs of any such project from any income of the authority, from the proceeds of revenue bonds issued and sold by the authority or others, from any taxes levied for the purpose by the State of Georgia, Floyd County, or any of the municipalities therein, or from any contributions or loans by political subdivisions or instrumentalities, persons, firms or corporations, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(9)  To elect its own officers from the membership of the authority; to elect and employ an executive director who is not required to be a member of the authority; and to authorize and empower such officers to act for the authority generally or in any specific matter. 
(10)  To borrow money and to execute debentures, bonds, notes, mortgages, deeds or bills of sale to secure debt, trust deeds and or other such instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing. 
(11)  To issue and sell revenue bonds for the purpose of raising funds for the payment, in whole or in part, of the cost of any project of the authority; to secure the payment of the obligations of such bonds by, but not limited to, selling, conveying, mortgaging, pledging and/or assigning any or all of its funds, income and/or property; and to exercise all the rights, powers and privileges, and to be subject to all the duties and liabilities, which a municipality may exercise and/or be subject to under the provisions of the Revenue Bond Law (chapter 87-8 of the Code of Georgia), as the same now is, or hereafter may be, amended. The rights, powers and privileges of the authority are not limited to those of such a municipality, however. 
(12)  To use public funds appropriated to it, the rents, profits and proceeds from the projects erected, leased or sold, and other funds and income of the authority, to provide for the operation and maintenance of such projects or other projects, to discharge the principal, interest and expenses of bonds, revenue bonds and notes issued by the authority, to pay other debts of the authority and to further and promote the objectives of the authority. 
(13)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public corporations or authorities performing similar functions. 
(14)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested. 
(15)  To adopt, alter, amend and/or repeal its own bylaws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the powers granted to it may be enjoyed, as the authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(16)  To do all things necessary and convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this act upon the authority. 
Editor's note— The Revenue Bond Law is now found in O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq. As instructed by the city, one (1) of the two (2) instances of the word "equip" in § 1-107(8) has been deleted. 
Section 1-108 - Issuance of bonds. 
The acquisition, construction, improvement, betterment, expansion or extension of any undertaking or project of the authority, and the issuance in anticipation of the collection of revenues of such undertaking or project, of bonds to provide funds to pay the whole or a part of the costs thereof, may be authorized by resolution or resolutions of the authority which may be adopted at a regular or special meeting by a majority of the members of the authority. Unless otherwise provided therein, such resolution or resolutions shall take effect immediately and need not be laid over or published or posted. The authority in determining the cost of any undertaking or project for which revenue bonds are to be issued may include all costs as hereinbefore defined. Such bonds shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, not exceeding 30 years from their respective dates, bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding seven percent (7%) per annum, and may be in such denominations and may carry such registration privileges and be subject to redemption and may contain such terms, covenants, assignments and conditions as the resolution or resolutions authorizing the issuance of such bonds may provide. Except as herein provided to the contrary, such bonds shall be issued and validated in the superior court of Floyd County, Georgia, in the same manner as revenue bonds of municipalities are issued and validated under the "Revenue Bond Law" (1937 Georgia Laws, pages 761—774; chapter 87-8 of the Code of Georgia), as now and hereafter amended. In the proceedings to validate such bonds, the Rome-Floyd County Development Authority shall be named as party defendant. In [the] event no bill of exceptions is filed within the time prescribed by law, or if filed, the judgment validating the bonds shall be affirmed by the Supreme Court of Georgia, such judgment shall be forever conclusive as to the validity of said bonds and the security therefor against said authority. 
Editor's note— The Revenue Bond Law is now found in O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq. 
State Law reference— Interest rates established by general law development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-8(f). 
Section 1-109 - Tax exemption. 
All property, real and personal, the title to which is vested in the authority, and all debentures, notes, bonds and revenue bonds issued by the authority, and interest thereon and income therefrom, shall be exempt from state, county, city and local taxation for any purpose. 
Section 1-110 - Persons handling funds; bond required. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to have all persons handling funds of the authority fully and adequately bonded for their faithful accounting for such funds. 
Section 1-111 - Debt against state, county or city prohibited. 
The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation, against the State of Georgia, Floyd County or any municipality therein. No debt, liability or obligation of the authority shall be considered a pledge or loan of the credit of the State of Georgia, or any county, city or other subdivision thereof. 
Section 1-112 - Conveyance of land to authority. 
If the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall be in the County of Floyd and/or any incorporated city or town in said county, the governing authorities of the County of Floyd and of said municipalities, respectively, are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, without cost, to the authority. Said county and/or said municipalities may donate to said authority real estate, personal property and services for any such project. Any such land, improvements, or personal property so conveyed or donated to the authority may be mortgaged, conveyed, or pledged to secure obligations of the authority. 
Section 1-113 - Title to property of authority. 
Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution, shall be conveyed to Floyd County subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property. No private interest shall exist in the property of the authority. The authority shall hold title only for the benefit of the public. 
Section 1-114 - Books and records; audit. 
The books and records of the authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the authority, by a competent independent auditor; and the minutes and records of the same shall be filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners of roads and revenue of said county, and shall be available for public inspection. 
Editor's note— The words "of roads and revenue" in the above section are obsolete. (O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20) 
Section 1-115 - Existence of authority. 
The authority shall exist and have all of said powers, and the right to exercise the same for its corporate purposes, regardless of whether or not it shall issue revenue anticipation obligations hereunder. 
ARTICLE II. - ROME-FLOYD COUNTY INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— This article is derived from 1961 Ga. Laws, page 3207. The sections are in their original order. For example, § 2-101 is from § 1, and § 2-102 is from § 2. 

Section 2-101 - Created. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Rome-Floyd County Industrial Development Authority, which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and in that name, style and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be interpleaded and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. In the event the name of said authority shall ever become the subject of change same may be accomplished by an act of the general assembly. 
Section 2-102 - General powers. 
The said authority is created for the purpose of expanding and developing industry in Floyd County and for improving the general welfare of said county, including the purchase and/or leasing of land and/or the construction thereon of facilities and/or improvements for lease and/or sale to industries so as to relieve abnormal unemployment conditions, and is an industrial development agency qualified to receive loans and other assistance from the Industrial Development Commission of the State of Georgia, or other governmental agencies. In carrying out these objectives the authority shall be deemed to be performing an essential governmental function, and engaged in activities which the State of Georgia or other political subdivisions could themselves lawfully undertake. 
Section 2-103 - Members; terms; oath; compensation. 
The said authority shall consist of seven (7) members, one (1) of whom shall be the chairman of the city commission of the City of Rome; one (1) of whom shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners of Floyd County; one (1) of whom shall be the president of the chamber of commerce of Rome and Floyd County, or its successor; one (1) of whom shall be the chairman of the industrial development committee of the chamber of commerce of Rome and Floyd County, or its successor; and three (3) of whom shall be appointed by the other four (4) members first above mentioned. 
(a)  The terms of office of the members who are the chairman of the city commission of the City of Rome, the chairman of the board of commissioners of Floyd County, the president of the chamber of commerce of Rome and Floyd County, or its successor, and the chairman of the industrial development committee of the chamber of commerce of Rome and Floyd County, or its successor, shall run concurrently with their tenure of office, and their successors in such respective offices shall succeed them as members of the said authority. 
(b)  The three (3) members initially appointed by the other four (4) members first mentioned shall be appointed for terms expiring December 31, 1961, December 31, 1962, and December 31, 1963, respectively; and thereafter their respective successors shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. In the event of death or resignation of either [sic] one of said appointed members, his successor shall be appointed by the remaining members for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(c)  Prior to taking office the members shall subscribe to the following oath, to-wit: "I do solemnly swear that I will fully and fairly perform the duties as a member of the Rome-Floyd County Industrial Development Authority, So Help Me God." 
(d)  The members of the said authority shall be entitled to no compensation. 
Section 2-104 - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(a)  The word "authority" shall mean the "Rome-Floyd County Industrial Development Authority," created hereby. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include property, real and/or personal, acquired or held by the authority for the development, expansion and promotion of industry in Floyd County; the acquisition of such property for such purposes; the improvement of such properties and/or the construction of buildings, plants, and/or equipment for the purpose of using, selling, leasing or renting such land, properties, improvements, structures or equipment to public or private persons, firms, corporations or associations for such purposes. 
(c)  The term "cost of project" shall embrace the cost of lands, buildings, improvements, machinery, equipment, properties, easements, rights, franchises, materials, labor and services acquired or contracted for, the cost of financing charges and of interest prior to and during construction, architectural, accounting, engineering and legal expenses, cost of plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incident to construction or improvements or to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and all other expenses necessary or incident to the acquisition, construction, equipping and/or operating any project or any part thereof. 
Section 2-105 - Quorum. 
Any four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of ordinary business of the authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the authority must be approved by not less than four (4) affirmative votes. 
Section 2-106 - Specific powers enumerated. 
The powers of the authority herein created shall include, but are not limited to, the power: 
(a)  To have a corporate seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
(b)  To contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead or be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, to contract with the State of Georgia, any county or municipality thereof, and other political subdivisions, and with private persons, firms, corporations and associations. 
(c)  To acquire, hold and dispose of real and personal property, including the stock of other corporations for its corporate purposes. 
(d)  To buy, acquire, receive as gifts, improve, own, operate, maintain, sell, lease as lessor or lessee and mortgage, as well as execute deeds and other instruments to secure debt to and for, land, buildings and property of all kinds, real and personal, within the County of Floyd. 
(e)  To enter into contracts for any period of time not exceeding 50 years. 
(f)  To acquire in its own name by purchase on such terms and conditions, and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easement therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of the same, or to sell the same, in any manner it deems to be the best advantage of the authority. 
(g)  To encourage and promote the expansion of industry in the County of Floyd, and the municipalities in said county, and to make a long range plan therefor. 
(h)  To appoint and select officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
(i)  To make contracts, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient to the acquisition, maintenance and operation of projects, including contracts for construction of projects, and leases, and rental and sale of projects, or contracts with respect to the use of projects, which it erects or acquires. 
(j)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, sell, lease, equip, expand, add to, operate and manage projects and to pay the costs of any such project from any income of the authority, or from any contributions or loans by persons, firms or corporations, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(k)  To elect its own officers from the membership of the authority; to elect and employ an executive director who is not required to be a member of the authority; and to authorize and empower such officers to acts [sic] for the authority generally or in any specific matter. 
(l)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute debentures, bonds, notes, mortgages, deeds or bills of sale to secure debt, trust deeds and other such instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing. 
(m)  To use the rents, profits and proceeds from the projects erected, leased or sold, to provide for the operation and maintenance of such projects or other projects, to discharge the principal and interest of notes issued by the authority, to pay other debts of the authority and to further and promote the objectives of the authority. 
(n)  To do all things within its powers to encourage industrial expansion and development, and the location of new industries in Floyd County and the municipalities therein. 
(o)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public corporations or authorities performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of this state. 
(p)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested. 
(q)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts. 
(r)  To adopt, alter or repeal its own bylaws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(s)  To do all things necessary and convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this act upon the authority. 
Section 2-107 - Personnel bonds. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to have all persons handling funds of the authority fully and adequately bonded for their faithful accounting for such funds. 
Section 2-108 - Debt of authority not debt of county or state. 
The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation, against the State of Georgia, Floyd County, or any municipality therein. No debt, liability or obligation of the authority shall be considered a pledge or loan of the credit of the State of Georgia, or any county, city or other subdivision thereof, except said authority. 
Section 2-109 - Property. 
If the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall be in the County of Floyd and/or any incorporated city or town in said county, the governing authorities of the County of Floyd and of said municipalities, respectively, are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements therein, without cost, to the authority. Said county and/or said municipalities may donate to said authority personal property and services for any such project. 
Section 2-110 - Gratuities. 
The authority shall not grant any donation or gratuity, directly or indirectly, to any person, firm, corporation or association. 
Section 2-111 - Reversion of property. 
Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution, shall revert to Floyd County and the municipalities therein subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property. No private interest shall exist in the property of the authority. The members thereof shall not use it for private gain or benefit. The authority shall hold title only for the benefit of the public. 
Section 2-112 - Audits. 
The books and records of the authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the authority, by a competent independent auditor; and the minutes and records of the same shall be filed with the clerk [secretary of the city commission] of the City of Rome and shall be available for public inspection. 
PART III - CODE 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Incorporation, boundaries and wards, art. I; miscellaneous provisions, art. XVII. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of the City of Rome, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1959, § 1-1; Code 1981, § 1-1001) 
Charter reference— Codification of ordinances, § 2-13. 
State Law reference— Exemplification of municipal minutes and other records, O.C.G.A. § 24-7-21. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission: 
City. The terms "the city" and "this city" mean the City of Rome, Georgia. 
Commission. Whenever the term "commission" is used, it is construed to mean the city commission of the City of Rome. 
County. The terms "the county" and "this county" mean the County of Floyd, Georgia. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only extends and is applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" is construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" are equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The term "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, etc. Whenever a reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, and departments by title only, i.e., "city manager," "chief of police," etc., it is deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the city. 
Person. The term "person" means companies, firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, bodies politic and corporate, other entities, and any combination thereof, and individuals. 
Secretary, secretary of the commission. Whenever the terms "secretary" and "secretary of the commission" are used, they are construed to mean the secretary of the city commission. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means a strip of land in front of or on the sides of a building or lot of land lying between the property line and the street. 
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The terms "the state" and "this state" mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" is construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or present. 
Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
(Code 1959, § 1-2; Code 1981, § 1-1002) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes generally, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise, are intended merely as catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1959, § 1-3; Code 1981, § 1-1003) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the repealed ordinance took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the repealed ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 1-4; Code 1981, § 1-1004) 
State Law reference— Operation of laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-5. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 1-5; Code 1981, § 1-1005) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections or subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the commission to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, so that a reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: 
"That section _____ of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new provisions should then be set out in full. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1959, § 1-6; Code 1981, § 1-1006) 
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city. 
(4)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the commission to any person. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(10)  Any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes. 
(11)  Any temporary or special ordinance. 
(12)  Any ordinance relating to elections. 
All such ordinances or acts are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance of the city commission, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented. 
(Code 1959, § 1-7; Code 1981, § 1-1007) 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty; continuing violations; adjudging fines and imprisonments. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or sentence of work on the streets or public works, or community service work, for not to exceed six months, or any combination of such punishments, in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court or any officer trying the offender. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a), any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1959, § 1-8; Ord. No. 82-6-4, § 1, 6-21-82; Code 1981, § 1-1008) 
Charter reference— Penalties for offenses against laws and ordinances, § 2-12; enjoining violation of charter provisions, § 17-5. 
State Law reference— Confinement of violators of ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8. 
Sec. 1-10. - Exercise of powers. 
The powers of the city may be exercised by the city as provided in this Code, or by other agencies as provided by contract. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Incorporation, boundaries and wards, art. I; city manager, art. III; municipal officers generally, art. IV; elections, art. V; civil service, art. VI. 
Cross reference— Alcohol control commission, § 3-31 et seq.; animal control center, § 4-53; building inspector, § 5-79; gas inspector, § 5-293 et seq.; plumbing inspector, § 5-336 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 6; emergency management, ch. 7; finance and taxation, ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; fire department, § 9-36 et seq.; administration of flood damage prevention chapter, § 10-11; administration of general license article, § 11-2; administration of sign and outdoor advertising regulations, § 11-135; administration of motor vehicle and traffic chapter, § 12-31 et seq.; transit department, § 12-361 et seq.; municipal court, ch. 13; Rome-Floyd County Parks and Recreation Authority, § 15-51 et seq.; planning and development, ch. 16; Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission, § 16-31 et seq.; Coosa Valley Regional Development Center, § 16-51 et seq.; tree board, § 16-166 et seq.; police, ch. 17; director of solid waste department, § 19-3 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; utilities, ch. 22; historic preservation review board, § 23-179; administration of zoning chapter, § 23-211 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, § 23-251 et seq.; Joint Municipal Employees Benefit System, app. A; pension committee, app. A, art. IX. 
State Law reference— Local government, O.C.G.A. tit. 36; emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; emergency interim successors to officials, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50; joint municipal employees benefit system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.; social security coverage for state and local employees, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City manager; directors reporting thereto. 
The following directors of the city are hereby designated: 
(1)  City manager. 
(2)  City clerk, who is also secretary to the commission. 
(3)  City attorney. 
(4)  Personnel director. 
(5)  Emergency management and 911 director. 
(6)  Fire chief. 
(7)  Municipal court judge. 
(8)  Police chief. 
The directors designated in subsections (2)—(8) shall report directly to the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-3001) 
Sec. 2-2. - City divisions and departments. 
The following divisions and departments of the city are hereby established: 
(1)  Community development. 
a.  Building inspection. 
b.  Keep Rome-Floyd Beautiful. 
c.  Community improvement. 
d.  River development. 
(2)  Finance. 
a.  Finance. 
b.  Management information service. 
c.  Public facilities. 
d.  Purchasing. 
(3)  Public works. 
a.  Buildings and grounds. 
b.  Cemetery. 
c.  Electrical/street lighting. 
d.  Engineering services. 
e.  Landfill. 
f.  Solid waste. 
g.  Streets and drainage. 
h.  Traffic. 
(4)  Water and sewer. 
a.  Billing and collection. 
b.  Central garage. 
c.  Flood control. 
d.  Water filtering and pumping. 
e.  Wastewater treatment. 
f.  Water distribution and sewage collection. 
(Code 1981, § 2-3001; Ord. No. 98-6-1, § I, 6-1-98) 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5; cemeteries, ch. 6; emergency management, ch. 7; finance and taxation, ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; municipal court, ch. 13; police, ch. 17; solid waste, ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; utilities, ch. 22. 
Secs. 2-3—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS [2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Municipal elections are governed by the Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.). It requires the city to make provision for the following matters: 
(1) Payment of expenses of elections, and other matters, O.C.G.A. §§ 21-3-8, 21-3-37, 21-3-99, 21-3-162. 
(2) Voter registration system, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-125. 
(3) Selecting polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-163. 
(4) Remuneration for rent, heat, etc., for polling place, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-166. 
Provisions pertaining to particular elections are included in ordinances enacted by the mayor and council for those elections. Such ordinances are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
The provisions of this article are in the process of revision. 
Charter reference— Wards, § 1-2. 

Secs. 2-31—2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— City commission, art. II. 

Sec. 2-51. - Standing committees. 
Standing committees of the city commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  Committee of the whole. 
(2)  Finance. 
(3)  General administration. 
(4)  Public works. 
(5)  Public safety. 
(6)  Community development and services. 
(7)  Water and sewer. 
(8)  Transit. 
(9)  River development. 
(Code 1981, §§ 2-1001, 10-3002) 
Cross reference— Finance and taxation, ch. 8; planning and development, ch. 16; police, ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; utilities, ch. 22. 
Sec. 2-52. - Membership on commissions. 
City commissioners shall serve as required on the alcohol control commission as set out in chapter 3, and on the traffic commission as set out in chapter 12, article I. 
(Code 1959, § 2-1; Ord. No. 80-6, 7-21-80; Ord. No. 82-1-2, 1-19-82, § 1; Code 1981, § 2-1001) 
Secs. 2-53—2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-76. - Authority to create. 
The city commission shall, unless otherwise provided by law, create all boards and commissions, which shall perform the duties prescribed by ordinance, including, but not limited to, making studies, conducting research and investigations, holding hearings and preparing recommendations as to needed ordinances and resolutions and for any other purposes authorized. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6001) 
Sec. 2-77. - Composition; appointment; removal; bylaws. 
(a)  The city commission shall provide, unless otherwise provided by law, for the manner of appointment, makeup and composition of boards and commissions, their periods of existence, and for the compensation of their members and employees, in whole or in part. The city commission may provide for reimbursement of the actual and necessary expenses incurred by the members of boards and commissions in the performance of their official duties. 
(b)  Any vacancy in the office of any member of a board or commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided by law, any member of a board or commission may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of all of the city commission members. 
(d)  All boards and commissions of the city shall be governed by and shall comply with all policies, rules, regulations and administrative procedures of the city including, but not limited to, such matters as personnel, budgeting, accounting, purchasing, recordkeeping, reporting, equipment utilization and travel. 
(e)  Each board and commission may establish bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the city Charter, the provisions of this Code, or applicable state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for its internal organization, election of officers and for the conduct of its affairs. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6001) 
Sec. 2-78. - Certain boards designated. 
The following boards and commissions or like bodies of the city now in existence under this Code or under state law are hereby designated: 
(1)  Authorities. 
a.  Rome Housing Authority. 
b.  Rome-Floyd County Development Authority. 
c.  Rome-Floyd County Parks and Recreation Authority. 
d.  Rome-Floyd County Industrial Development Authority. 
e.  Downtown Development Authority. 
(2)  Commissions. 
a.  Coosa Valley Regional Development Commission. 
b.  Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission. 
c.  Alcohol control commission. 
d.  Traffic commission. 
e.  Keep Rome-Floyd Beautiful. 
f.  Greater Rome Convention and Visitors Bureau. 
(3)  Committees. 
a.  Pension committee. 
(4)  Boards. 
a.  Civil service board of appeals. 
b.  Board of zoning appeals. 
c.  Historic district zoning board. 
d.  Emergency management agency. 
e.  Sara Hightower Regional Library Board. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6003; Ord. No. 86-3-3, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 98-6-1, § II, 6-1-98) 
Editor's note— On March 1, 1986, the city leased the Rome-Floyd County Library to the county until certain bonds have been paid in full, but not for more than 50 years. The library is operated by the Sara Hightower Regional Library Board. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; emergency management, ch. 7; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; parks, recreation and cultural affairs, ch. 15; planning and development, ch. 16; zoning, ch. 23; Joint Municipal Employees Benefit System, app. A. 
State Law reference— City public libraries, O.C.G.A. § 20-5-20 et seq.; acquisition and operation of libraries, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; lease agreements for providing library services, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5.1. 
Sec. 2-79. - Greater Rome Convention and Visitors Bureau. 
(a)  The commission known as the Greater Rome Convention and Visitors Bureau shall serve without compensation and shall consist of at least one commissioner of the city, an appointee of the city manager, and such other members as may be appointed in accordance with the bylaws of such commission. The chairman of the commission shall be appointed by the city commission and may be removed by it. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Greater Rome Convention and Visitors Bureau, and to this end it shall have the authority within the limits of the funds at its disposal, to provide for and promote tourism, conventions, and other tourist activities. 
(c)  On or before November 1 in each year, such bureau shall prepare and submit a budget for the following calendar year to be approved by the city commission. 
(d)  Title to all capital items initially purchased, or at any time thereafter purchased, by such bureau with the use of public funds shall remain in the city. 
(e)  The books and records of the Greater Rome Convention and Visitors Bureau shall be open at all times during normal business hours for public inspection, and the same shall be audited quarterly or as otherwise required by the city commission. 
(f)  The Greater Rome Convention and Visitors Bureau shall operate in accordance with its bylaws, as approved and adopted by the city commission. 
(Code 1959, § 2-8; Ord. No. 81-2-3, § 1, 2-2-81; Ord. No. 86-3-3, § 2, 2-17-86; Code 1981, § 2-6004) 
ARTICLE V. - ROME-FLOYD COUNTY HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-80. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Rome, Georgia, a municipal corporation. 
Commission means the Rome-Floyd County Human relations Commission created by joint ordinance of the City of Rome and Floyd County. 
County means Floyd County, Georgia, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 94-6-3, § I, 6-20-94) 
Sec. 2-81. - Creation of commission. 
The Rome-Floyd County Human Relations Commission is hereby created and established by this article in conjunction with the passage of an identical ordinance by the Floyd County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 94-6-3, § I, 6-20-94) 
Sec. 2-82. - Composition; terms of members; appointment of successors; filling of vacancies; removal; service without compensation. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of 20 voting members, one of whom shall be a member of the city commission, appointed by that body, and one of whom shall be a member of the Floyd County Board of Commissioners, appointed by that body. Nine of the remaining members shall be appointed by the city commission, and nine of the remaining members shall be appointed by the county board of commissioners from a list of persons submitted by the nominating committee of the commission following the guidelines of the state human relations commission. 
(b)  No restrictions on numbers of representatives living in the city or county shall be established. 
(c)  The members shall serve for three-year staggered terms and until their successors are appointed as provided for in this section. Initially, each local government shall appoint three members to serve for a period of one year, three members to serve for a period of two years, and three members to serve for a period of three years. No member may serve more than two consecutive terms, not to exceed six years. 
(d)  Any vacancy in membership, whether caused by the expiration of a member's term, or otherwise, shall, subject to the confirmation procedures contained in subsection (e), be filled by the governing body which originally appointed that member. Any appointment for an unexpired term shall terminate at the expiration of such term. All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(e)  When any vacancy on the commission occurs, the commission shall, subject to the written policies and procedures established by the commission and approved by the city and county, recommend to the appropriate local government the name of at least two persons to fill such vacancy. The appropriate local government shall appoint the replacement from the names submitted by the commission, or shall direct the commission, consistent with its policies and procedures, to make additional recommendations for the appointment. The local government shall not appoint any person to fill any vacancy on the commission who has not been recommended by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 94-6-3, § I, 6-20-94) 
Sec. 2-83. - Organization; rules; staff; finances. 
(a)  The commission shall elect its chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary from among its appointed members. The term of officers shall be one year, or until they are re-elected or until their successors are elected. The appointed secretary may be an officer or employee of the city or county, or a member of the commission. The commission shall determine its time of meetings, and shall make its own rules of procedure, including any rule, providing for termination of membership by reason of nonattendance at meetings. All meetings of the commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the commission shall be public records. 
(b)  The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for such work and may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state or local, public or semi-public agencies or private individuals or corporations; may expend such funds; and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts and contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing bodies of the city and county. 
(Ord. No. 94-6-3, § I, 6-20-94) 
Sec. 2-84. - Powers and duties. 
The commission shall have the following duties and functions: 
(1)  To encourage, promote, and develop fair and equal treatment and opportunity in the Rome/Floyd County Community for all persons regardless of race, color, creed, sex, religion, national origin, age, and physical or mental impairment (the "affected persons"); 
(2)  To cooperate with and provide guidance to local government agencies on human relations matters; 
(3)  To cooperate with private industry, community, professional, civic and religious organizations, and federal, state, county and municipal agencies in the development of public information programs, leadership, and activities in the interest of equal opportunity and treatment of all the affected persons; 
(4)  To examine, study and inform the public as to complaints received concerning discriminatory practices regarding the affected persons, and transmit such complaints to appropriate agencies for investigation and corrective action, when necessary; 
(5)  To coordinate research projects and studies and to make reports on human relations to the city commission and county commission; 
(6)  To implement programs which will ensure fairness to all minority groups in such areas as housing, recreation, education, employment, law enforcement, vocational guidance and related matters; 
(7)  To provide a forum for airing human relations problems and to promote cross-cultural and inter-community communication; 
(8)  To recommend to the city commission and county board commissioners such additional legislation and programs to effectuate the purposes of this article; and 
(9)  Perform such other human relations duties as may be reasonably requested of the commission by either the city commission or county commission. 
(Ord. No. 94-6-3, § I, 6-20-94) 
Secs. 2-85—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF ETHICS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-7-3, arts. I—X, adopted July 17, 2000, did not specifically amend this Code. Hence, said ordinance was included as §§ 2-101—2-110 at the discretion of the editor to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 2-101. - Purpose. 
Declaration of policy. It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government in recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all city officials is adopted. 
This code has the following purposes: (1) to encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; (2) to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; (3) to require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in manners that affect the city; and (4) to serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
Pursuant to controlling state and federal law, the provisions of this article shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(Ord. No. 00-7-3, art. I, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 2-102. - Scope of article. 
Scope of persons covered. The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed members of the city commission, the city attorney, and the municipal court judges. 
City Charter. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, section 4-2 of the Charter of the city shall be controlling in all matters pertaining to the unlawful interest of city commissioners or officers in contracts or other matters governed by the section 4-2. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of section 4-2. 
(Ord. No. 00-7-3, art. II, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 2-103. - Definitions. 
Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
City official or official, unless other expressly defined, means members of the city commission, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city attorney, whether such person is salaried, hired or elected. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of any city official. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a commission member in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions is incidental to the extent that the commission member would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity: (1) the interest is ownership of ten percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or (2) funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; (3) the person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city commission; or (4) the person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 00-7-3, art. III, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 2-104. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the commission, in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city commission. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law for political campaigns and contributions. Furthermore, no city official shall accept any gift or reward in excess of $50.00 from any person having business before or with the city. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as specifically authorized by state statutes. This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the part-time city attorney in his or her periodic work on behalf of the city. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with Georgia law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a city official, if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the Official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city commission, or, in the case of the city attorney or municipal court judge, to the city manager, and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(Ord. No. 00-7-3, art. IV, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 2-105. - Conflict of interest. 
Prohibition of conflict of interest. A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. In addition, city officials who serve as corporate officers or members of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city of the entity. Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 00-7-3, art. V, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 2-106. - Exemptions. 
Exemptions. This Code shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 00-7-3, art. VI, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 2-107. - Investigation procedure. 
Duties and powers. The city commission shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs, provided however, that any finding of the city commission shall be made on a positive vote of at least five of the remaining members of the city commissioner; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of three months; 
(3)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(4)  To deliver to the accused party written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article; 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; and 
(7)  To report its findings along with proposed sanction. 
(Ord. No. 00-7-3, art. VII, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 2-108. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  Complaint. Any person having a complaint against any city official for an alleged ethics violation under this article shall file in writing a complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation. The complaint shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall forward it to the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be forwarded to the mayor pro-tem of the city commission. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor shall notify the accused official of the complaint. The accused official shall provide a written response to the mayor concerning the allegation within three days. In the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall assume the responsibilities of the mayor under this section. 
(b)  Investigating committee. The mayor shall randomly select three, qualified, elected officials to serve as an investigating committee. The selection process shall be monitored and recorded by the city clerk. Qualified elected officials shall include elected representatives of municipalities from Georgia Municipal Association's District One, which are also certified cities of ethics. Three qualified municipalities shall be identified initially. The mayor shall contact the chief elected official of the elected body that municipality. If the chief elected official cannot or will not serve on the investigating committee, then he or she will be asked to randomly select another member of such municipality's governing body until a member agrees to serve. In the event no elected official from a chosen municipality can or will serve on the investigating committee, then another municipality will be randomly chosen and the process repeated. Members of the committee shall not be paid for their time, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for reasonable travel expenses under the City of Rome's existing policy. 
(c)  Investigation. The committee shall determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the investigating committee. Upon request, the committee shall be assisted by the city attorney. If the committee determines that the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation, it shall be dismissed and the complainant and accused official notified immediately. 
(d)  Hearing. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a full hearing, the investigating committee shall schedule a hearing into the complaint. The committee shall call any witness or request any evidence it deems necessary to consider the complaint. All three committee members must be present at the hearing. The accused official shall have the right at such hearing to present evidence or call witnesses, and shall have the right to be represented by an attorney. 
(e)  Recommendation. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the investigating committee shall make a written report to the city commission. The written report should make a determination of whether or not a violation has occurred. The written report may include a suggested penalty. 
(f)  Other enforcement/investigations. Any ethics complaint against the municipal court judges or the city attorney shall be investigated and enforced by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 00-7-3, art. VIII, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 2008-6-1, § I, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 2-109. - Penalties. 
(a)  Penalties. Any persons violating any provisions of this policy are subject to: 
(1)  Written and oral reprimand by the commission. 
(2)  Request for resignation by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 00-7-3, art. IX, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 2-110. - Miscellaneous. 
Severability. The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application. 
(Ord. No. 00-7-3, art. X, 7-17-00) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Certain boards designated, § 2-78; offenses in emergencies, § 7-40; finance and taxation, ch. 8; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 11; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; zoning, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. tit. 3; sale near churches, schools, etc., O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21; local regulation of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq.; local regulation of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local regulation of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; ordinances on drinking or drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-11. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Licenses for closed, new and conveyed outlets. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Monthly means on the basis of whole months. 
(b)  Licenses provided for in this chapter shall be issued as follows: 
(1)  There shall be no refund of license fees for licensed outlets which close during a calendar year. 
(2)  New outlets beginning after August 1 shall require licenses issued on the basis of six months and shall pay 50 percent of the annual license fee. 
(3)  Where established outlets, operating under an annual license, are sold or otherwise conveyed (thus requiring a new license), the new license fee shall be determined according to a monthly proration. 
(Code 1981, § 9-2114) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-2. - Drinking of alcoholic beverages by licensees and employees while on duty at outlets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the licensee or any employee of a malt beverage, liquor, or pouring outlet to consume any intoxicating beverage while on duty at the outlet, or to be on duty at the outlet in an intoxicated condition. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, any licensee or employee of an outlet who is on the outlet's premises shall be presumed to be "on duty" if he is: 
(1)  Being paid any salary, wage or remuneration of any kind for his services rendered during the time he is on the premises; 
(2)  On the outlet's premises for the benefit of or at the direction of the outlet or its management (other than as a customer, patron or guest); 
(3)  Engaging in the sale, directly or indirectly, of any food or beverage; or 
(4)  Taking a break during periods of on-duty employment. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9 and other applicable provisions. A violation of this section shall also constitute grounds for the suspension, revocation, and/or refusal to renew the outlet's license. 
(Code 1959, § 4-62; Ord. No. 87-6-1, § 1, 6-1-87; Code 1981, § 9-2113) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-3. - Furnishing alcoholic beverages to and purchase and possession of alcoholic beverages by persons under 21 years of age, violation; jurisdiction. 
The municipal court, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10, is granted jurisdiction to try and dispose of a first offense violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, pertaining to furnishing alcoholic beverages to, and purchase and possession of alcoholic beverages by, a person under 21 years of age, if the offense occurs within the corporate limits of the city. O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10 is incorporated in this section by reference. 
(Ord. No. 87-9-12, § 1, 9-21-87; Code 1981, § 9-2115) 
Sec. 3-4. - Sale of intoxicating beverages where firearms and weapons are sold. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, firearms, knives or other weapons and intoxicating beverages at the same business establishment. 
(Code 1959, § 4-61; Code 1981, § 9-2112) 
Sec. 3-5. - Exception. 
Restrictions in this chapter on the sale of alcoholic beverages near alcoholic treatment centers shall not apply to any business having a license in effect on July 1, 1981. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 3-6. - Violations; punishment. 
Any violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1959, § 4-57; Code 1981, § 9-2111) 
Secs. 3-7—3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOL CONTROL COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 3-31. - Establishment, composition. 
(a)  There is hereby established an alcohol control commission (sometimes referred to as the "ACC"), which shall consist of five citizens-at-large and one city commissioner. The city-commissioner member of the alcohol control commission shall be an ex-officio, non-voting member of the alcohol control commission. The chairman of the alcohol control commission shall be one of the citizen-at-large members and shall be designated and appointed by the mayor. 
(b)  The five citizen-at-large members of the alcohol control commission shall be chosen and appointed by the city commission. The ex-officio, non-voting, city-commissioner member of the alcohol control commission shall be chosen and appointed by the mayor. All members of the alcohol control commission shall serve terms, and occupy posts, as follows: 
(1)  Post 1. A citizen-at-large, serving a three-year term. 
(2)  Post 2. A citizen-at-large, serving a three-year term. 
(3)  Post 3. A citizen-at-large, serving a three-year term. 
(4)  Post 4. A citizen-at-large, serving a three-year term. 
(5)  Post 5. A citizen-at-large, serving a three-year term. 
(6)  Post 6. A city commissioner, serving at the pleasure of the city commission, with term expiring upon the expiration of his term as city commissioner. 
The terms of office for posts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 shall be staggered. 
(c)  Each member shall serve his specified term and until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(d)  In all actions by the alcohol control commission, only the citizen-at-large members of the alcohol control commission shall be eligible to vote. 
(Code 1959, § 4-53; Ord. No. 79-10, 7-16-79; Ord. No. 81-5-81, § 1, 5-5-81; Ord. No. 87-7-6, § 1, 7-20-87; Code 1981, § 9-2091; Ord. No. 2018-2-2, § I, 2-26-18) 
Sec. 3-32. - Staff and advisors; duties. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be the recorder and recordkeeper of the alcohol control commission and as such shall attend meetings, take minutes thereof, be responsible for all files and records, receive and process applications, and perform other such tasks as designated by the alcohol control commission. The city clerk may participate in all discussions of the alcohol control commission but has no voting power. 
(b)  The alcohol control commission shall have, as it requires, additional staff consisting of the city manager, city attorney, chief of police and all city employees available to it. These staff persons may participate in all discussions of the alcohol control commission but shall not have the power to vote. 
(Code 1959, § 4-54; Ord. No. 81-5-1, § 2, 5-4-81; Code 1981, § 9-2092) 
Sec. 3-33. - Powers and duties. 
The alcohol control commission is hereby vested with the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Initial applications. To screen, verify, investigate and review all initial applications for licenses for the sale of liquor, wine and malt beverages, at wholesale and retail, by the package and by the drink. 
a.  To grant or deny licenses to sell malt beverages by the package at wholesale or retail, wine by the package at wholesale or retail, liquor by the package, and for the sale of liquor, wine and malt beverages, at wholesale and retail, and by the drink. 
(2)  Renewals. To investigate and hear reports and charges constituting probable cause not to renew licenses for the sale of liquor, wine and/or malt beverages, at wholesale and retail, by the package and by the drink. 
a.  To make recommendations to the city commission to grant or to deny renewals of licenses for the sale of liquor by the package and for the sale of liquor, wine and/or malt beverages by the drink. 
b.  To grant or deny renewals of licenses to sell malt beverages and/or wine by the package at wholesale or retail. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation; probation; monetary sanction. To investigate and hear reports and charges constituting probable cause to suspend or revoke licenses for the sale of liquor, wine and/or malt beverages, at wholesale and retail, by the package and by the drink, or to impose monetary sanctions and to recommend to the city commission whether and what such penalty should be imposed. 
(4)  Appeals. To hear appeals on the seizure of a license by the chief of police, the assistant chief of police, a duly authorized officer or the license inspector under sections 3-81, 3-183, 3-240, and 3-306, and to affirm, reverse, modify or make recommendations to the city commission upon the actions of the suspending officer. 
(5)  Entertainment. To receive reports on, to investigate and to approve and disapprove, entertainment at pouring outlets, all as provided in section 3-278, and to take or recommend such action as is appropriate in the case of such disapproval. 
(6)  Employees. To receive reports on, to investigate and to approve or disapprove employees of retail outlets for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package or by the drink, all as provided in section 3-34, and to take such action as is appropriate in the case of such disapproval. 
(7)  Ordinances and policies. To recommend to the city commission modifications to the ordinances and policies of the city pertaining to the regulation, control and taxing of liquor, wine and malt beverages. 
(8)  Complaints, etc. To hear complaints, suggestions and recommendations from the city manager, the city commission, police department, state officials, alcoholic beverage dealers and the public at large as to the operation of liquor, wine and malt beverage outlets within the city. 
(9)  Rules and regulations. To promulgate rules and regulations governing procedures before it. 
(10)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property. To grant or deny temporary permits to allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property not otherwise exempted under code section 14-3(3), to place conditions on such temporary consumption permits, and to promulgate guidelines for the application, approval and use of such temporary consumption permits. 
(Code 1959, § 4-55; Ord. No. 81-5-1, § 3, 5-4-81; Ord. No. 86-5-3, § 1, 5-19-86; Code 1981, § 9-2093; Ord. No. 2007-3-2, § I, 3-19-07; Ord. No. 2008-7-1, §§ I, II, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 2013-2-1, § I, 2-11-13) 
Sec. 3-34. - Wearing of alcohol sales permits; application to alcohol control commission; fingerprinting, photographing and other investigation by the police department; employment of person without card; expiration on employee's birthday. 
(a)  Any person who works in a retail outlet for the sale of liquor by the package or whose principal responsibility is the service of food or beverage in an alcohol pouring outlet, whether or not such person is an employee of such retail outlet or pouring outlet, shall apply to the police department for an alcohol sales permit, which shall expire on the person's birthday and be renewable on or before that time on a year to year basis. The fee for the card shall be set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(b)  While on duty serving or selling alcohol of any type, every person required to hold an alcohol sales permit under subsection (a), whether or not an employee of the outlet, shall have his alcohol sales permit conspicuously displayed on his person at all times. 
(c)  Applicants for an alcohol sales permit shall make written application to the police department and shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting and such other investigating as may be required by the police department. 
(d)  The City of Rome police department shall review the application and investigate permit applicants. The police department shall issue and renew an alcohol sales permit to applicants who complete the necessary applications and paid the applicable fees, unless the applicant: 
(1)  Has been convicted of or pled guilty to any state or federal felony offense involving violence within the preceding ten years of the application date, 
(2)  Has been convicted of or pled guilty to any state or federal felony offense within the preceding three years, 
(3)  Has been convicted of or pled guilty to any state or federal misdemeanor offense involving forgery, identity theft, credit card fraud or theft within the preceding three years; 
(4)  Has been convicted or pled guilty to two or more offenses of selling, serving or providing alcohol to a minor within a twelve-month period, provided that the most recent conviction or guilty plea occurred within the preceding 12 months; or 
(5)  Is ineligible to serve or sell alcohol under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(e)  No alcohol licensee holder under the provisions of this chapter shall hire any person for, nor permit any person to work or assist in, sales at an alcohol pouring outlet or a retail outlet for the sale of liquor by the package, until such person has procured an alcohol sales permit as prescribed in this section. 
(f)  The police department may provisionally grant an alcohol sales permit to an applicant, pending investigation and report. Where the report, when received, demonstrates that the applicant fails to meet the requirements of this section, the department shall revoke the permit and demand its return. 
(g)  Adjudications of alleged violations of this section shall be held in municipal court. 
(h)  Any holder of an alcohol sales permit found guilty of a violation of this chapter or of any State of Georgia law concerning the sale of alcohol or the furnishing of alcohol to minors shall have, in addition to any other punishment allowed by law, their permit suspended for a period of 30 days. The municipal court judge may, in his or her discretion, elect to suspend all but ten of the suspension days, if the facts and circumstances warrant such reduction. Upon being found guilty of a second violation of this chapter or of any State of Georgia law concerning the sale of alcohol or the furnishing of alcohol to minors, within a twelve-month period, the permit holder shall have, in addition to any other punishment allowed by law, his or her permit suspended for a period of 12 months. The municipal court judge may, in his or her discretion, elect to suspend all but two months of the suspension days, if the facts and circumstances warrant such reduction. During any period of suspension, the permit holder shall surrender such permit to the police department. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose alcohol sales permit has been revoked, and upon whom demand for surrender such permit has been made, to refuse to so surrender, or to alter, conceal, deface or destroy the permit. 
(j)  An applicant denied an alcohol sales permit on the basis of item (d)(5) above may appeal to the alcohol control commission for a hardship variance. Upon appeal, the alcohol control commission shall conduct a hearing and may reduce the period of time within which an applicant must wait to receive an alcohol sales permit if the applicant shows good cause why granting said permit would not endanger public health, safety or welfare, based on the facts and circumstances of each individual application. 
(k)  For the purposes of subsections (d)(5) and (h), a plea of nolo contendere shall be treated as a conviction. 
(Code 1959, § 4-56; Ord. No. 81-1-3, § 1, 1-26-81; Ord. No. 82-10-1, § 1, 10-18-82; Ord. No. 83-4-10, § 1, 4-18-83; Ord. No. 87-6-10, § 1, 6-15-87; Code 1981, § 9-2094; Ord. No. 97-4-3, §§ I, II, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 98-2-2, § I, 2-16-98; Ord. No. 2008-12-3, § I, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 2009-11-1, § I, 11-16-09; Ord. No. 2010-4-1, § I, 4-19-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-12-3, § I, adopted Dec. 15, 2008, amended § 3-34 title to read as herein set out. Former § 3-34 title pertained to wearing of employee identification cards; application to police department, fingerprinting, photographing; employment of person without card; expiration on employee's birthday. 
Sec. 3-35. - Prohibition of certain types of entertainment, attire and conduct. 
(a)  Findings; public purpose. Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia, Richmond County, Georgia; Amarillo, Texas; Austin, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Houston, Texas; Renton, Washington; Phoenix, Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; St. Paul, Minnesota; Tucson, Arizona; Augusta, Georgia; LaGrange, Georgia; Dalton and Whitfield County, Georgia; Carrollton, Georgia; Smyrna, Georgia; and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences, we believe are relevant to the problems faced by the City of Rome, Georgia, the city commission takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the findings of the commission that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
(b)  Enactment. The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or disperse alcohol beverages. 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcohol beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft or the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) of this subsection or where such persons (or person) perform(s) acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) above. 
(c)  Severability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this enactment are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section hereof shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this enactment, since the same would have been enacted by the city commission without the incorporation herein of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ord. No. 93-10-2, § I, 10-18-93; Ord. No. 95-3-2, § I, 3-6-95) 
Secs. 3-36—3-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MALT BEVERAGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-56. - Definitions. 
Unless the context or the specific provisions of this section demand otherwise, the words and terms used in this article shall have the same definition and meaning as state law where used in O.C.G.A. title 3, chapter 5 (§ 3-5-1 et seq.). The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business location means the location or proposed location of a retail or wholesale malt beverage outlet. 
Church means a freestanding building which is owned by a religious organization or association and primarily utilized for religious services, ceremonies, or instruction. 
Measured means measured by way of the nearest travelled road, street or highway from the front entrance of an outlet to the property line of an involved institution. 
Outlet means a store for the sale of malt beverages. 
Outlet manager means the person who does or will actually manage or operate the malt beverage store on a day-to-day basis. 
Private residence means a dwelling for two families or less, and not unoccupied for six months or more. 
(Code 1981, § 9-2001; Ord. No. 97-11-1, § I, 11-17-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-57. - Package sales generally. 
(a)  The building or proposed building to house a retail outlet for the sale of malt beverages by the package shall meet all requirements of the building inspector, the fire marshal, and the traffic engineer, and shall comply with the offstreet automobile parking and storage regulations set forth in section 23-63. 
(b)  Each outlet for the retail sale of malt beverages by the package shall post in a conspicuous place within the outlet a sign in letters at least two inches high, reading as follows: "Sale of Malt Beverages to Any Person Under 21 Years of Age Strictly Prohibited." 
(c)  No screen, partition or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of a retail outlet for the sale of malt beverages by the package from the street, nor any booth within, shall be permitted. 
(d)  No sale of malt beverage by the package shall be allowed except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 1:30 a.m. on weekdays; except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and midnight on Saturday; and except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Sunday, nor on other days prohibited by state law. 
(e)  The state regulations relating to the sale and distribution of malt beverages by the package, as revised, promulgated by the state revenue department, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this section. 
(f)  Any holder of a license to sell at retail malt beverages by the package shall make an immediate report to, and receive approval by, the alcohol control commission of any change in the interests in or ownership of a malt beverage outlet and/or any change in the information stated in the original application for license. 
(g)  In the case of the sale of an existing licensed business, provided that the report of the chief of police is satisfactory to the chairman of the alcohol control commission and the chief of police, the purchaser of such business may continue operation of such business without change and/or enlargement, pending action by the alcohol control commission on the transfer of, or on a new, license. In such case, the purchaser or transferee shall, during or immediately after such purchase or transfer, make application for approval. 
(h)  No drive-in windows for the sale of malt beverages shall be allowed. 
(i)  The open parking area of any building or proposed building to house a retail outlet shall have an average maintained footcandle intensity of at least one footcandle with a minimum allowable intensity of three-tenths of a footcandle. The covered parking area of any building or proposed building to house a retail outlet shall have an average maintained footcandle intensity of at least two footcandles with a minimum allowable intensity of five-tenths of a footcandle. 
(j)  Each outlet for the retail sale of malt beverages by the package shall install and maintain security cameras in the outlet of a type and number approved by the chief of police. Such cameras: 
(1)  Shall be placed in the outlet to record activities in the check out or cash register area(s). 
(2)  Shall be capable of producing a retrievable image on film or tape that can be made a permanent record and enlarged through projection or other means. 
Such cameras shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the chief of police or his designee. If a robbery or other felony occurs in such outlet, the film or tape recording such event shall immediately be made available to the chief of police or his designee. Provided, however, any outlet shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection if it has two or more employees on duty and on the premises at all times. All films, tapes, or images required by this Code section shall be retained by the outlet, in its original, viewable format, for a period of no less than 30 days after recording. 
(Code 1959, § 4-11; Ord. No. 82-11-8, § 1, 11-15-82; Ord. No. 82-11-9, § 1, 11-15-82; Ord. No. 82-11-11, § 1, 11-15-82; Ord. No. 89-4-1, § I, 4-3-89; Code 1981, § 9-2013; Ord. No. 94-5-2, § I, 5-16-94; Ord. No. 05-3-2, § I, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 2011-6-7, § I, 6-20-11) 
Secs. 3-58—3-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 3-71. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell or offer to sell any malt beverage at wholesale or retail within the corporate limits of the city without having the appropriate license for such manufacture or sale, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 4-2; Code 1981, § 9-2002) 
State Law reference— Local malt beverage license, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq. 
Sec. 3-72. - Separate license for each malt beverage outlet; transfer; surrender. 
(a)  A separate license shall be required for each malt beverage outlet, and a separate application shall be made for each outlet. 
(b)  Licenses under this article shall be transferable only upon prior approval by the city clerk and the police chief and upon payment of a transfer fee of $400.00. 
(c)  Immediately upon the sale or closing of an outlet, it shall be the duty of the licensee to surrender his license to the alcohol control commission. 
(d)  Any licensee who is an employee of a corporation, and who is separated from his employment, whether he resigns, retires or is fired, shall immediately notify the office of the secretary of such separation. Should the secretary's office not be open at such time, the police department shall be notified instead with notice given to the secretary as soon as possible on the next day of normal business. If such employee removes the malt beverage license from the establishment, he shall immediately surrender such license to the secretary or to the police department. Failure to surrender such license, if removed from the place of business, shall be a violation and shall be punished as provided by section 1-9. 
(Code 1959, § 4-3; Code 1981, § 9-2003; Ord. No. 01-3-1, § I, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 2016-12-01, § I, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 3-73. - Classification of licenses; fees. 
(a)  Licenses under this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Retail package. Retail beer package store, which shall permit only the sale of malt beverages in packages at retail. 
(2)  Wholesale. Wholesale malt beverage distributor, which shall permit only the sale of malt beverages at wholesale. 
(3)  Manufacture. Manufacturers of malt beverages, which shall permit only the manufacture, bottling and packaging of malt beverages. 
(b)  The amount of the license fee for each class shall be as set forth in the license fee schedule of the city as described in section 8-36. 
(Code 1981, § 9-2004) 
Sec. 3-74. - Applications for malt beverage license, wholesale malt beverage distributor license. 
Applications for retail malt beverage licenses and applications for wholesale malt beverage distributor licenses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Forms; submission. Each initial applicant shall make written application to the alcohol control commission for the privilege of engaging in the sale (specifying wholesale or retail) of malt beverages, such applicant using forms provided by the secretary. 
(2)  Where filed; fee. The application shall be filed with the secretary with a fee as set out in the fee schedule book of the city, provided in section 8-36, for investigation of the applicant and of the proposed location and processing of the application. 
(3)  Contents. The application shall state: 
a.  As to the applicant(s): Full name, birth date, present address and addresses for the past five years, business address and business addresses or employers and their addresses for the last five years, name of spouse and all minor children, complete record of all arrests, convictions and guilty pleas for violations of all laws, city, state and federal, of both applicant and spouse, and the disposition of all charges. 
b.  As to the applicant's outlet manager (if not the same as the applicant), the same information as required of the applicant in subsection (3)a. 
c.  Exact location (street address and otherwise) of proposed business, including ward and zoning district. The location must be properly identified as required by section 20-12. 
d.  Name and address of owner or landlord and/or resident manager of property proposed for location and whether or not there is a building proposed to be used already erected thereon. 
e.  Trade name (or proposed trade name) of proposed business. 
f.  Names and addresses of all persons having any financial interest in the outlet by way of ownership of building or stock, receipt of income from the business or otherwise. 
g.  Such other information as may be required by the city commission, the alcohol control commission, the chief of police, the city manager, the city attorney or the secretary, through interrogatories or otherwise. 
(4)  Approvals. The application shall contain evidence of the following persons' approval of the licensee and of the owner and the manager of the malt beverage establishment: 
a.  Building inspector (i.e., building permit, certificate of occupancy, or other evidence). 
b.  Traffic engineer. 
c.  Fire marshal. 
d.  Chief of police. 
(5)  Oath. The application shall be sworn to. 
(6)  Surveyor's certificate. The application shall be accompanied by a current certificate from a registered surveyor containing the following information: 
a.  A scale drawing of the building or proposed building, as situated on the proposed lot. 
b.  The proposed offstreet parking facilities available to the building and all outdoor lighting on the premises. 
c.  The exact location of the business, including street address, ward, and county tax map number. 
d.  Current zone classification of the location. 
e.  Both the straight line distance and the measured distance in lineal feet from each of the following: The nearest church, the nearest school ground or college campus, boys' club, girls' club, Y.M.C.A., public park or public library, hospital or clinic, Maple Street Community Center, Star House or Salvation Army center, and the nearest alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. (The requirement of showing such distances shall not exist where such area or facility is in excess of 350 feet from the proposed business location; however, the surveyor's certificate shall so state.) 
(7)  State application. There shall be attached to the city application a copy of the applicant's application or proposed application for license from the state. 
(Ord. No. 83-5-8, § 1, 5-16-83; Code 1981, § 9-2005(1)—(6)) 
Sec. 3-75. - Advertisement; proof thereof. 
(a)  Each applicant under this division shall advertise his application for license in a local daily newspaper once a week for two weeks. The advertisement shall appear after filing application and before the public hearing provided for in this division. The advertisement shall contain the name of the applicant, the purpose of the application, the proposed location of the business and its owners and the name of the proposed outlet manager, if known. 
(b)  The applicant, before consideration will be given to his application, shall file with the secretary a copy of the advertisement together with affidavits to the effect that it has been printed as required. 
(Code 1959, § 4-6; Code 1981, § 9-2006) 
Sec. 3-76. - Action by alcohol control commission. 
(a)  Within seven days from the time proof of advertisement is filed, the secretary shall notify the chief of police, who shall investigate the character of the applicant and the reputation of the location and make a full report to the alcohol control commission. The secretary shall also circulate the application to the building inspector, the fire marshal and the traffic engineer for their investigation and recommendation or approval. 
(b)  The secretary, when assured that all requirements have been complied with, shall refer the application, together with any objections filed, to the alcohol control commission. The alcohol control commission shall, after investigation of the applicant and the proposed location, direct the secretary to issue or refuse the license for which application is made, upon payment of the appropriate fee. 
(Code 1959, § 4-7; Code 1981, § 9-2007) 
Sec. 3-77. - Considerations and guidelines for grant or denial. 
The alcohol control commission, in making its determination on an initial application, shall be guided by the following factors as to whether or not to grant a license under this division: 
(1)  The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location, that is, whether the same is predominantly residential, industrial or business. 
(2)  The proximity of churches, hospitals, schools, college campuses, public libraries, YMCA, girls' club, boys' club, Open Door Home, Star House, Salvation Army center, public parks and playgrounds, private residences and alcoholic treatment centers owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(3)  Whether the proposed location has adequate offstreet parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons. 
(4)  Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom. 
(5)  The criminal record of the applicant and the outlet manager and general good character and reputation and their financial responsibility; provided that nonpayment of federal, state, county or city taxes shall be prima facie evidence of lack of financial responsibility. 
(6)  A report of the chief of police, the building inspector, the fire marshal and the traffic engineer. 
(7)  The information required in the application or statement and whether all requirements as to notice, advertisement, fire codes, building, zoning, parking, lighting and legal matters have been met. 
(8)  Evidence presented to the commission for or against the application. 
(9)  Whether or not the granting of the application is in the interest of the city. 
(10)  Whether any license for sale of beer or wine or alcohol previously issued for the location has been revoked for cause by the alcohol control commission. 
(11)  Whether the applicant holds or possesses any other license for the sale of alcohol issued by the city. 
(12)  The history or reputation of the building or establishment (proposed for outlet) for prostitution or other sex offenses; fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence; gambling; illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs; and other violations of the law. 
(Code 1959, §§ 4-8, 4-33; Code 1981, §§ 9-2008, 9-2035) 
Sec. 3-78. - Grounds for denial. 
(a)  Prohibited locations. It shall be unlawful for any person representing the city to grant a license for the sale of malt beverages within the following areas of the city: 
(1)  Within any residential zoning district. 
(2)  Within a measured 200 feet of any girls' club, boys' club, Y.M.C.A., community center, Salvation Army center, public library, or public park. 
(3)  Within a measured 150 feet of a private residence, if such residence is located within a residential zone. 
(4)  Within a measured 300 feet of any church ground. 
(5)  Within a measured 300 feet of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(6)  Within a measured 300 feet of any school ground or college campus. 
(7)  In any existing building or establishment having a history of, or reputation for, prostitution or other sex offenses; fighting, shooting, stabbing, or other violence; gambling; illegal dealings in alcoholic beverages or drugs; or other violations of the law. 
(b)  Prohibited persons. It shall be unlawful for any person representing the city to grant a license for the sale of malt beverages to: 
(1)  A person who is not a resident of the county for at least one year immediately preceding the filing of the application; provided that such prohibition as to the length of residency in the county shall not apply to an individual who: 
a.  Is a regular employee of a corporation which operates, or proposes to operate, the licensed business; and 
b.  Shall not otherwise be a prohibited person under this section. 
(2)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(3)  A person who has been convicted of a felony, or of a crime opposed to decency and morality, or who has been convicted of a crime involving violation of the ordinances of the city relating to the use, sale, taxability or possession of malt beverages, wine or liquor, or violations of the laws of the state and federal government pertaining to the manufacture, possession, transportation or sale of malt beverages, wine or intoxicating liquors, or the taxability thereof. 
(4)  A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause or who has had a license under this chapter revoked for cause. 
(5)  A person who is under the age of 21 years or who is not of sound mind and memory. 
(6)  It is the intent and purpose of this section that a malt beverage license shall not be issued to any person who is not a resident of this county. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to provide otherwise. 
(Code 1959, § 4-9; Ord. No. 83-7-7, § 1, 7-18-83; Ord. No. 83-8-3, § 1, 8-15-83; Ord. No. 85-9-1, § 1, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 87-9-2, § 1, 9-8-87; Code 1981, § 9-2009) 
Sec. 3-79. - Removing residence from county or otherwise becoming a prohibited person. 
Any licensee under this division who removes his residence from the county, or otherwise becomes a "prohibited person" as defined in section 3-78(b), shall, within three days of the event, make the fact known to the alcohol control commission and shall surrender his license upon demand by the alcohol control commission in such case. 
(Code 1959, § 4-9.1; Code 1981, § 9-2010) 
Sec. 3-80. - Renewal; denial of renewal. 
(a)  All licenses under this division shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall be renewable as a matter of course upon payment of the appropriate fee, except as is set out in subsection (d). 
(b)  Each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on or before November 15 of each year on forms approved by the secretary, and the license fee shall be paid in full no later than December 31 of each year. 
(c)  The application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall report on the licensee's activity, if any, and upon activity at the location of the licensed business, if any, during the year. 
(d)  If the chief reports any activity which constitutes probable cause for not renewing a license, the renewal shall not be made, and the matter shall be referred to the alcohol control commission for its consideration. 
(e)  The alcohol control commission shall afford the licensee a public hearing, and in passing upon the application for renewal, it shall be guided by the following factors applicable to an initial application: subsections (5), (6), (8), (9), (10) and (12) of section 3-77. 
(f)  At the public hearing, the alcohol control commission may grant, or deny for cause, the renewal of any license issued under this division. 
(Code 1959, § 4-10; Code 1981, § 9-2011) 
Sec. 3-81. - Suspension, revocation, and monetary sanction—Generally. 
(a)  Summary action. There shall be no summary seizure of licenses under this division, unless there exists in the city a state of emergency duly declared; after any such seizure, a hearing shall be held as soon as practicable. 
(b)  Action by city commission. The alcohol control commission may recommend to the city commission to suspend, refuse to renew, place on probation, or revoke a license to sell malt beverages, and to impose a monetary sanction not to exceed $2,000.00, under the conditions set forth in this section. Then the city commission shall have full power and authority to suspend, refuse to renew, place on probation, or revoke a license to sell malt beverages, and to impose a monetary sanction not to exceed $2,000.00 under the conditions set forth in this section. Before taking any such action except suspending a license for failure to pay an imposed monetary sanction when due, the city commission shall require a hearing, either before it or the alcohol control commission, at least five days' notice of which hearing shall have been given to the affected licensee. Sufficient grounds for the suspension, refusal to renew, probation, revocation of a license, or imposition of a monetary sanction include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A licensee has failed to open a business within six months after approval of the license. 
(2)  A licensee has ceased to operate the business for a period of three consecutive months. 
(3)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has sold alcoholic beverages during a period of suspension. 
(4)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application or renewal process. 
(5)  A licensee has failed to pay any fee, license fee, or other amount of money due to the city under this chapter or any other city-licensing ordinance. 
(6)  A licensee has failed to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license as set forth in this article. 
(7)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent, knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication. 
(8)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of legal consumption in the State of Georgia. 
(9)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any other law, ordinance, or regulation governing the operation of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or which is reasonably related to the operation of such establishment. 
(10)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any other section of this chapter. 
(11)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has been convicted or pled guilty or no contest to any violation of its license to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages issued by the State of Georgia Department of Revenue, City of Rome, Floyd County and/or Floyd County Sheriffs Office. 
(12)  A licensee has failed to satisfy the criteria for obtaining a license to sell malt beverages. 
(13)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any federal, state, or local laws or ordinances relating to the use and sale of drugs and alcoholic beverages. 
(14)  When the continued operation of the licensed business is detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(c)  The failure of a licensee to pay when due any monetary sanction assessed pursuant to the terms of this chapter of the Code shall result in the immediate suspension of all alcohol licenses issued by the city to such licensee. A suspension under this subsection shall continue until all monetary sanctions and other sums due the city by the licensee are paid in full. 
(Code 1959, § 4-11; Code 1981, § 9-2012; Ord. No. 2008-2-4, § I, 2-18-08; Ord. No. 2008-7-1, § III, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 2013-2-1, § II, 2-11-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-2-1, § II, adopted Feb. 11, 2013, amended § 3-81 title to read as herein set out. Former § 3-81 title pertained to suspension and revocation—generally. 
Sec. 3-82. - Same—Changes of circumstances. 
The approval of an application by the alcohol control commission, and/or the granting of a license by the commission, may be suspended or revoked, after notice and hearing, if any change in the information supplied, or in the physical layout represented in the plat submitted, occurs without the approval of the alcohol control commission. An applicant anticipating any such change shall submit all details thereof to the alcohol control commission. 
(Ord. No. 83-5-8, § 1, 5-16-83; Code 1981, § 9-2005(7)) 
Secs. 3-83—3-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LIQUOR[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-136. - Definitions. 
Unless the context demands otherwise, the words and terms used in this article shall have the same definition and meaning as state law where used in O.C.G.A. title 3 (§ 3-1-1 et seq.), known as the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, as now or hereafter amended. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business location and location of the business means the location or proposed location of a retail or wholesale liquor outlet. 
Liquor means spirituous liquor or distilled spirits. 
Measured means measured by way of the nearest legally travelled road, street, sidewalk, or highway from the front entrance of an outlet to the property line of an involved residence or institution. 
Outlet means a store for the sale of liquor. 
Outlet manager means the person who does or will actually manage and operate the liquor store on a day-to-day basis. 
Private residence means a dwelling for two families or less that is not unoccupied for six months or more. 
(Code 1981, § 9-2021) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-137. - General regulations. 
(a)  The building or proposed building to house a retail outlet shall meet all requirements of the building inspector, the fire marshal and the traffic engineer, and shall comply with the offstreet automobile parking and storage regulations set forth in section 23-63. 
(b)  No advertising sign exterior of the retail outlet shall be permitted. 
(c)  Each retail outlet shall post the following signs and notices conspicuously within the place of business: 
(1)  A sign printed in letters at least two inches high, reading as follows: "Sale of Liquor to Persons Under 21 Years of Age Strictly Prohibited." 
(2)  One printed copy of the penal sections of this article. 
(d)  No screen, partition or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of a retail outlet from the street, nor any booth within, shall be permitted. 
(e)  No sale of liquor shall be allowed except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on weekdays; except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Saturday; and except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Sunday, nor on other days prohibited by state law. 
(f)  Each retail outlet shall post at least four copies of its complete price list or, in lieu thereof, place a price on each bottle for sale. 
(g)  No advertising of prices outside a retail outlet in any manner whatsoever, including signs on the outlet or outlet window, shall be permitted. 
(h)  No drive-in windows shall be permitted. 
(i)  The state regulations relating to the sale and distribution of distilled spirits, as revised, promulgated by the state department of revenue, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article as if fully set out in this section. 
(j)  The applicant shall make an immediate report to, and receive approval by, the alcohol control commission of any change in the interests in or ownership of the liquor outlet or liquor business and/or any change in the information stated in the original application for license. The alcohol control commission shall report the changes to the city commission along with its recommendations. 
(k)  The open parking area of any building or proposed building to house a retail outlet shall have an average maintained footcandle intensity of at least one footcandle with a minimum allowable intensity of three-tenths of a footcandle. The covered parking area of any building or proposed building to house a retail outlet shall have an average maintained footcandle intensity of at least two footcandles with a minimum allowable intensity of five-tenths of a footcandle. 
(Code 1959, § 4-37; Ord. No. 82-11-12, § 1, 11-15-82; Ord. No. 84-10-13, § 1, 10-15-84; Code 1981, § 9-2040; Ord. No. 94-5-3, § I, 5-16-94; Ord. No. 2011-6-7, § II, 6-20-11) 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5. 
Secs. 3-138—3-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 3-166. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell or offer to sell any spirituous liquors or distilled spirits at wholesale or retail within the corporate limits of the city without having the appropriate license for such manufacture or sale, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or this article. 
(Code 1959, § 4-27; Code 1981, § 9-2022) 
State Law reference— Local liquor license, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq. 
Sec. 3-167. - Separate license for each outlet; transfer; surrender. 
(a)  A separate license shall be required for each liquor outlet, and a separate application shall be made for each. 
(b)  Licenses for approved outlets under this division shall be transferable upon: 
(1)  The prior approval of the city clerk and the police chief and upon payment of a transfer fee of $400.00. 
(c)  Immediately upon the sale or closing of an outlet, it shall be the duty of the licensee to surrender his license to the alcohol control commission. 
(d)  Any licensee who is an employee of a corporation, who is separated from his employment, whether he resigns, retires or is fired, shall immediately notify the office of the secretary of such separation. Should the secretary's office not be open at such time, the police department shall be notified instead with notice given to the secretary as soon as possible on the next day of normal business. If such employee removes the liquor license from the establishment, he shall immediately surrender such license to the secretary, or to the police department. Failure to surrender such license, if removed from the place of business, will be a violation and shall be punished as provided by section 1-9. 
(Code 1959, § 4-28; Ord. No. 78-5, § 1, 10-17-77; Ord. No. 82-5-2, § 1, 5-17-82; Code 1981, § 9-2023; Ord. No. 2008-7-1, § IV, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 2016-12-01, § II, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 3-168. - Classification of licenses; fees. 
(a)  Licenses under this division shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Class M. Manufacturers, which shall permit only the manufacture, bottling and packaging of distilled spirits. 
(2)  Class R. Retail liquor package store, which shall permit only the sale of liquor in packages at retail. 
(3)  Class W. Wholesale liquor distributor, which shall permit only the sale of liquor at wholesale. 
(b)  The amount of the license fee for each class shall be as set forth in the license fee schedule of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1959, § 4-29; Code 1981, § 9-2024) 
Sec. 3-169. - Initial application for license. 
(a)  An application for a class M license shall be made to the alcohol control commission, which may refer it to the Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission. The latter shall report to the alcohol control commission within 30 days. 
(b)  Application for a Class R or Class W license shall be as follows: 
(1)  Each initial applicant shall make a written application to the alcohol control commission for the privilege of engaging in the sale (specifying wholesale or retail) of liquor, such applicant using forms approved by the secretary. 
(2)  The application shall be filed with the secretary with a fee for investigation of the applicant and of the proposed location and processing of the application, in the amount set forth in the license fee schedule of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(3)  The application shall state: 
a.  As to the applicants: Full name, birth date, present address and addresses for the past five years (including compliance with O.C.G.A. § 3-4-23 when the applicant has been a resident of the city for less than 12 months immediately proceeding application) business address and business addresses or employers and their addresses for the last five years, names of spouse and all minor children, complete record of all arrests, convictions and guilty pleas for violations of all laws, city, state and federal, of both applicant and spouse, and the disposition of all charges. 
b.  As to the applicant's outlet manager (if not the same as the applicant), the same information as required of the applicant in subsection (3)a. 
c.  Exact location (street address and otherwise) of proposed business, including ward and zoning district. The location must be properly identified as required by section 20-12. 
d.  Name and address of owner or landlord and/or resident manager of property proposed for location and whether or not there is a building proposed to be used already erected thereon. 
e.  Trade name (or proposed trade name) of proposed business. 
f.  Names and addresses of all persons having any financial interest in the outlet by way of ownership of building or stock, receipt of income from the business or otherwise. 
g.  Such other information as may be required by the city commission, the alcohol control commission, the chief of police, the city manager, the city attorney or the secretary through interrogatories or otherwise. 
(4)  The application shall contain evidence of the following persons' approval of the licensee and of the owner and the manager of the liquor establishment: 
a.  Building inspector (i.e., building permit, certificate of occupancy, or other evidence). 
b.  Traffic engineer. 
c.  Fire marshal. 
d.  Chief of police. 
(5)  The application shall be sworn to. 
(6)  The application shall be accompanied by a current certificate from a registered surveyor containing the following information: 
a.  A scale drawing of the building or proposed building, as situated on the proposed lot. 
b.  The proposed offstreet parking facilities available to the building and all outdoor lighting on the premises. 
c.  The exact location of the business, including street address, ward, and county tax map number. 
d.  Current zone classification of the location. 
e.  Both the straight line distance and the measured distance in lineal feet from each of the following: The nearest church, the nearest school ground or college campus, boys' club, girls' club, Y.M.C.A., public park or public library, hospital or clinic, Maple Street Community Center, Star House or Salvation Army center, and the nearest alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. (The requirement of showing such distances shall not exist where such area or facility is in excess of 650 feet from the proposed business location; however, the surveyor's certificate shall so state.) 
(Code 1981, § 9-2025(1)—(6); Ord. No. 01-1-2, § 1, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 3-170. - Sham applicant; de facto applicant or outlet manager. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to file, or permit to be filed, an application for license under this division wherein a sham applicant or a sham outlet manager is named. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to file an application for license containing his name as applicant, or the name of an outlet manager, when such person is not the de facto applicant or the de facto outlet manager, as the case may be. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit his name to be used on an application for license where such person will not be the de facto owner of the license or the de facto outlet manager, as the case may be. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to file an application for license, or permit his name to be used in such application, where the application contains a nominal applicant or nominal outlet manager for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this division restricting applicants or managers to persons of good character and without criminal records, or restricting economic interests in outlets, or for any other elusive purpose. 
(Code 1959, § 4-30.1; Code 1981, § 9-2026) 
Sec. 3-171. - Application containing false information. 
An application under this division containing known false information may result in the disapproval, revocation, suspension or failure to renew the license applied for. 
(Code 1959, § 4-30.2; Code 1981, § 9-2027) 
Sec. 3-172. - Incomplete application. 
An application under this division filed and submitted before containing substantially all the information required may be rejected by the alcohol control commission, and an applicant may not refile for a period of 90 days. 
(Code 1959, § 4-30.3; Code 1981, § 9-2028) 
Sec. 3-173. - Surveyor's certificate containing false information. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any applicant under this division to submit with his application any surveyor's certificate containing known false information and/or measurements. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any surveyor to submit, or allow to be submitted, a certificate containing known false information. 
(c)  A violation of subsection (b) may result in the revocation of the business license of the surveyor submitting the false information. 
(d)  Substantial errors in measured distances, as determined by the city engineer, shall be prima facie evidence that the distances submitted are known to be false. 
(Code 1959, § 4-30.4; Code 1981, § 9-2029) 
Sec. 3-174. - Advertisement, proof thereof. 
(a)  Each applicant under this division shall advertise his application for license in a local daily newspaper once a week for two weeks, which advertisement shall appear after filing application and before the public hearing provided for in this division. The advertisement shall contain the name of the applicant, the purpose of the application, the proposed location of the business and its owners, and the name of the proposed outlet manager, if known. 
(b)  The applicant shall also, within three days after filing the application, identify the proposed location by posting a sign not less than 24 inches by 36 inches in size, with letters of at least 2½ inches on the front door of the building proposed to be used (if facing the right-of-way of the city street upon which the building fronts; otherwise, within three feet of the right-of-way), or upon a prominent place on the lot where the building is proposed to be constructed, facing the street. The sign shall be captioned "Liquor License Application Pending" and shall designate the name and address of the applicant, the type of license and the date of the application, and no other advertisement or wording. The sign shall remain posted until final action by the city commission on the application. 
(c)  The cost of the advertising, both newspaper and sign, shall be borne by the applicant. 
(d)  The applicant, before consideration will be given to his application, shall file with the secretary: 
(1)  A copy of the advertisement together with affidavits to the effect that it has been printed as required. 
(2)  A photograph of the sign erected pursuant to this section, together with affidavits to the effect that it has been erected as required. 
(Code 1959, § 4-31; Code 1981, § 9-2030) 
Sec. 3-175. - Investigation of applicant; recommendations; grant, denial of application. 
Within seven days from the time proof of advertisement is filed under this division, the city clerk shall notify the chief of police of the application, who shall investigate the character of the applicant and report to the alcohol control commission. The city clerk shall also refer the application, together with any objections filed, to the alcohol control commission. The alcohol control commission shall afford the applicant a hearing prior to rendering its decision. The alcohol control commission, after investigation, shall direct the city clerk to issue or refuse the license for which application is made, upon payment of the appropriate fee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-7-1, § V, 7-7-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-7-1, § V, adopted July 7, 2008, repealed former § 3-175, and enacted a new § 3-175 as set out herein. Former § 3-175 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Code 1959, § 4-32 and Code 1981, § 9-2031. 
Sec. 3-176. - Conditional approval of application; suspension of license. 
The alcohol control commission may approve an application under this division subject to supplying documentation and/or meeting required formalities, and withhold issuance of a license until such requirements are complete. 
(Code 1959, § 4-32.1; Code 1981, § 9-2032) 
Sec. 3-177. - Approval of application; expiration in 90 days; extension for cause. 
Approval of an application under this division by the alcohol control commission shall be valid for up to 180 days, at the discretion of the alcohol control commission. The alcohol control commission may extend the approval for cause and within its discretion, provided the request therefor is made within the original approval period. 
(Code 1959, § 4-32.2; Code 1981, § 9-2033; Ord. No. 2016-03-02, § I, 3-14-16) 
Sec. 3-178. - Substantially same application not to be resubmitted or entertained within six months of previous application; deferral of action on application subject matter of which is being litigated. 
(a)  No applicant under this division may submit, and the alcohol control commission shall not act upon, an application which is substantially the same as an application submitted within the previous six months, unless directed by the commission. 
(b)  Either the alcohol control commission or the city commission, or both, may defer action upon any application, the subject matter of which is substantially the same as the subject matter of litigation then pending in the state or federal courts until such time as the litigation is resolved. 
(Code 1959, § 4-32.3; Code 1981, § 9-2034) 
Sec. 3-179. - Considerations and guidelines for granting or denying license. 
The considerations and guidelines for granting or denying a liquor license shall be the same as for malt beverages, as set out in section 3-77. 
Sec. 3-180. - Grounds for denial of license. 
(a)  Prohibited locations. The requirements pertaining to prohibited locations of liquor establishments shall be the same as for malt beverages except that the distances from school grounds or college campuses shall be 600 feet; provided, that no new retail liquor package establishment nor the relocation of any existing retail package establishment shall be located within 500 yards of any other business licensed to sell package liquor at retail, as measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground; provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to any hotel license under this chapter; provided, further, that this restriction shall not apply to any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 1997, nor to the renewal of such license. The restriction of this section shall also not apply to any location to which a new license is applied for if the sale of distilled spirits was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(b)  Prohibited persons. It shall be unlawful for any person to grant a license for the sale of liquor to: 
(1)  A person who is not a resident of the county for at least one year immediately preceding the filing of the application; provided that such prohibition as to the length of residency in the county shall not apply to an individual who: 
a.  Has been, for at least one year, a regular employee of a corporation which operates, or proposes to operate, the licensed business. 
b.  Shall not otherwise be a prohibited person under this section or state law. 
(2)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(3)  A person who has been convicted of a felony, or of a crime opposed to decency and morality, or who has been convicted of a crime involving violation of the ordinances of the city relating to the use, sale, taxability or possession of malt beverages, wine or liquor, or violations of the laws of the state or federal government pertaining to the manufacture, possession, transportation or sale of malt beverages, wine or intoxicating liquors, or taxability thereof. 
(4)  A corporation. 
(5)  A partnership, unless all partners qualify. 
(6)  A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  A person who is under the age of 21 years or who is not of sound mind and memory. 
(9)  An elected official, officer, or employee of the city or of the county, or members of their immediate families, provided however that the alcohol control commission shall have the authority to review applications to determine if appropriate and sufficient grounds exist to grant a variance to this prohibition. This prohibition shall not apply to the malt beverage pouring license and wine pouring license at Stonebridge Golf Course or the malt beverage pouring license and wine pouring license at the Rome Downtown Tennis Center and the Rome Tennis Center at Berry College. 
(10)  A person who already holds a class W license or a license in the classification applied for. 
(Code 1959, § 4-34; Ord. No. 78-5, § 2, 10-17-77; Ord. No. 87-9-1, § 1, 9-8-87; Code 1981, § 9-2036; Ord. No. 92-9-3, § I, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 98-2-3, § I, 2-16-98; Ord. No. 00-85, § I, 8-21-00; Ord. No. 01-1-1, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 01-2-1, § I, 2-5-01; Ord. No. 2016-09-01, § I, 9-12-16) 
Sec. 3-181. - Removing residence from county or otherwise becoming a prohibited person. 
Any licensee under this division who removes his residence from the county, or otherwise becomes a "prohibited person" as defined in section 3-180(b), shall, within ten days of the event, make the fact known to the alcohol control commission and shall surrender his license upon demand by the alcohol control commission in such case. 
(Code 1959, § 4-34.1; Code 1981, § 9-2037) 
Sec. 3-182. - Renewal; denial of renewal. 
(a)  All licenses under this division shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall be renewable as a matter of course upon payment of the appropriate fee, unless adverse information shall have come to the knowledge of the alcohol control commission or unless the chief of police makes a report as is set out in subsection (d). 
(b)  Each licensee shall make written application for renewal of his license on or before November 15 of each year on forms provided by the secretary, and the license fee shall be paid in full on or before December 31 of each year. 
(c)  The application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall report on the licensee's activity, if any, and upon activity at the location of the licensed business, if any, during the year. 
(d)  If the chief of police reports any activity which constitutes probable cause for not renewing a license, the renewal shall not be made, and the matter shall be referred to the alcohol control commission for its consideration. 
(e)  The alcohol control commission shall afford the licensee a public hearing and make findings of fact, which shall be referred to the city commission. In passing upon the application for renewal, the city commission shall be guided by the following factors applicable to an initial application: subsections (5), (6), (8), (9), (10) and (12) of section 3-77 and section 3-181. The city commission may grant, or deny for cause, the renewal of any license issued under this division. 
(Code 1959, § 4-35; Code 1981, § 9-2038) 
Sec. 3-183. - Suspension, revocation, and monetary sanction—Generally. 
(a)  Summary action. There shall be no summary seizure of licenses under this division, unless there exists in the city a state of emergency duly declared; after any such seizure, a hearing shall be held as soon as practicable. 
(b)  Action by city commission. The alcohol control commission may recommend to the city commission to suspend, refuse to renew, place on probation, or revoke a license to sell liquor, and to impose a monetary sanction not to exceed $2,000.00, under the conditions set forth in this section. Then the city commission shall have full power and authority to suspend, refuse to renew, place on probation, or revoke a license to sell liquor, and to impose a monetary sanction not to exceed $2,000.00 under the conditions set forth in this section. Before taking any such action except suspending a license for failure to pay an imposed monetary sanction when due, the city commission shall require a hearing, either before it or the alcohol control commission, at least five days' notice of which hearing shall have been given to the affected licensee. Sufficient grounds for the suspension, refusal to renew, probation, revocation of a license, or imposition of a monetary sanction include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A licensee has failed to open a business within six months after approval of the license. 
(2)  A licensee has ceased to operate the business for a period of three consecutive months. 
(3)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has sold alcoholic beverages during a period of suspension. 
(4)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application or renewal process. 
(5)  A licensee has failed to pay any fee, license fee, or other amount of money due to the city under this chapter or any other city-licensing ordinance. 
(6)  A licensee has failed to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license as set forth in this article. 
(7)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent, knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication. 
(8)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of legal consumption in the State of Georgia. 
(9)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any other law, ordinance, or regulation governing the operation of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or which is reasonably related to the operation of such establishment. 
(10)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any other section of this chapter. 
(11)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has been convicted or pled guilty or no contest to any violation of its license to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages issued by the State of Georgia Department of Revenue, City of Rome, Floyd County and/or Floyd County Sheriffs Office. 
(12)  A licensee has failed to satisfy the criteria for obtaining a license to sell liquor. 
(13)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any federal, state, or local laws or ordinances relating to the use and sale of drugs and alcoholic beverages. 
(14)  When the continued operation of the licensed business is detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(c)  The failure of a licensee to pay when due any monetary sanction assessed pursuant to the terms of this chapter of the Code shall result in the immediate suspension of all alcohol licenses issued by the city to such licensee. A suspension under this subsection shall continue until all monetary sanctions and other sums due the city by the licensee are paid in full. 
(Code 1959, § 4-36; Code 1981, § 9-2039; Ord. No. 2008-2-6, § I, 2-18-08; Ord. No. 2013-2-1, § III, 2-11-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-2-1, § III, adopted Feb. 11, 2013, amended § 3-183 title to read as herein set out. Former § 3-183 title pertained to suspension and revocation—generally. 
Sec. 3-184. - Same—Changes of circumstances. 
The approval of an application by the city commission, and/or the granting of a license by the commission, may be suspended or revoked if any change in the information supplied, or in the physical layout represented in the plat submitted, occurs without the approval of the alcohol control commission. An applicant anticipating any such change shall submit all details thereof to the alcohol control commission, which shall report it to the city commission only where the alcohol control commission's recommendation is affected by such change. 
(Code 1981, § 9-2025(7)) 
Secs. 3-185—3-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WINE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-211. - Definitions. 
Unless the context demands otherwise, the words and terms used in this article shall have the same definition and meaning as state law where used in O.C.G.A. title 3, chapter 6 (§ 3-6-1 et seq.). The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business location means the location or proposed location of a retail wine outlet. 
Outlet means a store for the retail sale of wine. 
(Code 1959, § 4-40; Code 1981, § 9-2051) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 3-212—3-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 3-236. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, store or offer to sell wine at wholesale or retail within the corporate limits of the city without having the appropriate license for such sale, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 4-41; Code 1981, § 9-2052) 
State Law reference— Local wine license, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 
Sec. 3-237. - Separate license for each outlet; transfer; surrender. 
(a)  A separate license shall be required for each wine outlet, and a separate application shall be made for each outlet. 
(b)  Licenses under this division shall be transferable only upon prior approval by the city clerk and the police chief and upon payment of a transfer fee of $400.00. 
(c)  Immediately upon the sale or closing of an outlet, it shall be the duty of the licensee to surrender his license to the city commission. 
(Code 1959, § 4-42; Code 1981, § 9-2053; Ord. No. 01-3-2, § I, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 2016-12-01, § III, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 3-238. - Classification; fees. 
(a)  Licenses under this division shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Retail package. Retail wine package store, which shall permit only the sale of wine in packages at retail. 
(2)  Wholesale. Wholesale wine distributor, which shall permit only the sale of wine at wholesale. 
(b)  The amount of the license fee for each class shall be as set forth in the license fee schedule of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1981, § 9-2054) 
Sec. 3-239. - Application and qualification. 
(a)  An application for a retail package wine license shall be the same as, and in accordance with, the requirements applicable to the sale of malt beverages by the package at retail, and all provisions of this chapter pertaining to the application and qualification for a retail package license, including sections 3-74 through 3-79 and 3-82, shall be enforced in the sale of wine. 
(b)  All regulations controlling the retail sale of malt beverages by the package shall also be applicable to the retail sale of wine by the package as if fully set out as separate provisions in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 4-44; Ord. No. 82-2-2, § 1, 2-15-82; Ord. No. 86-4-5, § 1, 4-21-86; Code 1981, § 9-2055) 
Sec. 3-240. - Renewal, suspension, revocation, monetary sanction. 
(a)  Renewal. The provisions set forth in sections 3-80 and 3-182 shall apply to the renewal, suspension, and revocation of licenses under this article. 
(b)  Summary action. There shall be no summary seizure of licenses under this division, unless there exists in the city a state of emergency duly declared; after any such seizure, a hearing shall be held as soon as practicable. 
(c)  Action by city commission. The alcohol control commission may recommend to the city commission to suspend, refuse to renew, place on probation, or revoke a license to sell wine, and to impose a monetary sanction not to exceed $2,000.00, under the conditions set forth in this section. Then the city commission shall have full power and authority to suspend, refuse to renew, place on probation, or revoke a license to sell wine, and to impose a monetary sanction not to exceed $2,000.00 under the conditions set forth in this section. Before taking any such action except suspending a license for failure to pay an imposed monetary sanction when due, the city commission shall require a hearing, either before it or the alcohol control commission, at least five days' notice of which hearing shall have been given to the affected licensee. Sufficient grounds for the suspension, refusal to renew, probation, revocation of a license, or imposition of a monetary sanction include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A licensee has failed to open a business within six months after approval of the license. 
(2)  A licensee has ceased to operate the business for a period of three consecutive months. 
(3)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has sold alcoholic beverages during a period of suspension. 
(4)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application or renewal process. 
(5)  A licensee has failed to pay any fee, license fee, or other amount of money due to the city under this chapter or any other city-licensing ordinance. 
(6)  A licensee has failed to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license as set forth in this article. 
(7)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent, knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication. 
(8)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of legal consumption in the State of Georgia. 
(9)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any other law, ordinance, or regulation governing the operation of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or which is reasonably related to the operation of such establishment. 
(10)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any other section of this chapter. 
(11)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has been convicted or pled guilty or no contest to any violation of its license to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages issued by the State of Georgia Department of Revenue, City of Rome, Floyd County and/or Floyd County Sheriffs Office. 
(12)  A licensee has failed to satisfy the criteria for obtaining a license to sell wine. 
(13)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any federal, state, or local laws or ordinances relating to the use and sale of drugs and alcoholic beverages. 
(14)  When the continued operation of the licensed business is detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(d)  The failure of a licensee to pay when due any monetary sanction assessed pursuant to the terms of this chapter of the Code shall result in the immediate suspension of all alcohol licenses issued by the city to such licensee. A suspension under this subsection shall continue until all monetary sanctions and other sums due the city by the licensee are paid in full. 
(Code 1959, §§ 4-44.1, 4-44.2; Ord. No. 86-4-5, §§ 2, 3, 4-21-86; Code 1981, §§ 9-2056, 9-2057; Ord. No. 2008-2-5, §§ I—III, 2-18-08; Ord. No. 2013-2-1, § IV, 2-11-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-2-1, § IV, adopted Feb. 11, 2013, amended § 3-240 title to read as herein set out. Former § 3-240 title pertained to renewal, suspension, revocation. 
Secs. 3-241—3-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq.; sale of distilled spirits by private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-276. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hotel means every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, and whether conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation: 
(1)  Which maintains 50 or more rooms used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests; 
(2)  Which maintains an adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment to serve food as required therein; 
(3)  Which operates one or more public dining rooms (excluding banquet rooms) with a combined seating capacity of at least 30, where meals are regularly served to guests; provided that consistent with the definition of "lounge" in this section, in no event shall the seating capacity of the lounge exceed that of such public dining rooms; 
(4)  Which employs sufficient personnel to serve food as required in this article; and 
(5)  Which derives at least as much gross income from the sale of such meals prepared, served, and consumed in the hotel as it does from its sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Mobile food vehicle means a unit mounted on or pulled by a motorized vehicle where food including prepackaged foods and nonalcoholic beverages for individual portion service are prepared, stored, served, or dispensed. 
Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge, restaurant or nightclub in their premises, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in this definition of "hotel." 
Lounge means a separate room connected with, a part of and adjacent to a restaurant (as defined in this section) or located in a hotel (as defined in this section), provided that in no event shall the seating capacity of the lounge exceed that of its connected restaurant. The bar area incorporated within a restaurant and where food is served and consumed shall not be considered a lounge. 
Pour means sell for beverage purposes, sell for consumption on the premises, sell by the drink, and allow patrons to bring their own liquor, wine or malt beverages for the purposes of mixing drinks and/or consuming same on the premises. The sale of mixes or setups or advertising to "bring your own" or the possession by patrons on the premises of liquor, wine or malt beverages, shall be prima facie evidence of pouring. 
Pouring outlet means any place where liquor, wine and/or malt beverages (unless specifically modified) are poured or proposed to be poured and in the case of liquor and wine, "pouring outlet" shall mean only a restaurant, hotel, private club, lounge, public stadium, coliseum or auditorium as defined in this section, or any retail shop or establishment that is specifically approved by the city commission. 
Premises means the definite, closed-in or partitioned-in locality (whether room or building) wherein pouring takes place. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members. 
(3)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment. 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests. 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Public stadium, coliseum or auditorium means any facility owned or controlled by the City of Rome, Floyd County, or a public authority having a seating capacity in excess of 2,500 people. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, which: 
(1)  Maintains an adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment to serve food as required in this article and/or maintains an affiliation with a mobile food vehicle that is parked on the premises to serve food as required in this article. 
(2)  Provides a regular seating capacity for at least 30 persons; provided, that consistent with the definition of "lounge" in this section, in no event shall the seating capacity of the lounge exceed that of its connected restaurant. 
(3)  Employs sufficient personnel to serve food as required in this section. 
(4)  Derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and liquor sales from the sale of such meals prepared, served and consumed on the premises, including the sale of meals prepared by an affiliated mobile food vehicle that are served and consumed on the premises. The city clerk shall review the gross income figures from each establishment and determine if the annual sales meet the required ratio between food and liquor and make appropriate recommendations to the alcohol control commission. 
(Code 1959, § 4-46; ; Code 1981, § 9-2071; Ord. No. 82-2-3; Ord. No. 83-5-9, § 2, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 87-4-3, § 1, 4-20-87; Ord. No. 92-1-2, § I, 1-21-92; Ord. No. 04-9-9, § I, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 2007-4-3, § I, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 2009-9-5, § I, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 2010-11-2, § I, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 2016-06-01, §§ I, II, 6-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-1-1, § I, 1-22-18; Ord. No. 2018-2-1, § I, 2-12-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1. 
Sec. 3-277. - Pouring outlets generally. 
The following regulations shall apply to pouring outlets: 
(1)  The building or proposed building where pouring will take place shall meet all requirements of the building inspector, the fire marshal and the traffic engineer. 
(2)  No pouring of liquor and/or wine shall be permitted between 1:30 a.m. Sunday and 12:30 p.m. Sunday and between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on other days. 
(3)  No pouring of malt beverages shall be permitted between 1:30 a.m. Sunday and 12:30 p.m. Sunday and between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on other days. 
(4)  No liquor or wine may be consumed on the premises of the pouring outlet between the hours of 2:00 a.m. Sunday and 12:30 p.m. Sunday and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on other days. 
(5)  No malt beverage may be consumed on the premises of the pouring outlet between the hours of 2:00 a.m. Sunday and 12:30 p.m. Sunday and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on other days. 
(6)  Lounges and pouring outlets, except for restaurants, private clubs, and bowling alleys, shall not keep their doors open to the public, or allow members of the public to remain on the premises, beyond the prohibited hours of consumption. 
(7)  In no event shall drinks be mixed or sold, nor malt beverages sold, during the prohibited hours, based upon the timely sale of tickets, chits, decanters or other devices. 
(8)  No outlet manager, nor other employee of an outlet, shall permit violations of subsections (2) through (7). 
(9)  Pouring licensees may sell malt beverages by the pitcher, or wine by the bottle or decanter, for consumption on the premises. 
(10)  Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge or restaurant in their premises, provided the hotel and the franchisee meet all the requirements of this article. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any person to employ knowingly in any pouring outlet in any capacity whatsoever, including performers, entertainers and musicians, any person who has pleaded guilty or has been convicted of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in drugs, sex offenses or for any charge relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors. 
(12)  No signs (advertising sale by the drink or soliciting patrons to bring their own or to brownbag) affixed to the premises shall be permitted; provided, however, there shall be no prohibition against utilizing signs showing the name of the pouring outlet. 
(13)  It shall be the duty of the management of a pouring outlet to maintain a copy of this article at the outlet and to instruct each employee on its terms. 
(14)  The state laws and regulations relating to the sale and distribution of distilled spirits, as revised, promulgated by the state department of revenue, and especially as related to retail sale for consumption, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article as if fully set out in this section. 
(15)  A pouring licensee shall make immediate report to, and receive approval by, the city commission of any change in the interests in or ownership of the pouring outlet and/or any change in the information as stated in the original application for license. 
(16)  No person already holding a class W license shall be granted a pouring license. 
(17)  A beer pouring license and a beer and wine package license may not be issued at the same outlet location unless said outlet also sells food prepared on the premises of the outlet for consumption on the premises of the outlet. 
(18)  On or before the 20th day of the month, the licensee of each pouring outlet which pours liquor (except private clubs) shall file with the secretary a gross income report of the outlet for the preceding month, certified by the licensee, which contains a percentage breakdown of the amount of liquor sales of the outlet relative to the outlet's total gross income from the sale of food or non-food goods, if specifically approved by the city commission, for the applicable month. Failure to file a timely report as provided herein, or the filing of a fraudulent report, shall constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of the alcohol pouring license issued by the city to such licensee. 
(19)  Sunday alcohol sales will be permitted in a licensed pouring establishment which (a) obtains a Sunday sales license, as provided in section 3-303; and (b) derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served or in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(Code 1959, § 4-51; Ord. No. 84-10-14, § 1, 10-15-84; Code 1981, § 9-2078; Ord. No. 98-3-1, § I, 3-16-98; Ord. No. 98-11-6, § I, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 04-9-8, § I, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 2007-4-2, § I, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 2007-4-3, § II, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 2010-11-2, § I, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 2018-2-1, § II, 2-12-18) 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5. 
Sec. 3-278. - Entertainment at pouring outlets. 
(a)  Bands or orchestras and patron dancing shall be permitted at pouring outlets: 
(1)  Where adequate space exists; 
(2)  Where all fire and safety regulations are met; 
(3)  Where the appropriate license fee has been fully paid; and 
(4)  Where prior approval of the alcohol control commission is obtained. 
(b)  Prior approval may be given only after notice of dates, time, approximate number of guests expected, nature of musical source and such other information as may be required is given in writing to the alcohol control commission. 
(c)  Where music or dancing is provided on a regular basis, the alcohol control commission may singly approve such regular basis, provided notice of any substantial departure from such regular basis is given to the alcohol control commission. In all cases wherein music or dancing is provided on other than a regular basis or entertainment other than bands or patron dancing is provided, prior approval for each such occasion shall be obtained from the alcohol control commission. 
(d)  The alcohol control commission may require a pouring outlet providing such music and dancing to provide such police attendance and protection as, in the opinion of the chief of police, is adequate to meet the need therefor. 
(Code 1959, § 4-52; Code 1981, § 9-2079) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; police, ch. 17. 
Sec. 3-279. - Temporary permit; standards for issuance; accounting. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, upon proper application, the alcohol control commission may grant a permit for an isolated or casual pouring of liquor, malt beverages and wine, provided that there is no objection from the state and provided that the proceeds from the sales under such permit shall be donated to a corporation or organization qualified as an exempt organization under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. The alcohol control commission is authorized to delegate its authority to grant or deny such permits to the chief of police or to the city clerk. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Proper application means an application containing the following information: 
(1)  As to the corporation or organization receiving donations: 
a.  Name. 
b.  Address. 
c.  Nature and purpose. 
(2)  As to the applicant (who must be an authorized member of the applying organization): 
a.  Name. 
b.  Address. 
(3)  Proposed location. 
(4)  Dates of sales. 
(c)  No permit shall be granted under this section unless the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  The applicant shall be qualified to hold a permanent alcoholic beverage pouring license of the same classification under this Code. 
(2)  The proposed location shall not be a prohibited location in violation of this Code. 
(3)  The dates of sale under the permit shall not violate laws and regulations of the city or the state. 
(4)  A permit fee shall be paid by the applicant to the city in an amount as set forth in the fee schedule of the city. 
(5)  The application shall comply with regulations set forth in section 3-277. 
(6)  When applicable, the application shall comply with section 3-278. 
(d)  All applicants shall, within five working days from the expiration of the permit, file with the alcohol control commission an accounting of the sales under any temporary granted permit. 
(Ord. No. 83-6-1, § 1, 6-20-83; Ord. No. 91-8-5, § I, 8-19-91; Code 1981, § 9-2079) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-280. - Off-premises licenses. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the alcohol control commission may grant a license to permit the off-premises pouring of malt beverages, wine, and liquor under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  An off-premises license may only be issued to licensees who hold in good standing an alcohol pouring license issued by the city, and no such licensee shall be permitted to pour any alcoholic beverage off-premises which cannot be lawfully poured on the licensee's premises. 
(2)  An application for an off-premises pouring license shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name of licensee. 
b.  Address of licensee. 
c.  Type of on-premises pouring license held by licensee. 
d.  Type of off-premises license required by licensee. 
(3)  No off-premises license shall be valid until the licensee pays an annual license fee in the amount established in the license fee scheduled in the city as provided in section 8-36 of this Code. 
(4)  The amount of all sales of alcoholic beverages and food sold off-premises need not be included in the licensee's gross income figures for the purpose of establishing the licensee's food drink ratio reports that the licensee files with the city pursuant to this Code. However, the amount of such sales shall be included in the licensee's gross income figures for the purpose of establishing the amount of the mixed drink taxes due from the licensee to the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an off-premises licensee to pour any malt beverages, wine, or liquor at any off-premises location until the licensee shall first obtain an off-premises pouring permit. Such permit may be issued by the city clerk for any period up to three days. Any permit for a period longer than three days must be issued by the alcohol control commission. An off-premises permit may be issued in accordance with the following: 
(1)  An application for an off-premises pouring permit shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name of licensee. 
b.  Date and description of licensee's off-premises license. 
c.  Street address of the proposed off-premises location. If the location has not been previously approved, a current survey shall be filed with the application which meets the survey requirements of section 3-74(6). 
(2)  No permit for a particular off-premises location shall be issued if the requested building is a "prohibited location" as that term is defined in section 3-180(a), or fails to meet all requirements of the building inspector, the fire marshal and the traffic engineer for an on-premises pouring outlet. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any off-premises licensee to sell liquor at an off-premises location unless food is served at the event. 
(4)  No off-premises permit shall be valid until the licensee pays a permit fee in the amount established in the license fee schedule of the city as provided in section 8-36 of this Code. The permit fee shall be based on a per day usage charge. 
(5)  Unless otherwise provided for in this section, all regulations of this Code controlling the pouring of alcoholic beverages on-premises shall govern the pouring of alcoholic beverages off-premises. 
(Ord. No. 95-1-1, § I, 1-17-95) 
Secs. 3-281—3-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 3-301. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pour or offer to pour any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within the corporate limits of the city without having a pouring license, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 4-47; Code 1981, § 9-2072) 
State Law reference— Local license for sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110; local licensing of private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-40 et seq. 
Sec. 3-302. - Separate license for each outlet; transfer; surrender. 
(a)  A separate license shall be required for each pouring outlet, and a separate application shall be made for each such place. 
(b)  Licenses for approved outlets under this article shall be transferable upon: 
(1)  Approval of the transferee in accordance with the procedures established in section 3-169 for new applicants; provided, that except for the advertisement requirements of section 3-174, the approval as to location shall not be required. 
(2)  Payment of a transfer fee of $400.00. 
(c)  Immediately upon the sale or closing of a pouring outlet, it shall be the duty of the licensee to surrender his license to the city commission. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (c), upon the resignation or termination of employment of a person who holds the license for an outlet who is not himself the owner of the outlet, the outlet's owner or board of directors, if applicable, shall immediately file an application for the transfer of the license to another licensee. During the pendency of such application, and until its approval, the outlet may continue to operate under the authority of its license, upon the designation by the outlet of an interim licensee who meets the same qualifications of a licensee provided in this article, and upon the approval of such proposed interim licensee by the chief of police and the chairman of the alcohol control commission. 
(Code 1959, § 4-48; Ord. No. 78-5, § 3, 10-17-77; Ord. No. 82-5-3, § 1, 5-17-82; Ord. No. 82-6-1, § 1, 6-7-82; Code 1981, § 9-2073; Ord. No. 2016-12-01, § IV, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 3-303. - License for pouring; fee. 
(a)  Licenses under this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Liquor pouring. Outlet for pouring liquor, which shall permit only the sale of liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  Wine pouring. Outlet for pouring wine, which shall permit only the sale of wine by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(3)  Malt beverage pouring. Outlet for pouring malt beverages, which shall permit only the sale of malt beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(4)  Sunday pouring. Outlet possessing one or more of the preceding licenses which shall also permit Sunday sales of alcohol by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  The amount of the license fee for each class shall be as set forth in the license fee schedule of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1981, § 9-2074; Ord. No. 04-9-8, § II, 9-20-04) 
Sec. 3-304. - Application, qualification; regulation. 
(a)  Applications for all pouring licenses (malt beverage, liquor, and/or wine) shall be the same as, and in accordance with, the requirements applicable to the sale of liquor by the package at retail. All provisions of this chapter pertaining to the qualifications and licensing for a liquor retail package store license, except as provided herein, shall apply and be enforced in the sale of malt beverages, liquor, and/or wine for consumption on the premises; provided, that the residence requirements for such pouring licenses shall be as set out in section 3-78(b)(1); and, provided, further, that the 500-yard limitation restricting the location of liquor package outlets, as provided in section 3-180(a), shall not apply to pouring establishments. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided in this article, all regulations controlling the sale of liquor at retail by the package (section 3-137 shall be applicable as if fully set out as a separate section in this article), together with the additional provisions contained in sections 3-277 and 3-278 and the penal provisions of this chapter shall govern the sale of liquor, wine and/or malt beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(c)  No application shall be considered from, and no license shall be granted, to an applicant whose business location for a liquor pouring outlet is anything other than a restaurant, hotel, private club, lounge, or any retail shop or establishment that is specifically approved by the city commission. 
(d)  It is the intention of this article that liquor by the drink be sold only at bona fide restaurants, hotels, private clubs, and any retail shop or establishment that is specifically approved by the city commission under the restrictions set out in this article and not at walk-in bars or sham establishments. 
(Code 1959, § 4-50; Ord. No. 83-5-7, § I, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 83-8-4, § 1, 8-15-83; Code 1981, § 9-2075; Ord. No. 93-12-4, § I, 12-20-93; Ord. No. 98-2-4, § I, 2-16-98; Ord. No. 2018-2-1, § III, 2-12-18) 
Sec. 3-305. - Action upon pouring license. 
Action upon a pouring license shall be the same as is set forth in section 9-2039. 
(Code 1959, § 4-50.2; Code 1981, § 9-2077) 
Sec. 3-306. - Renewal, suspension, revocation, and monetary sanction. 
(a)  Renewal. The provisions set forth in sections 3-80 and 3-182 shall apply to the renewal, suspension, and revocation of licenses under this article. 
(b)  Summary action. There shall be no summary seizure of licenses under this division, unless there exists in the city a state of emergency duly declared; after any such seizure, a hearing shall be held as soon as practicable. 
(c)  Action by city commission. The alcohol control commission may recommend to the city commission to suspend, refuse to renew, place on probation, or revoke a license under this article, and to impose a monetary sanction not to exceed $2,000.00, under the conditions set forth in this section. Then the city commission shall have full power and authority to suspend, refuse to renew, place on probation, or revoke a license under this article, and to impose a monetary sanction not to exceed $2,000.00 under the conditions set forth in this section. Before taking any such action except suspending a license for failure to pay an imposed monetary sanction when due, the city commission shall require a hearing, either before it or the alcohol control commission, at least five days' notice of which hearing shall have been given to the affected licensee. Sufficient grounds for the suspension, refusal to renew, probation, revocation of a license, or imposition of a monetary sanction include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A licensee has failed to open a business within six months after approval of the license. 
(2)  A licensee has ceased to operate the business for a period of three consecutive months. 
(3)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has sold alcoholic beverages during a period of suspension. 
(4)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application or renewal process. 
(5)  A licensee has failed to pay any fee, license fee, or other amount of money due to the city under this chapter or any other city-licensing ordinance. 
(6)  A licensee has failed to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license as set forth in this article. 
(7)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent, knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication. 
(8)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of legal consumption in the State of Georgia. 
(9)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any other law, ordinance, or regulation governing the operation of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or which is reasonably related to the operation of such establishment. 
(10)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any other section of this chapter. 
(11)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has been convicted or pled guilty or no contest to any violation of its license to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages issued by the State of Georgia Department of Revenue, City of Rome, Floyd County and/or Floyd County Sheriffs Office. 
(12)  A licensee has failed to satisfy the criteria for obtaining a license to sell alcoholic beverages under this article. 
(13)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any federal, state, or local laws or ordinances relating to the use and sale of drugs and alcoholic beverages. 
(14)  When the continued operation of the licensed business is detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(d)  The failure of a licensee to pay when due any monetary sanction assessed pursuant to the terms of this chapter of the Code shall result in the immediate suspension of all alcohol licenses issued by the city to such licensee. A suspension under this subsection shall continue until all monetary sanctions and other sums due the city by the licensee are paid in full. 
(Code 1959, § 4-50.1; Code 1981, § 9-2076; Ord. No. 2013-2-1, § V, 2-11-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-2-1, § V, adopted Feb. 11, 2013, amended § 3-306 title to read as herein set out. Former § 3-306 title pertained to renewal, suspension, revocation. 
Secs. 3-307—3-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXCISE TAXES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Finance and taxation, ch. 8. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 3-331—3-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MALT BEVERAGES 

Sec. 3-351. - Rate of taxation. 
In addition to the annual license fees required by article III, there is hereby levied upon each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city an excise tax, on such malt beverages so sold, as follows: 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2), such excise tax shall be computed at the rate of $0.004166 per ounce. 
(2)  All malt beverages sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, and being commonly known as tap or draft beer, shall not be subject to the excise tax provided for in subsection (1), but in lieu thereof there is hereby imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling such malt beverages within the city an excise tax of $6.00 for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of 15½ gallons sold by such wholesale dealer within the city and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 4-12; Code 1981, § 3-5001) 
Sec. 3-352. - Method of payment. 
The tax levied under this division shall be paid to the city by each wholesale dealer on all malt beverages sold within the city as follows: Each wholesale dealer selling, shipping or in any way delivering malt beverages to a retailer in the city shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all such deliveries on or before the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales are made. 
(Code 1959, § 4-13; Code 1981, § 3-5002) 
Sec. 3-353. - Payment of tax; report. 
The summary report made by each wholesale dealer to the city shall show the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, and the amount of excise tax collected. 
(Code 1959, § 4-14; Code 1981, § 3-5003) 
Sec. 3-354. - Right to audit. 
The city shall have the right to audit, and to require production of records from, each wholesaler of malt beverages supplying retailers in the city and each retailer so supplied. 
(Code 1959, § 4-15; Code 1981, § 3-5004) 
Sec. 3-355. - Failure to make timely report; penalty. 
(a)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance under this division shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of ten percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 100 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(b)  Such failure to make a timely report or remittance, or the filing of a false or fraudulent report, shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of the business license issued by the city to the wholesale dealer. 
(Code 1959, § 4-16; Code 1981, § 3-5005) 
Sec. 3-356. - Payment of fee to wholesaler; payment revocable. 
The city may pay to each wholesaler for the service of computing and remitting the taxes collected from retailers under this division a fee of three percent of such remittances, such payment to be revocable by the city at any time. Such payment shall be forfeited if any report or payment of tax under this division is not submitted to the city by the time required in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 4-17; Code 1981, § 3-5006) 
Sec. 3-357. - Sale prohibited when tax not paid. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the city any malt beverage on which the tax required in this division has not been paid to the wholesaler or distributor or the city. 
(Code 1959, § 4-18; Code 1981, § 3-5007) 
Secs. 3-358—3-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LIQUOR GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-381. - Rate of taxation. 
In addition to the annual retail liquor license fee required by article IV, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.80 per wine gallon, which shall be paid to the city on all liquor sold, displayed or stored in the city. The $0.80 per wine gallon shall be prorated down on miniatures, half pints, pints, fifths, half gallons and other quantities and on wine gallons so that each bottle shall be taxed on the basis of $0.80 per wine gallon. 
(Code 1959, § 4-38; Code 1981, § 3-5021(a)) 
Sec. 3-382. - Method of payment. 
The tax levied under this division shall be paid to the city by the wholesale distributor on all liquor sold to retailers in the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping or in any way delivering liquor to any such retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the month following. 
(Code 1959, § 4-38; Code 1981, § 3-5021(b)) 
Sec. 3-383. - Summary of purchase invoices. 
Each wholesale distributor of liquor shall furnish to the city a summary of all purchase invoices for liquor sold to each retailer in the city on or before the tenth of each month following such purchases. Such invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Code 1959, § 4-38; Code 1981, § 3-5021(c)) 
Sec. 3-384. - Right to audit. 
The city shall have the right to audit, and to require production of records from, each wholesaler of liquor supplying retailers in the city and each retailer so supplied. 
(Code 1959, § 4-38; Code 1981, § 3-5021(d)) 
Sec. 3-385. - Payment of fee to distributor; payment revocable. 
The city may pay to each wholesale distributor for the service of computing and remitting the taxes collected from retailers under this division a fee of three percent of the remittances, the payment to be revocable by the city at any time. Such payment shall be forfeited if any report or payment under this division is not submitted to the city by the time required in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 4-38; Code 1981, § 3-5021(e)) 
Secs. 3-386—3-405. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WINE 

Sec. 3-406. - Rate of taxation. 
In addition to the annual retain wine license fee required by article V, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter which shall be paid to the city on all wine sold, displayed or stored in the city. The $0.22 per liter tax rate shall be proportionally applied to smaller and larger quantities of wine so that each container shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. 
(Code 1959, § 4-45; Code 1981, § 3-5031(a); Ord. No. 93-9-3, § I, 9-20-93) 
Sec. 3-407. - Method of payment. 
The tax levied under this division shall be paid to the city by each wholesale distributor on all wine sold to retailers in the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping or in any way delivering wine to any such retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the month following. 
(Code 1959, § 4-45; Code 1981, § 3-5031(b)) 
Sec. 3-408. - Summary of purchase invoices. 
Each wholesale distributor of wine shall furnish to the city a summary of all purchase invoices for wine sold to each retailer in the city on or before the tenth of each month following such purchases. Such invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Code 1959, § 4-45; Code 1981, § 3-5031(c)) 
Sec. 3-409. - Right to audit. 
The city shall have the right to audit, and to require production of records from, each wholesaler of wine supplying retailers in the city and each retailer so supplied. 
(Code 1959, § 4-45; Code 1981, § 3-5031) 
Sec. 3-410. - Payment of fee to wholesaler; payment revocable. 
The city may pay to each wholesaler for the service of computing and remitting taxes collected from retailers under this division a fee of three percent of such remittances, such payment to be revocable by the city at any time. Such payment shall be forfeited if any payment of tax under this division is not submitted to the city by the time required herein. 
(Code 1959, § 4-45; Code 1981, § 3-5031(e)) 
Secs. 3-411—3-435. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LIQUOR BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 3-436. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means not later than the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax levied under this division is to be computed. 
Licensee means any person holding a liquor pouring license under the provisions of article VI. 
Monthly period means one of the calendar months of any year. 
(Ord. No. 85-12-12, § 1, 12-16-85; Code 1981, § 3-5042) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-437. - Imposition; rate of tax. 
There is hereby imposed, and there shall be paid, a tax of three percent on the sale of liquor by the drink in the city. 
(Ord. No. 85-12-12, § 1, 12-16-85; Code 1981, § 3-5043) 
Sec. 3-438. - Collection by licensee. 
Every licensee shall collect a tax of three percent on the sale of liquor by the drink at his pouring outlet. 
(Ord. No. 85-12-12, § 1, 12-16-85; Code 1981, § 3-5044) 
Sec. 3-439. - Due date. 
All amounts of taxes levied under this division shall be due and payable monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(Ord. No. 85-12-12, § 1, 12-16-85; Code 1981, § 3-5045(a)) 
Sec. 3-440. - Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. 
On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the secretary showing the gross sales of liquor by the drink by the licensee during the applicable period and the amount of tax collected or otherwise due under this division for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the secretary. 
(Ord. No. 85-12-12, § 1, 12-16-85; Code 1981, § 3-5045(b)) 
Sec. 3-441. - Collection fee allowed licensees. 
Licensees collecting the tax levied under this division shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and payment of the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.), approved February 20, 1951, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 85-12-12, § 1, 12-16-85; Code 1981, § 3-5045) 
State Law reference— Sales and use taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-442. - Deficiency determination. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the secretary is not satisfied with any return of the tax levied under this division or the amount of tax required to be paid to the city by any licensee, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service. The secretary or his designated representatives shall give the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears on the records of the secretary. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the licensee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of sufficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(Ord. No. 85-12-12, § 1, 12-16-85; Code 1981, § 3-5046) 
Sec. 3-443. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  If any licensee fails to make a return, the secretary shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee for the sale of mixed drinks at such licensee's pouring outlet. The estimate shall be made for the periods in respect to which the licensee fails to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in or may come into the possession of the secretary. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 85-12-12, § 1, 12-16-85; Code 1981, § 3-5047) 
Sec. 3-444. - Administration of division; authority of secretary. 
(a)  The secretary shall administer and enforce the provisions of this division for the collection of the tax imposed by this division. 
(b)  Every licensee shall keep records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the secretary may require. 
(c)  The secretary or any person authorized in writing by the secretary may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of the licensee in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  In administration of the provisions of this division, the secretary may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such persons' possession or custody information relating to the sale of liquor by the drink at the applicable pouring outlet. Reports shall be filed with the secretary when required by the secretary and shall set forth the gross sales from the sale of liquor by the drink, the amount of tax imposed and collected thereon, and such other information as the secretary may require. 
(Ord. No. 85-12-12, § 1, 12-16-85; Code 1981, § 3-5048) 
Sec. 3-445. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this division is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 85-12-12, § 1, 12-16-85; Code 1981, § 3-5049) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Regulation of slaughterhouses, § 2-10. 
Cross reference— Feeding or disturbing animals in cemeteries, § 6-32; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 11; standards for issuance of parade permit, § 11-563; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; conditions constituting nuisances, § 14-51; definitions pertaining to solid waste, § 19-1; removal of dead animals, § 19-17; depositing of litter, § 19-51; zoning, ch. 23; maintenance of mobile home parks, § 23-140. 
State Constitution reference— Municipal animal control, art. IX, § II, par. III. 
State Law reference— Animals, O.C.G.A. tit. 4; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; slaughter, transportation, etc., of animals, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-110; game and fish, O.C.G.A. tit. 27. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means any animal that is placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of such private property and unattended or uncared for. Any animal shall also be considered as abandoned which is upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of the animal for a period of time in excess of 36 hours unattended or without proper food and water. 
Animal at large means an animal not under restraint. 
Animal control center means the facility designated by the city manager, or as otherwise provided by contract, for the detention of animals. 
Animal control superintendent means the person designated as such by the city manager, or by contract, to perform the duties prescribed by this article. 
Animal under restraint means any animal: 
(1)  Secured by a leash or lead or enclosed by way of fence or other enclosure; 
(2)  Under the control of a responsible and competent person and obedient to that person's commands, that person being actually present with the animal; or 
(3)  Confined within a vehicle that is parked or in motion. 
Companion animal means a domesticated animal kept as a pet for pleasure rather than utility. Pets include, but are not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, hamsters, horses, mice, reptiles, domesticated wild animals, exotic animals and other animals associated with man's environment. 
Cruelty means any act of commission or omission whereby unjustified physical pain, suffering or death of an animal is caused or permitted. This includes failure to provide proper drink, air, space, shelter or protection from the elements, a sanitary and safe living environment, necessary veterinary care or nutritious food. In the case of activities where physical pain is necessarily caused, such as medical and scientific research, food processing, customary and normal veterinary and agricultural husbandry practices, pest elimination, and animal training and hunting, "cruelty" shall mean a failure to employ the most humane method reasonably available. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being, without provocation, on public or private property; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Domesticated animal means any animal that is accustomed to live in or about the habitation of humans, including, but not limited to, cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated wild animals and/or exotic animals. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command or any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which he is located. 
Guide dog means a dog trained for and used by blind persons, visually handicapped persons and deaf persons. 
Humane society means the Rome-Floyd County Humane Society, Inc. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that, without provocation, bites a human being on public or private property or acts in a threatening or aggressive manner toward a person that places said person in reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury. 
Owner means any person owning, possessing, keeping, harboring or acting as custodian of a domesticated animal. 
Vicious animal means: 
(1)  Any animal with a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or other domestic animals; 
(2)  Any animal which attacks a human being or other domestic animal one or more times without provocation; or 
(3)  Any pit bull terrier, which is defined as any Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog or any mixed breed of dog which contains as an element of its breeding the breed of Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire terrier as to be identifiable as partially of the breed of Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire terrier by a qualified veterinarian duly licensed as such by the state. 
(Ord. No. 85-11-4, § 1, 11-4-85; Code 1981, § 4-4023; Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § I, 11-3-08) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Rights of visually handicapped and deaf persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-2. - Maintaining in unsanitary condition or so as to disturb peace. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any fowl or other animal in the corporate limits of the city in any manner so as to create an unsanitary or obnoxious condition or so as to disturb the peace. 
(Code 1959, § 5-1; Code 1981, § 4-4001) 
Sec. 4-3. - Noisy or offensive animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit any fowl or other animal in the city in such manner as to become noisy, offensive or a nuisance to the neighbors or citizens of the city, or to disturb the peace of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 5-2; Code 1981, § 4-4002) 
Cross reference— Noises generally, § 14-5. 
Sec. 4-4. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Whoever wilfully or maliciously kills, abuses, maims or disfigures any animal or wilfully or maliciously administers poison to any animal or exposes any poisonous substance with intent that the same shall be taken and swallowed by such animal shall be in violation of this Code. 
(b)  Whoever overloads, overdrives, tortures, torments or deprives an animal of its necessary sustenance or shelter or cruelly or unmercifully beats, mutilates, whips or kills any animal or causes the same to be done, or otherwise treats any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner shall be deemed in violation of this Code. 
(c)  Whoever confines any animal and fails to supply sufficient quantities of wholesome food and water, or who keeps any animal in any enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, or abandons to die any animal shall be deemed in violation of this Code. 
(d)  Any animal control officer shall impound any animal found to be treated cruelly. The disposition of such animal shall be at the discretion of the director of animal control or his designee. This disposition could include returning the animal to its owner or retaining the animal if the violation is found to be intentional. 
(1)  If the director of animal control determines that the cruelty is, in fact, intentional and a determination is made to retain the animal rather than return the animal, then the owner of the animal shall be given five days' notice to object in writing to the director of animal control. A disposition of the animal shall be made as quickly after the five-day period as is reasonably practical. 
(2)  If an owner objects to the disposition of the animal as determined by the director of animal control or his designee, then the owner shall have the right to appeal said decision to the Rome Municipal Court and said appeal shall be made within 30 days of the decision. The animal control department will keep the animal in its custody and control pending said appeal unless otherwise directed by the court. 
(Code 1959, § 5-3; Code 1981, § 4-4003; Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § II, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 4-5. - Poisoning animals. 
(a)  Any person who shall expose or put out, or cause to be exposed or put out, upon his own premises, or upon the premises of another, or upon the property owned or held through easement by the city, any substance known to be poisonous to animals, which is poured over, wrapped in or otherwise combined with food, with the apparent intent to entice such animals to eat such poisonous substance and become poisoned thereby shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(b)  The finding of such poisonous substance or poisoned food, together with proof as to the identity of the person exposing or putting out same, shall be prima facie evidence of the intent to poison and destroy such animals. 
(Code 1959, § 5-4; Code 1981, § 4-4004) 
Sec. 4-6. - Hogs and goats prohibited within corporate limits. 
No hogs nor goats shall be kept within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 5-5; Code 1981, § 4-4005) 
Sec. 4-7. - Horses and cattle permitted within corporate limits under certain conditions. 
Persons may keep and house horses and cattle within the corporate limits of the city, provided such animals are not permitted to run at large, and provided they, and the grounds upon which they are kept, are maintained in quiet and clean order so as not to become offensive to neighbors and the general public. 
(Code 1959, § 5-5.1; Code 1981, § 4-4006) 
Sec. 4-8. - Fowl running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow fowl of any kind to run at large in the city. 
(Code 1959, § 5-7; Code 1981, § 4-4008) 
Sec. 4-9. - Bird sanctuary; area designated. 
The entire area within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1959, § 5-8; Code 1981, § 4-4009) 
Sec. 4-10. - Birds or wildfowl; shooting, trapping, hunting, molesting or robbing nests of same prohibited; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to trap without a federal permit, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wildfowl or to rob bird nests or wildfowl nests within the city. Provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular location that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property, and if no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then these birds may be destroyed under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1959, § 5-9; Code 1981, § 4-4010) 
Sec. 4-11. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon information made known to the chief of police or his authorized representative that any owner of any dog or other animal is in violation of this chapter, he shall cause a summons to be issued requiring the owner of such dog or other animal to appear before the judge of the municipal court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for violation of this chapter. If a violation of this chapter has been personally witnessed by the chief of police or his authorized representative, a subpoena shall be issued to the person making the complaint to appear on the day and time set for trial, then and there to testify on behalf of the city. 
(b)  To the extent practicable, an animal running at large unattended and whose owner is known shall be taken to the owner's residence, unless no adult person shall be present, in which event it shall be taken to the animal control center. In either event, a redemption fee shall be paid by the owner. 
(c)  If the owner of any dog or other animal is not known and such dog or other animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, schoolgrounds, or other public places or premises or upon the property of another without that property owner's permission as prohibited by this chapter, upon complaint made to, or information made known to the animal control department, it shall be the duty of the animal control superintendent or his authorized representative to take possession of the dog or other animal and impound it in the animal control center. Such impoundments shall be regulated as set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 82-2-1, § 2, 2-15-82; Code 1981, § 4-4030) 
Sec. 4-12. - Penalty; second offense. 
(a)  Any person violating the terms of this chapter, or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, may be punished as provided in section 1-9. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a second offense for violating the terms of this chapter, or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto, may be, in addition to the penalty provided in subsection (a) of this section, deprived of the right to keep an animal within the corporate limits of the city for a period of up to two years after such violation. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-2, § 1, 4-4-83; Code 1981, § 4-4043; Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § III, 11-3-08) 
Secs. 4-13—4-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; destroying or injuring police dog, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-107; state assistance for control or elimination of wild or abandoned dogs, O.C.G.A. § 27-1-7; hunting with dogs, O.C.G.A. § 27-3-16; dogs endangering deer, O.C.G.A. § 27-3-49; guide dogs for the handicapped, O.C.G.A. § 30-4-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4-46. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city. This article sets forth necessary controls on the unrestrained activities of vicious animals which threaten the safety and pleasantness of streets, parks, sidewalks, yards, and all areas of the city. The lack of knowledge or intent is not a defense in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 85-11-3, § 1, 11-4-85; Code 1981, § 4-4022) 
Sec. 4-47. - Contract. 
The city may contract with the county for animal control. 
Sec. 4-48. - Public nuisance. 
Any animal which: 
(1)  Is found at large in violation of section 4-49, 4-50, or 4-51; 
(2)  Is a vicious animal and while on the property of its owner is not kept enclosed by a fence at least five feet in height, the sides of which are embedded into the ground no less than one foot, and the gate of which is secured by a child proof lock, and restrained by a leash or chain to prevent it from wandering out of the confined area; or while off the real property of its owner, is not muzzled and kept secured by a leash or chain held by a competent person; 
(3)  Produces, because of quantity, manner or method in which the animals are domesticated or maintained, unsanitary conditions in the city; 
(4)  Attacks passersby or passing vehicles; 
(5)  Makes or causes frequent or long continued noise which disturbs the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity; or 
(6)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare or safety according to rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health; 
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and any person who knowingly keeps, owns, harbors or acts as custodian of an animal constituting a nuisance shall be guilty of an unlawful act and shall be punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 85-11-5, § 1, 11-4-85; Code 1981, § 4-4024) 
Sec. 4-49. - Running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, or any person having an animal in his custody, to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the streets and highways of the city, or on the property of another person without permission of the owner of that property or of the person in possession of that property. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4025) 
Sec. 4-50. - Duty to keep animal under restraint while on property. 
It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or any person having any animal in his possession or custody, to ensure that the animal is enclosed by a fence or other enclosure or is restrained by a chain or leash or in some other physical manner or under control by a competent person so that it cannot wander off of the real property limits of its owner, possessor or custodian except as provided in this article, it being the intent of this article that all animals be prevented from leaving while unattended the real property limits of their owners, possessors or custodians thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4026) 
Sec. 4-51. - Duty to keep animal under restraint while off property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal or any person having an animal in his possession to keep that animal under control at all times while the animal is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor, or custodian. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Under control means confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion, secured by a leash or other device held by a competent person, or properly confined within an enclosure with the permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4027) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-52. - Rabies control; inoculation; tag. 
(a)  (1)  All cats and dogs owned, possessed, harbored or residing within the corporate limits of the city shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, using only those vaccines prescribed and/or approved by the state department of human resources. 
(2)  All cats and dogs shall be vaccinated against rabies once reaching three months of age. All cats and dogs shall be revaccinated within 12, 24, or 36 months as specified by the type of vaccine used. Any cat or dog found not to be vaccinated once reaching three months of age must have the consent of a licensed veterinarian stating the reason why such cat or dog should not be vaccinated. 
(3)  Any person keeping, owning, harboring, or having any other type of animal, excluding cats and dogs, is not required to have the animal vaccinated against rabies unless required by the laws of this state, but such failure to have such animal vaccinated is at the risk of such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor or allow to be kept or harbored any cat or dog without a collar having a valid vaccination tag attached thereto as required by rabies control rules and regulations of the laws of this state. 
(c)  The identification and collar prescribed in subsection (b) of this section shall be worn at all times by any cat or dog except when the cat or dog is participating in a pet show or exhibit. However, any cat or dog being shipped or transported through the city or any cat or dog entering the city only for the purpose of a temporary stay not exceeding 14 days shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, but shall be subject to all other rules and regulations of the Floyd County board of health. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination or owner's license tag to the collar of any animal for which such tag was not issued, or to remove such tag from any animal without the consent of such animal's owner, possessor or custodian. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4028; Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § IV, 11-3-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § IV, adopted Nov. 3, 2008, amended § 4-52 title to read as herein set out. Former § 4-52 title pertained to vaccinations for rabies; dogs. 
Sec. 4-53. - Animal control center; appointment of animal control superintendent and officers. 
(a)  The city manager shall designate an area to be known as the city animal control center. 
(b)  The city manager shall appoint a person to be known as the animal control superintendent to supervise such other persons as are necessary to operate the animal control center. 
(c)  The animal control superintendent shall be charged with responsibilities including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Cooperating with the rabies control officer and the county board of health and assisting in the enforcement of the laws of the state with regard to dogs, and especially with regard to the vaccination of said dogs against rabies and the confinement or leashing of vicious dogs. 
(2)  Investigating all complaints made regarding animals. 
(3)  Issuing warning citations to ordinance offenders. 
(4)  Enforcing, only through duly authorized personnel, all state laws and ordinances enacted by the city for the care, control and custody of animals. 
(5)  Exacting, collecting, reporting and remitting fees and costs. 
(6)  Supervising and being in charge of the city animal control center. 
(Ord. No. 82-2-1, § 3, 2-15-82; Code 1981, § 4-4032) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 4-54. - Impounding dogs and cats—Redemption and destruction. 
Any dog or other animal within the city without an owner, or any dog or other animal running at large at any time, or any dog or other animal within the city whose owner fails to have the dog or other animal vaccinated by a rabies inspector or a licensed veterinarian, in accordance with the laws of the state, shall be impounded or confined in the animal control center for a period of 72 hours for redemption by the owner, if any. Any dog or other animal not redeemed in accordance with this section may be released to the humane society. Any dog or other animal not redeemed in accordance with this section or not accepted by the humane society in accordance with this section shall be destroyed in a humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 82-2-1, § 5, 2-15-82; Code 1981, § 4-4033) 
Sec. 4-55. - Same—Redemption procedures; disposition of funds. 
(a)  Not later than two days after any dog or other animal has been taken to the animal control center, notice thereof shall be given to its owner or, if the owner is unknown, then notice thereof shall be posted for three days or until the animal is disposed of, on a bulletin board at the animal control center, with a description of the animal and the time and place of taking the animal, together with the time and date of posting the notice. The time for the redemption of the animal, as provided in this article, shall not begin to run until such notice has been given or posted. 
(b)  In order for an owner to redeem an animal, the owner must have the animal fully vaccinated for rabies by an authorized rabies inspector or licensed veterinarian, if it has not been so vaccinated within one year from the redemption date and shall pay a penalty in an amount provided by contract, plus a cost to the animal control department for taking and caring for the animal, as provided by contract. 
(Ord. No. 82-2-1, § 6, 2-15-82; Code 1981, § 4-4034) 
Sec. 4-56. - Guard dogs. 
It shall be the duty of each owner, tenant or custodian of property upon or within which a guard dog is located to conspicuously and prominently post the following notice on the outside of the property: 
"WARNING 
GUARD DOG" 
in either red or black letters upon a white background, large enough to be easily read at a distance of 25 feet. In the case of a building, the notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about every entrance and every exit. In the case of a general enclosure in which a guard dog is located, the notices shall be conspicuously posted upon the enclosure at a distance not greater than 50 feet apart as well as upon every entrance and every exit through the enclosure. In the case of apartments, condominiums or businesses located within a larger building where the guard dog is located within the apartment, condominium or building solely, the notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about every entrance and every exit. Failure to comply with this section shall be punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4035) 
Sec. 4-57. - Animals suspected of being rabid—Generally; diseased animals. 
Any animal impounded which appears to be suffering from rabies, or if affected with rabies, shall not be redeemed but shall be kept for ten days under observation; and thereafter if the animal control officer determines that the animal is affected with the disease, the animal shall be destroyed in a humane manner. Otherwise, it shall be subject to redemption as provided in this article. Any animal which is suffering from any infectious, contagious or dangerous disease may be redeemed by the owner in order to provide proper treatment for the animal. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4036; Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § V, 11-3-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § V, adopted Nov. 3, 2008, amended § 4-57 title to read as herein set out. Former § 4-57 title pertained to dogs suspected of being rabid—generally; diseased dogs. 
Sec. 4-58. - Same—Duty of owner or custodian; procedure in suspected cases. 
(a)  Any animal that shows symptoms of rabies, or which has bitten any person, shall be penned up immediately by its owner or immediate custodian, and the animal control center shall be notified immediately. The animal shall be confined in a place approved by the animal control superintendent, and under conditions approved by him for not less than ten days, and the animal shall be subject to observation by a person designated by the superintendent at all times during this period. 
(b)  If rabies does not develop within this period, then the animal shall be released to his owner; but, if rabies does develop, the animal shall be destroyed in a humane manner. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4037; Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § VI, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 4-59. - Teasing; molesting; poisoning. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tease, molest, bait, poison or in any way bother any animal not belonging to him or legally under his control. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4038) 
Sec. 4-60. - Injuring companion animals; notice required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person injuring a companion animal by running over or into the animal, or coming into contact with it with an automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle, to fail to notify immediately the owner of the animal, the animal control center or the police department. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4039) 
Sec. 4-61. - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon any animal within the city. Each person who knowingly abandons an animal, or willingly permits such abandonment, or aids in the abandonment of any animal, shall be in violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4040) 
Sec. 4-62. - Wild animals—Permit. 
No person shall have, keep or maintain any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal or reptile without first applying to and receiving from the police department a permit to do so. The charge for this permit shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4041) 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 17. 
Sec. 4-63. - Same—Authority of police department. 
The police department is hereby vested with the authority to issue permits to any person for the keeping or maintaining of any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal or reptile when, in the opinion of the chief of police, any such animal or reptile may be kept or maintained without menacing the safety of any person or property. Provided, however, that the police department may require any such animal or reptile to be properly caged or secured or may make additional rules or regulations regarding the keeping or maintaining of any such animal or reptile, and may revoke any permit for any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any of the rules and regulations of the police department, or when, in the opinion of the chief of police, the safety of any person or property is menaced by the keeping of any such animal or reptile. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4042) 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 4-64. - Investigations by animal control officers; notice of classification as a dangerous dog. 
Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the city limits, the animal control officer shall conduct an investigation in order to carry out the provisions of this article. If the dog is classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner pursuant to the provisions of subsection 4-65(b) of this Code. Such notice shall be complete upon its mailing. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § VII, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 4-65. - Procedures for classification as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; notice; hearing. 
(a)  Applicability for enforcement purposes. As applied to the owners of potentially dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section must be carried out as a necessary condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this article against such owners. As applied to the owners of dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section shall not be an essential element of any crime provided for in this article or in the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
(b)  Notice of classification required. When a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is classified as such, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner of such classification. 
(c)  Contents of notice of classification. The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and delivered in person by an animal control officer or mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within ten days after the date shown on the notice, has the right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the animal control board; 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous will become effective for all purposes under this article on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the animal control board and will advise the owner that failure to appear at the requested hearing will be deemed a withdrawal of the appeal and consent to the classification. 
(d)  Hearing. When the animal control board receives a timely request for a hearing as provided for in subsection (c) of this section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving such request. Animal control shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the owner of the dog at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and, in addition thereto, the board shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(e)  Notice of determination by animal control board. Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § VII, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 4-66. - Restrictions on permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs to be outside a proper enclosure. 
It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or substantial leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § VII, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 4-67. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. 
(a)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal control officer if the: 
(1)  Owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond as required by subsection 4-68(c); 
(2)  Dog is not validly registered as required by subsection 4-68(a); 
(3)  Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(4)  Dog is outside a proper enclosure and in violation of section 4-66. 
(b)  A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: 
(1)  Not validly registered as required by subsection 4-68(a); 
(2)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(3)  Outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 4-66. 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this section and upon payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within ten days of the date the dog was confiscated, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner in accordance with section 4-54. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § VII, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 4-68. - Requirements for possession of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(a)  Certificate required. It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued by the county in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Conditions for issuance of certificate. Subject to the additional requirements of subsection (c) for dangerous dogs, the animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the director sufficient evidence of the following: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; and 
(2)  The posting at the premises with a clearly visible dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog sign warning that there is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on the property. 
(c)  Dangerous dogs. In addition to the requirements of subsection (b), the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the animal control director evidence of either insurance or a surety bond: 
(1)  Insurance. A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of a dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog, and: 
a.  It shall be the continuing and sole duty of the owner to provide the director of animal control proof of an updated and effective policy; 
b.  The owner shall notify the director of animal control of any changes, renewals, and/or cancellations by certified written notice at least 30 days prior to any change, renewal and/or cancellation; 
c.  The county shall have the right to rely on the representations of the owner that he will maintain the required insurance when he qualifies for the insurance of the certificate of registration. 
(2)  Surety bond. A surety bond in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person injured by the dog. 
(3)  Fees. An annual fee paid to the animal control director or his designee as listed in the fee schedule book, maintained by the Floyd County Clerk. 
(d)  Right to inspect. The animal control director or his designee shall have the right to inspect randomly and without notice a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog which is required to be confined pursuant to this section. Permission of the owner or person in custody of the animal confined shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-1, § VII, 11-3-08) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Regulation of buildings, § 2-10. 
Cross reference— City divisions and departments, § 2-2; general liquor regulations, § 3-137; pouring outlets generally, § 3-277; finance and taxation, ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; powers of chief of fire department, § 9-36; amendments to Life Safety Code, § 9-73; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; flood hazard reduction, § 10-15; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 11; transfer of business license, § 11-16; procedure for issuance of business license, § 11-19; sidewalk cafes, § 11-60; signs and outdoor advertising, § 11-116 et seq.; conditions constituting nuisances, § 14-51; nuisances generally, § 14-51 et seq.; city auditorium, § 15-111 et seq.; planning and development, ch. 16; application of building and fire safety codes to existing buildings, § 16-86 et seq.; stormwater management plan required, § 16-204; performance bond required for stormwater management plan, § 16-251; enforcement of solid waste chapter, § 19-2; cleanliness of construction sites and demolition sites, § 19-61; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; house numbering, § 20-12; development plans for subdivisions, § 21-57; utilities, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 23; procedures for approval of private subdivision developments, § 23-104; mobile home park permit, § 23-136; inspections of mobile home parks, § 23-138; affirmation of existing building and zoning codes, § 23-182; building permit requirements under zoning chapter, § 23-212 et seq.; decisions of board of zoning appeals, § 23-255. 
State Constitution reference— Power of city to provide technical codes, Art. IX, § II, par. III. 
State Law reference— Buildings and housing, O.C.G.A. tit. 8; adoption and administration of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. tit. 25; bonds for public contractors, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-100 et seq.; unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors and low-voltage contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; nonresident contractors, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Building permit fees shall be prescribed in the fee schedule book of the City of Rome as provided in section 8-36. 
(b)  No permit as required under this chapter shall be issued until the fee prescribed shall have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure shall have been paid. 
(c)  Where work for which a permit is required by this article is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining the permit, the fees specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this article in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(d)  Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To design, construct, erect, build, alter any building; 
(2)  To install wiring, electrical apparatus or fixtures used in connection with electricity; 
(3)  To install, extend, alter or work with consumer gas piping or certain gas appliances; 
(4)  To install or repair plumbing or plumbing appliances; or 
(5)  To install or maintain mechanical equipment used in conjunction with structures and buildings, unless such person complies with the regulations and restrictions in this chapter. Any person or entity violating this chapter may be punished as provided in section 1-9. Each day any such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1959, § 9-111; Code 1981, § 8-2261; Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, 4-2-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, amended § 5-1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5-1, pertained to Standard Excavation and Grading Code adopted; incorporated by reference. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 5-2. - One- and two-family dwelling code. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard codes known as the International Residential Code, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended in this article. Chapter 1 and appendix G of such code are also hereby adopted. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. The provisions of this section shall be controlling in construction of one- and two-family dwelling buildings within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 81-8-1, § 1, 8-17-81; Ord. No. 85-10-8, § 1, 10-21-85; Code 1981, § 8-2301; Ord. No. 96-4-3-, § VII, 4-15-96; Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, 4-2-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, amended § 5-2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5-2, pertained to One-and Two-Family Dwelling Code adopted; incorporated by reference. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 5-3. - Energy code. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard codes known as the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended in this article. Chapter 1 of such code is also hereby adopted. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. 
(Ord. No. 79-13, 8-20-79; Code 1981, § 8-2281; Ord. No. 96-4-3, § VIIII, 4-15-96; Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, 4-2-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, amended § 5-3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5-3, pertained to Georgia State Energy Code adopted; incorporated by reference. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 5-4. - Moving structures on public streets. 
(a)  No person shall use the streets within the corporate limits of the city to move, transport or relocate any house, dwelling, building or other structure of a width of more than 12 feet at its widest point, or a length of more than 60 feet at its longest point, or a height of more than 14 feet at its highest point without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector, or his designated agent. 
(b)  No structure shall be moved upon any street within the city limits during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m., 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m., and 3:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. No movement shall be made between sunset and sunrise unless special permission is granted by the city commission. Movement times may also be changed by the issuer of the permit when special situations exist. 
(c)  The application for the permit shall designate: 
(1)  The type of load to be moved. 
(2)  The exact route and streets to be used. 
(3)  The time of day or night that the moving shall take place. 
(4)  The fact that any and all public utilities whose facilities may be affected have been notified. 
(5)  Such other matters as the issuer deems proper. The terms of the permit shall be strictly adhered to by the mover; no deviation therefrom shall be permitted without the express written permission of the issuer. 
(d)  An application for a permit must be made at least 48 hours prior to the proposed moving, at which time the issuer shall notify the chief of police, who shall furnish, at the time of moving, such necessary police escort to the mover as the chief of police deems necessary to ensure the safety of the public. 
(e)  The fee for such permit shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. In addition thereto, the mover shall deposit with the issuer, for moving each such structure to a location either within or without the city, as a bond for damages to public property, a sum as set forth in such fee schedule. Such sum shall be returned to the mover within 15 days after such moving if no damage is done to public property. In case of such damage, the amount of the refund will be the total deposit less the actual damages, including repair, replacement and labor. If damage costs exceed the deposit, the mover shall be liable to the city for the additional costs. 
(f)  When any part of the movement is on a state route, the provisions of this section are in addition to those required by the state for its permit. No city permit shall be issued in such cases unless the mover has first obtained a state permit for such movement. 
(g)  In no event shall permission be granted to remove into or within the city any building which any government or governmental agency has found unfit for human habitation or use or which has been constructed of defective materials, or which has become defective from age, fire, abuse or other cause. When any doubt exists, the building inspector shall make a complete inspection for such faults. 
(h)  When movement is on streets with overhead signals, cables, wires or other devices, the mover shall take such precautions as are necessary to guide and handle the wires and/or devices and to prevent damage thereto. 
(i)  The issuer of the permit shall contact the fire chief as soon as the permit is issued. Changes in the predetermined route may be made at the discretion of the fire chief. 
(j)  All extreme points on the structure being moved shall be visibly marked with flags or lights or both. If movement at night is permitted, lights shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 81-12-3, § 3, 12-7-81; Code 1981, § 8-2017) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20. 
Secs. 5-5—5-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONTRACTORS 

Secs. 5-36—5-74. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, struck in their entirety Art. II, §§ 5-36—5-39, which pertained to definitions, certificate of registration required for business license, procedure for applying for certificate of registration, state licenses, etc., honored. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Projecting signs, § 11-130. 

Sec. 5-75. - Building code. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard code known as the International Building Code, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended in this article. Chapter 1 and Appendix B Board of Appeals of such code are also hereby adopted. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. The provisions of this section shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1; Code 1981, § 8-2001; Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, 4-2-07; Ord. No. 2014-2-1, § I, 2-10-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, amended Art. III, § 5-75 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, § 5-75, pertained to short title. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 5-76. - Amendments to building code. 
The following shall be considered amendments, additions to, changes in or exceptions to the building code adopted in section 5-75. 
(1)  Section B101.2.2 shall be deleted and replaced to read as follows: 
a.  B101.2.2 Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members and one (1) alternate who are qualified by experience and training to review matters pertaining to building construction. 
(Code 1959, § 2; Ord. No. 78-19, § 1, 6-19-78; Ord. No. 79-6, § 1, 7-16-79; Ord. No. 81-11-1, § 1, 11-16-81; Ord. No. 81-12-1, § 1, 12-7-81; Ord. No. 82-8-6, § 1, 8-2-82; Ord. No. 85-10-2, § 1, 10-21-85; Ord. No. 89-4-2, § I, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 92-1-1B, § I, 1-6-92; Code 1981, § 8-2002; Ord. No. 96-4-3, § I, 4-15-96; Ord. No. 02-3-4, § I, 3-18-02; Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, 4-2-07; Ord. No. 2014-2-1, § II, 2-10-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, amended Art. III, § 5-76 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, § 5-76, pertained to Standard Building Code adopted as amended by the state; incorporated by reference; local amendments. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; installation standards for building sewers and connections, § 22-156. 
Sec. 5-77. - Building permits required; fees. 
(a)  Building permit fees shall be as prescribed in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(b)  No permit as required by the building code shall be issued until the fee prescribed shall have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure shall have been paid. 
(c)  Where work for which a permit is required by this article is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining the permit, the fees specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this article in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(Code 1981, § 8-2018) 
Sec. 5-78. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, struck in its entirety Art. III, § 5-78 to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, § 5-78, pertained to additional building requirements. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 5-79. - Building official; appointment; compensation. 
The city manager, with the approval of the city commission, shall appoint the building official, who shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by the city commission. 
(Code 1959, § 9-5; Code 1981, § 8-2021; Ord. No. 2014-2-1, § III, 2-10-14) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Secs. 5-80—5-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, struck in its entirety Art. III, §§ 5-80, 5-81 to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 5-80, 5-81, pertained to fire limits described, Standard Existing Buildings Code adopted; incorporated by reference. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICITY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; duty of electricians at fire or other emergency, § 9-44; general sign regulations, § 11-118. 
State Law reference— Electrical contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-111. - Electrical code. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard codes known as the National Electrical Code, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended in this article. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, 4-2-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, amended Art. IV, § 5-111 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, 5-111, pertained to definitions. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 5-112—5-263. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § I, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, struck in its entirety, Art. IV, Div. 1, §§ 5-112—5-119 to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, Div. 1, §§ 5-112—5-119, generally. Also struck in its entirety Art. IV, Div. 2, §§ 5-151—5-181, pertaining to inspections; minimum requirements, Art. IV, Div. 3, §§ 5-211—5-218, pertaining to licensing; examinations; state license required, Art. IV, Div. 4, §§ 5-251—5-263, pertaining to local electrical code. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 5-264—5-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GAS 

Sec. 5-291. - Gas code. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard codes known as the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended in this article. Chapter 1 of such code is also hereby adopted. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, 4-2-07; Ord. No. 2014-2-1, § IV, 2-10-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, amended in its entirety, Art. V, § 5-291 to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, § 5-291, pertained to short title. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 5-292—5-330. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § I, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, struck in its entirety, Art. V, §§ 5-292—5-304, which pertained to Standard Gas Code adopted; incorporated by reference, inspector—appointment; assistants, same—powers and duties, license, permits, use of existing pipes and appliances, inspection required, certificate of approval; issuance, fees for inspections, city not liable for injuries from gas defects, penalty for violations, installation and maintenance regulations, water heaters. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLUMBING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-331. - Plumbing code. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard code known as the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended in this article. Chapter 1 of such code is also hereby adopted. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, 4-2-07; Ord. No. 2014-2-1, § V, 2-10-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, amended in its entirety, Art. VI, § 5-331 to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, § 5-331, pertained to short title. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 5-332—5-400. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § I, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, struck in its entirety, Art. V, Div. 1, §§ 5-5-332—5-375, pertaining to generally and Art. V, Div. 2, §§ 5-376—5-381, pertaining to water conservation. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
ARTICLE VII. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 5-401. - Mechanical code. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard code known as the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended in this article. Chapter 1 of such code is also hereby adopted. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, 4-2-07; Ord. No. 2014-2-1, § VI, 2-10-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, amended Art. VII, § 5-401 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, § 5-401, pertained to Standard Mechanical Code adopted; incorporated by reference. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 5-402—5-430. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § I, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, struck in its entirety Art. VII, § 5-402, which pertained to furnaces. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 5-431. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for and maintain the health and cleanliness of the city and to insure safe and sanitary conditions in the buildings, structures and premises in the city by establishing minimum housing standards and providing for the abatement of nuisances within the jurisdiction of the city. The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be necessary for reasons of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1959, § 15A-1; Code 1981, § 8-2271) 
Sec. 5-432. - Property maintenance. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard codes known as the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended in this article. Sections 101 through 102.2 and 103 through 105 of chapter 1 of such code are also hereby adopted. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. The provisions of this section shall be controlling with regard to all existing buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, 4-2-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, amended Art. VII, § 5-432 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, § 5-432, pertained to Standard Housing Code adopted; incorporated by reference. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 5-433—5-460. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § I, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, struck in its entirety Art. VII, § 5-403, which pertained to admendments. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
ARTICLE IX. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-7-2, § I, adopted July 19, 2004, amended Art. IX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

Sec. 5-461. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The City Commission of the City of Rome, Georgia finds and declares that within the city limits of the City of Rome there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, as well as optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the City of Rome or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the City of Rome and the State of Georgia; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the City of Rome where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders such real estate and adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of 
the people of the City of Rome and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe-human habitation. The Rome City Commission finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this ordinance shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 (a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the City of Rome, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 04-7-2, § I, 7-19-04) 
Sec. 5-462. - Declaration of unsafe buildings and systems as illegal; application to private property; continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
(a)  All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings, structures or service systems. 
All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All the provisions of this chapter including method and procedure, may also be applied to private property where an owner or occupant of the property allows the property to become unsafe, to create a public health hazard or general nuisance or to endanger the health, safety and welfare of those persons working or residing in the vicinity of the property because of the accumulation of weeds, brush, vegetation, trash, junk, debris, filth and other unsafe or unsanitary conditions. 
A finding by a public officer that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this article. 
(c)  It is the intent of the Rome City Commission that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this ordinance shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 04-7-2, § I, 7-19-04) 
Sec. 5-463. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle means a vehicle, including cars, trucks, trailers, boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, [manufactured] homes, or any other similar vehicle, that meets one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Has been left unattended upon a highway, street, or alley or other public property outside a designated parking space for a period of 48 hours; 
(2)  Is within public view and is inoperable, partially or wholly dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded, or of similar condition, or any vehicle without a current license plate if required by law, and is located outside of an enclosed building, garage, carport, wrecked motor vehicle compound, or other place of business designated and lawfully used for the storage of such inoperable vehicles, for a period exceeding 30 days; or 
(3)  Has no tag correctly displayed on the vehicle or the owner cannot provide to the city police officer proof of insurance. 
Applicable codes means (a) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (b) any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and (c) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 of Title 8 after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Chronic nuisance property means a property on which three or more nuisance activities as described in section 5-465(c) exist or have occurred during any 60-day period or seven or more nuisance activities have occurred during any 12-month period. 
City means the City of Rome, Georgia. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term 'dwellings, buildings, or structures' shall not be mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the City Commission of the City of Rome. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with Code Section 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. "Interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgage of record. 
Private nuisance means one limited in its injurious effects to one or a few individuals. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, city, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings; or structures in the city or municipality. 
Public nuisance means one, which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, § 41-2-8, and §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this ordinance adopted under § 41-2-7, § 41-2-8, and §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this ordinance or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 04-7-2, § I, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 2018-8-2, § I, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 5-464. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. It shall be unlawful for such owner to allow a dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to become unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city or otherwise become a nuisance as set forth under this Code or the laws of this State. 
(b)  It is the further duty of the every owner and occupant of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to maintain safe and sanitary premises and not to create, maintain or allow the accumulation of weeds, brush, vegetation, trash, junk, debris, filth and other unsafe or unsanitary conditions on or in said dwelling, building, structure, or property. It shall be unlawful for such owner or occupant to create, maintain or allow such unsafe or unsanitary conditions on said dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(c)  The City Commission of the City of Rome, Georgia hereby appoints and designates the city code enforcement officer, city fire marshal, city police chief, and the Chief Building Inspector of the Rome/Floyd County Building Inspection Department and their respective designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this ordinance. 
(d)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the City of Rome, Georgia charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance, with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. 
The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the Municipal Court of the City of Rome, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less that 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
The Municipal Court of the City of Rome shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all such complaints. 
(e)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order which: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation the present value of the dwelling, building or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair alter, or improve a structure may be considered. The income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 41, of the O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(f)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. Such abatement action by the city shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the court order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to Code Section 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(g)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(h)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in any court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(i)  In addition to any other power or authority granted in this ordinance to the court, the court shall have full jurisdiction and authority to punish persons found to have created, allowed or maintained a nuisance or other dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary condition and who have refused to abate the same, as provided for in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(j)  Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to summarily and without notice order the abatement of or abate any nuisance or dangerous condition where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. No. 04-7-2, § I, 7-19-04) 
Sec. 5-465. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinance dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures whose interior or exterior bearing walls, or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such extent as to weaken the structural support of such member or members below the minimum required by the building codes of the city; 
(2)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures, which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose for which it is used, or intended to be used; 
(3)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures, which have visible soil erosion adjacent to or under any structural support; 
(4)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures, which have parts that are so attached or detached that they are likely to fall and injure persons or property; 
(5)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures, which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; 
(6)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures having inadequate facilities for egress in the event of a catastrophe, such as windstorm, fire, earthquake or panic because of inadequate stairways, elevators, escalators or fire escapes, such that such defect is likely to cause injury to persons or property in the event of such a catastrophe; 
(7)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and welfare of the occupants thereof or the people of the city; 
(8)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures which have become so dilapidated, decayed, damaged, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living, including without limitation, effective and adequate ventilation, plumbing, sanitation facilities, running water, light or other facilities such that such conditions render the dwellings, buildings, or structure dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or welfare of either those living therein, those who may live therein, or the people of the city; 
(9)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures where an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions shall create a public health hazard or general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity; 
(10)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures which exist in violation of any ordinances of the city such that said building, dwelling or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial business or industrial use due to conditions existing in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such building, dwelling or structure, of the occupants of the neighborhood buildings, dwellings or structures, or of other residents of the city; 
(11)  Those buildings, dwellings, or structures that have been used: 
a.  On more than two occasions within a six-month period as the site of the unlawful sale, delivery, manufacture, or cultivation of any controlled substance; 
b.  On one occasion as the site of the unlawful possession of a controlled substance, where such possession constitutes a felony and that has been previously used on more than one occasion as the site of the unlawful sale, delivery, manufacture, or cultivation of any controlled substance; 
c.  By a criminal gang for the purpose of conducting a pattern of criminal gang activity; 
d.  On more than two occasions within a six-month period, as the site of a violation relating to dealing in stolen property; 
e.  On more than two occasions within a six-month period, as the site of a violation relating to prostitution; 
(12)  Those conditions constituting nuisances set forth in section 14-51 of this Code; 
(13)  Any building, structure, or other place or location where any activity is conducted, performed, or maintained in violation of local, state, or federal law (which can be a safety hazard); 
(14)  Abandoned vehicles. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain more than two abandoned vehicles as defined by this ordinance, and any abandoned vehicle is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated as provided in this ordinance. Any junked automobile, truck, vehicles or trailer of any kind or type shall not be parked or stand on any private property or public roads and is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight deterioration, and invite plundering and vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute a nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety to Rome's existing Unsafe Building Ordinance; or 
(15)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant or dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of a nuisance activity based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of a nuisance activity being committed. 
(1)  A nuisance activity includes: 
a.  A most serious offense. 
b.  A drug related activity. 
c.  Any of the following activities, behaviors, or criminal conduct: 
1.  Assault, fighting, menacing, stalking, harassment or reckless endangerment. 
2.  Promoting, advancing, or profiting from prostitution. 
3.  Prostitution. 
4.  Permitting prostitution. 
5.  Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
6.  Failure to disperse. 
7.  Weapons violations. 
8.  Drug traffic loitering. 
9.  Gang related activity. 
(Ord. No. 04-7-2, § I, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 2018-8-3, § I, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 5-466. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this ordinance shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To investigate property in the City of Rome in order to determine which properties therein contain accumulations of weeds, trash, junk, filth or unsafe or unsanitary conditions; 
(3)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(4)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(5)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the article; and 
(6)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. No. 04-7-2, § I, 7-19-04) 
Sec. 5-467. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 04-7-2, § I, 7-19-04) 
Sec. 5-468. - Notice of lis pendens; costs; creation of lien; appeals. 
(a)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Floyd County at the time of filing the complaint in the City of Rome Municipal Court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(b)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(c)  The lien provided for in this code section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Floyd County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (c) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The Clerk of Superior Court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Floyd County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(d)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this Code section shall transmit to the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48; provided, however, that the limitation of Code Section 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with Code Section 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to the City of Rome, Georgia. 
(e)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this Code section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this Code section. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to Code Section 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. 
(f)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this Code section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this Code section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, municipal tax collector, or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of Code Sections 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(g)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(h)  Any person affected by an order requiring the abatement of a nuisance, including the closure, repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure issued by the City of Rome Municipal Court may petition the Superior Court of Floyd County by direct appeal under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. 04-7-2, § I, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 07-2-5, § I, 2-19-07) 
Sec. 5-469. - Emergency closing of unfit dwellings, buildings and other structures. 
In addition to having a dwelling, building, or structure closed pursuant to an order under subsection 5-464(f), a public officer may bring an immediate, emergency action ordering the closing of a dwelling, building, or structure in urgent cases where such property is found to be unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses. Such emergency petition may be brought prior to issuing a complaint for the abatement of a nuisance under this article. 
A petition requesting an emergency closing may be brought under the following conditions: 
(a)  After inspection of a dwelling, building, or structure, a public officer may proceed with filing an emergency petition to close the property upon finding that the dwelling, building, or structure constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of those persons visiting, working or residing within such dwelling, building, or structure, and that imminent harm to the occupants thereof has occurred or is likely to result from the continued use of such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(b)  The public officer shall prepare a petition which shall identify subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and known residents or users of the subject property; identify the exact nature of danger and all applicable codes relevant to such danger. The complaint shall also contain a statement requesting the closure of the dwelling, building, or structure. 
(c)  A hearing shall be scheduled by the municipal court as soon as practicable, given the nature of the danger and the likelihood of injury alleged in the complaint. 
(d)  The owner of the property and any person in possession of said property and premises shall be served personally with a copy of the complaint whenever possible. The public officer, any officer of the City of Rome Police Department, and any person authorized by the State of Georgia as a process server may attempt to make such personal service. Failure to perfect personal service shall not be cause to dismiss the complaint or postpone the hearing. Where personal service is not obtained on all of the above parties, a copy of the complaint shall be posted on the property on the date the complaint is filed. In addition, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, and by first-class mail, to the residents and owner of the property. In the case of single family dwellings, service on one adult (persons 18 years of age and over) resident of the property shall be sufficient to obtain personal service. In the case of multi-family dwellings, service must be attempted for each residential unit. 
(e)  If after such notice and hearing, the municipal court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, is not in compliance with applicable codes, and constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of those persons working or residing within such dwelling, building, or structure, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and residents an order to close such dwelling, building, or structure. The court may place such conditions as are reasonable on the opening of such property, including the repair of the dwelling, building, or structure. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases where the conditions of a dwelling, building, or structure are so dangerous that a delay in closing such dwelling, building, or structure would could cause a substantial likelihood of immediate harm or injury to those persons visiting, working or residing therein, the chief building official or the city manager may issue an order temporarily closing of the property pending a hearing in Municipal Court. In that event, the public officer shall proceed with filing a petition and scheduling a hearing using the provisions set forth under this Code Section. Any hearing held under this paragraph (f) shall be scheduled no later than 72 hours after the temporary closing of the property. 
(g)  All orders by the Municipal Court to close the property and all temporary orders by the chief building official or the city manager to temporarily close a property shall be binding on all persons, and failure to abide by such orders shall be a violation of this Code and is enforceable by the Rome Police Department or any authorized law enforcement agency. The chief building official may, in his discretion, allow persons to temporarily enter onto a closed dwelling, building, or structure for the purpose of removing personal property or to secure the dwelling, building, or structure. 
(Ord. No. 07-2-5, § I, 2-19-07) 
Secs. 5-470—5-495. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SWIMMING POOL CODE 

Sec. 5-496. - Swimming pool code. 
For the purpose of the public health welfare and safety, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby adopted as the swimming pool code of the City of Rome, Georgia. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. The provisions of this section shall be controlling for the purpose of establishing specifications, rules and regulations for the design, construction, alteration and repair of swimming pools within the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, that where the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code conflicts with another provision in chapter 5 of the Rome City Code, such other provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, 4-2-07; Ord. No. 2014-2-1, § VII, 2-10-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § II, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, amended in its entirety Art. X, § 5-496 to read as herein set out. Former Art. X, § 5-496, pertained to Standard Swimming Pool Code adopted; incorporated by reference. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 5-497. - Licenses; compliance with article VI. 
Any person desiring to design, construct, alter or repair a swimming pool shall, in addition to following the provisions of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, comply with the provisions of article VI of this chapter, including the licensing provisions. 
(Ord. No. 79-16, 9-4-79; Code 1981, § 8-2292; Ord. No. 2014-2-1, § VIII, 2-10-14) 
Secs. 5-498—5-525. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-4-1, § III, adopted Apr. 2, 2007, struck in its entirety ch. 5, Art. XI, which pertained to electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors, and utility contractors. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Chapter 6 - CEMETERIES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Regulation of cemeteries, § 2-10. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; city divisions and departments, § 2-2; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 11; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; parks, recreation and cultural affairs, ch. 15; zoning, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-1 et seq.; interment of deceased indigents, O.C.G.A. § 36-12-5; receipt of cemetery or burial lots in trust, annual returns, commissions, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4; municipal corporation as trustee of funds donated to cemetery, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-5; Georgia Cemetery Act of 1983, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq.; authority of coroners, etc., to disinter bodies, O.C.G.A. § 45-16-45. 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cemetery lot or plot means and consists of enough land in which persons may be buried in single grave spaces, as defined in the plat of the cemetery and as described in the deed of the burial rights to the owner thereof. 
Sexton means the city cemetery superintendent. 
(Code 1981, § 5-3002; Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Burials; location restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any dead body except in a public or private cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3001) 
Sec. 6-3. - Cemetery lots or burial space subject to restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations; authority of sexton. 
(a)  All cemetery plots, lots or burial spaces owned and purchased within the public cemeteries of the city, and all such plots, lots or spaces sold, shall be subject to the restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations in this chapter and shall be subject to such other rules, regulations, amendments or alterations and ordinances as shall be adopted and regularly passed by the city from time to time. A reference to such rules and regulations in the deed or certificate of ownership shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth therein. 
(b)  The sexton is authorized to supervise the upkeep, care and operations of city cemeteries. In the absence of the sexton, the assistant sexton assumes the duties of this position. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3003) 
Sec. 6-4. - Purchase price of lots. 
The purchase price of lots in the public cemeteries shall be as set out in the fee schedule book of the city, as provided in section 8-36. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3004) 
Sec. 6-5. - Burial rights in public cemeteries; supervision of sale and conveyances, execution, form and conditions of deed. 
(a)  Sale of burial rights; deed. The city clerk shall generally supervise the sale and conveyance of burial rights purchased in the public cemeteries of the city. The city clerk shall execute to the purchaser of the burial rights a cemetery deed made in substantially the following form: 
"City of Rome, Floyd County, Georgia: 
This indenture, Made this _____ day of ________, in the Year of Our Lord, one thousand nine hundred and ___, between the City of Rome, Floyd County, Georgia, of the first part, and ___________ of the second part. 
Witnesseth: That the party of the first part, for and in consideration of the sum of _____ Dollars, to it in hand paid by the said party of the second part, the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, has granted, bargained, sold and conveyed, and by these presents doth grant, bargain and sell unto said party of the second part, ___________, heirs and assigns, the exclusive rights of interment in and to a certain burial place in ___________ Cemetery, in said city which is known and distinguished in the plan of said cemetery as (description) the number and description of said lot being made with reference to the surveys and plats on file in the sexton's office and by which the parties to this conveyance acknowledge themselves bound; to have and to hold said exclusive privilege to the said party of the second part and ___________ heirs forever, subject to all the requirements of any ordinance of the commissioners of the City of Rome now in force or hereafter ordained, regulating said cemetery, upon this express condition, nevertheless, that no sale or transfer of the rights of burial and interment in said burial lot ___________ shall at any time by party of the second part or by any future owner be valid without the permission and approval of the City of Rome, and an entry of which shall be made on the books of the City of Rome, and upon the payment of the required transfer fee. And provided, that the party of the second part or any future owner of the burial and interment rights in said burial lot ________ shall not at any time or times hereafter demand or receive any compensation for an interment in said burial lot _____ .  And provided also that the rights and premises granted hereby shall be subject to the restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations made and to be made hereafter by said City of Rome for the government of its cemetery, lot holders, visitors to the cemetery and burial of the dead. 
The restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations as they appear in section 6-3 of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia, are hereby specifically included in this deed by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
And the said party of the first part for itself and its successors, the said exclusive privilege, unto the said party of the second part against said party of the first part and its successors, and against all and every person, and persons whomsoever, will warrant and forever defend. 
In testimony whereof, the said party of the first part hath hereunto signed its corporate name and affixed its corporate seal the day and year first above written. 
The City of Rome 
By: _____ City Clerk of the City of Rome 
Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 
_____
_____ Notary Public, Floyd Co., Ga." 
Except, however, in deeding burial rights in section K and part of section D of East View Cemetery, such deed given by the city clerk shall contain the following clause: 
"Monuments or stones of any kind, or enclosures, shall not be permitted on the graves and plots in section K and part of section D of East View Cemetery as hereinafter described. Only individual bronze memorial tablets or markers and bronze family name markers shall be allowed and they must be set level with the ground within the family plot. They must be set subject to approval and inspection of the City of Rome." 
(b)  Conditions, record of transfer. All deeds to burial rights given by the city after April 7, 1982, shall be upon this expressed condition, nevertheless, that no sale or transfer of the rights of burial and interment in such cemeteries at any time by the purchaser thereof or by any future owner shall be valid without the permission and approval of the city, and upon the payment of a transfer fee in an amount as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city, as provided in section 8-36. The record of transfer shall be kept by the city, together with the city's permission of the transfer, upon a book specifically kept for the purpose of recording such transfers. The transfers shall not be valid or binding between the parties thereto or the city until the transfers shall be approved by the city and recorded in such book. The deeds and transfers shall contain also legal descriptions to identify the plot conveyed. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3005) 
Sec. 6-6. - Ownership construed; use and division; reversion to city. 
Ownership of a lot consists only in the right of interment. The lot can be used for no other purpose and cannot be divided into smaller portions than originally laid down in the plot. Should a lot holder die without devise of the lot or any known kindred, title to such lot shall revert to the city, for the protection of those who may be interred therein. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3006) 
Sec. 6-7. - Issuance of deed. 
A deed or certificate of ownership shall be issued to each lot holder on full payment of the purchase money of such lot. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3007) 
Sec. 6-8. - Right of purchaser; taking for debt or selling for secular use. 
When a right has once been purchased within the enclosure of a public cemetery for burial purposes, it becomes for all time the property of the purchaser and his transferees and cannot be taken for debt or sold for secular uses. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3008) 
Sec. 6-9. - Owner's change of address, duty to notify city; sufficient and proper legal notification described. 
It shall be the duty of a plot, lot or burial space owner to notify the city of any change in his post office address. Notice sent to a plot, lot or burial space owner at the last address on file in the office of the city clerk shall be considered a sufficient and proper legal notification. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3009) 
Sec. 6-10. - Certain rights and privileges reserved by city. 
The following rights and privileges are hereby expressly reserved by the city in its conveyance of any cemetery lot, plot or space: At any time and from time to time, the city may: 
(1)  Resurvey, enlarge, diminish, replat, alter in shape or size or otherwise change all or any part, portion or subdivision of the property mapped and platted. 
(2)  File amended maps or plats thereof and use the same for the erection of buildings or for any purposes or uses connected with, incident to, or convenient for the care, preservation or preparation, for the disposal or interment of dead human bodies, or other cemetery purposes, together with easements and rights-of-way over and through such premises for the privilege of, installing, maintaining and operating pipelines, conduits or drains for sprinklers, drainage, electric or communication lines, or for any other like purposes. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3010) 
Sec. 6-11. - Easements or rights of interment in roads, drives, alleys or walks. 
No easement or right of interment is granted by the city to any plot, lot or burial space in any road, drive, alley or walk within a cemetery, but such road, drive, alley or walk may be used as long as the city devotes it to that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3011) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 20. 
Sec. 6-12. - Transfer or assignment; prerequisite to validity. 
No transfer or assignment of any cemetery lot, space or plot or interest therein shall be valid until the consent of the city has been endorsed thereon and the same has been recorded on the books of the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3012) 
Sec. 6-13. - Charge for transfer of ownership. 
The city may fix a charge for all transfers of ownership of lots, spaces and plots. No transfer of ownership shall be complete or effective until all charges are paid. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3013) 
Sec. 6-14. - Subdivision of plots; interment of persons with no interest in plot. 
The subdivision of cemetery plots, lots or spaces is not allowed by any person except the city, and no person not having an interest therein shall be interred in any plot, lot or space except by written consent of all persons interested in such plot, lot or space and the city; provided, however, a relative of any record owner may be buried in such lot, space or plot, as provided in this chapter or by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3014) 
Sec. 6-15. - Family plot inalienable. 
(a)  Reversion to city. Whenever an interment of the remains of a member or of a relative of a member of the family of the record owner, or of the remains of the record owner, is made in a plot transferred by deed or certificate of ownership to an individual owner and the owner dies without making disposition of the plot either in his will by a specific device, or by a written declaration filed and recorded in the office of the city clerk, the plot thereby becomes inalienable and shall be held as the family plot of the owner, with title to the same reverting to the city for protection of those who may be interred therein. 
(b)  Right to burial without consent. In a family plot one grave, niche or crypt may be used for the owner's interment; one for the owner's surviving spouse, if any, who by law has a right of interment in it; and in those remaining, if any, the parents and children of the deceased owner, in order of death, may be interred without the consent of any person claiming any interest in the plot. 
(c)  Order of right of interment. If no parent or child survives, the right of interment goes in the order of death, first, to the spouse of any child of the record owner, and second, in the order of death, to the next heir at law of the owner or the spouse of any heir at law. 
(d)  Interment right waived in favor of other relative. Any surviving spouse, parent, child or heir who has a right of interment in a family plot may waive such right in favor of any other relative, or spouse of a relative, of either deceased owner or of his spouse, and upon such waiver the remains of the person in whose favor the waiver is made may be interred in the plot. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, §§ 5-3015—5-3018) 
Sec. 6-16. - Right of spouse of owner—Described. 
The spouse of any owner of any plot which contains more than one interment space has a vested right of interment of his remains in the plot, lot or space, and any person thereafter becoming the spouse of the owner has a vested right of interment of his remains in the plot if more than one interment space is unoccupied at the time the person becomes the spouse of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3019) 
Sec. 6-17. - Same—Vested right of spouse; joinder prerequisite to divesting. 
No conveyance or other action of the owner without the written consent or joinder of the spouse of the owner divests the spouse of a vested right of interment, except that a final decree of divorce between them terminates the vested right of interment unless otherwise provided in the decree. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3020) 
Sec. 6-18. - Plots having several owners; representation by designated owner. 
When there are several owners of the rights of interment in a plot, lot or space, they may designate one or more persons to represent the plot, lot or space and file written notice of designation with the city clerk. In the absence of such notice or of written objection to its so doing, the city is not liable to any owner for interring or permitting an interment or refusing an interment in the plot, lot or space upon the request or direction of any co-owners of the lot, space or plot. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3021) 
Sec. 6-19. - Waiver of vested right. 
A vested right of interment may be waived and is so waived and terminated upon the interment elsewhere of the remains of the person in whom those rights are vested. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3022) 
Sec. 6-20. - Scope of vested right. 
No vested right of interment gives to any person the right to have his remains interred in any interment space in which the remains of any deceased having a prior vested right of interment have been interred, nor does it give any person the right to have the remains of more than one deceased person interred in a single interment space. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3023) 
Sec. 6-21. - Authorization to open plot. 
The city may inter or open a plot for any purpose on proper written authorization by any plot owner of record made out on forms approved by the city and duly filed in the office of the city clerk unless there are written instructions to the contrary on file in such office. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3024) 
Sec. 6-22. - Owners permitting interments for remuneration. 
Cemetery owners shall not allow any interments to be made in their lots for a remuneration. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3025) 
Sec. 6-23. - Monument restrictions in East View Cemetery, part of section D and section K, and in the memorial section of Myrtle Hill Cemetery. 
Monuments or stones of any kind, or enclosures, shall not be permitted on the graves and plots in these sections of East View Cemetery and Myrtle Hill Cemetery set out below. In those sections, only individual bronze memorial tablets or markers and bronze family name markers shall be allowed, and they must be set level with the ground within the family plot. They must be set subject to the approval and inspection of the city. The sections are as follows: 
(1)  That portion of section D of East View Cemetery bounded by the westerly lines of lots 122, 153, 161, 194, 215 and 228; by the northerly lines of lots 261, 260, 262, 263, 264, 287, 286, 288 and 289; bounded on the northeasterly side of the northeasterly lines of lots 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294 and 295; and bounded on the southeasterly side by the southeasterly lines of lots 295, 277, 276, 275, 244, 245, 243, 203, 202, 156, 155 and 122. 
(2)  All of section K of East View Cemetery. 
(3)  The memorial section of Myrtle Hill Cemetery. 
Flat poured concrete shall not be allowed in any cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3026) 
Sec. 6-24. - Monument contractors and construction. 
(a)  All monument contractors must hold a valid license from the city and an installation permit from the sexton. 
(b)  The permitted working hours are as follows, except as otherwise permitted by the city manager: 

 
No Saturday or Sunday work is permitted. 
(c)  All work must be completed by noon on the last working day before the following specified City of Rome Cemetery Department holidays: 
New Year's Day,  Martin Luther King Jr. Holiday,  Good Friday,  Easter,  Mother's Day,  Memorial Day,  Father's Day,  July 4,  Labor Day,  Armistice Day,  Veterans Day,  Thanksgiving Day,  Christmas Day 
or any holiday observed by the City of Rome. 
(d)  No excavation work can be instituted that cannot be completed by Friday noon or before holidays. Once excavation work begins, the contractor must pursue installation diligently until completed. When any questionable work results, the sexton is empowered to temporarily stop all work until the matter is resolved to the satisfaction of the city. 
(e)  All monuments must be of solid material base and die, marble or granite. Flush markers can be bronze. No other material is permitted. All monuments must have a concrete or cement foundation, not less than four inches thick, of adequate strength and construction. All monuments and markers shall be in accordance with the regulations on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3027; Ord. No. 06-11-7, § I, 11-20-06) 
Sec. 6-25. - Offensive, improper or injurious monuments, removal. 
If any monument or other structure, or any inscription, is placed in or upon any lot or grave, which shall be determined by the sexton to be offensive, improper or injurious to the appearance of the surrounding lots or grounds or the cemetery generally, he shall have the right and it shall be his duty to enter upon such lot and cause the removal of such offensive or improper object or objects. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3028) 
Sec. 6-26. - Raising or depressing surface of lots or graves prohibited. 
The proprietors of cemetery lots are prohibited from raising or depressing the surface of any lot or grave above or below the surrounding ground. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3029) 
Sec. 6-27. - Authority for grading, landscaping, improvements, plantings, interments, disinterments and removals. 
In the cemetery, all grading, landscape work and improvements of any kind and all care on plots shall be done, and all trees and shrubs and herbage of any kind shall be planted, trimmed, cut or removed, and all openings and closing of plots, and all interments, disinterments and removals shall be made only by the authority of the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3030) 
Sec. 6-28. - Improvements or alterations of individual property; direction and approval of city; removal when unsightly. 
All improvements or alterations of individual property in the cemetery shall be under the direction of and subject to the consent, satisfaction and approval of the city; and should they be made without its written consent, the city shall have the right to remove, alter or change such improvements or alterations at the expense of the plot, lot or space owner, or in any event at any time when, in its judgment, they become unsightly to the eye. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3031) 
Sec. 6-29. - Right to remove detrimental trees and shrubs. 
If any tree or shrub, situated in any lot, shall, by means of its roots or branches, become detrimental in any way to the adjoining lot, avenue or walk, it shall be the duty and privilege of the city, and it hereby reserves the right, to enter upon the lot and remove the trees or shrubs, or any part thereof. But no tree growing in any lot or border shall be pruned or removed without the consent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3032) 
Sec. 6-30. - Flowers, trees, shrubs and herbage—Right to prevent removal. 
The city reserves the right to prevent the removal of any flowers, floral designs, trees, shrubs or plants or herbage of any kind from any cemetery. No flowers will be removed from any grave space without the permission of the sexton. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3033) 
Sec. 6-31. - Same—Authority to remove; liability for frames or baskets. 
The city shall have the authority to remove all floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, shrubs, plants or herbage of any kind from the cemetery when, in the judgment of the sexton, they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental or diseased. The city shall not be liable for damage to floral pieces, baskets or frames in which or to which such floral pieces are attached. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3034) 
Sec. 6-32. - Same—Gathering or breaking; feeding or disturbing birds or animals. 
All persons are prohibited from gathering flowers, either wild or cultivated, or breaking trees, shrubbery or plants or feeding or disturbing the birds or other animal life in the cemeteries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3035) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4. 
Sec. 6-33. - Control of floral arrangements; disposal of floral frames. 
(a)  Only one floral arrangement shall be placed on each grave and only at the base of the monument. All flowers shall be placed at the base of the monument. Any flowers which are determined by the sexton to be outside of the appropriate area may be removed by the city. 
(b)  The city recommends that all floral arrangements be placed in clay or plastic containers. Glass, tin, wire and cement containers are prohibited. Any other container must be approved by the sexton. 
(c)  The sexton is authorized to remove funeral flowers after 72 hours unless notified by the family or lot owners. 
(d)  Floral frames, when removed from the plot, unless called for within ten days by those lawfully entitled to them, shall be disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3036) 
Sec. 6-34. - Signs, notices or advertisements prohibited. 
No signs, notices or advertisements of any kind shall be allowed in any cemetery, except by the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3037) 
Sec. 6-35. - Responsibility for damage. 
The city disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage from causes beyond its reasonable control, and especially from damage caused by the elements, an act of God, a common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots or orders of any military or civil authority, whether the damage is direct or collateral. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3038) 
Sec. 6-36. - Interments, disinterments and removals; time, manner and charges for same; opening and closing graves; grave service; embalming. 
(a)  All interments, disinterments and removals must be made at the time and in the manner and subject to the payment of such charges as are fixed by the city. 
(b)  Only city employees will open or close graves. The sexton reserves the right to refuse to open or close a grave at any time he sees fit, with the approval of the city manager. 
(c)  No grave service will be made ready for burial before 12:00 noon for a chapel or church service on Mondays, or before 1:00 p.m., graveside, on any day following a cemetery holiday. It is not physically possible to complete the excavation and provide a proper graveside service before 12:00 noon for a chapel service, or before 1:00 p.m. for a graveside service on Mondays. Therefore, the city will not contract for interments prior to these hours on Mondays. 
(d)  All state and local health laws must be complied with prior to any interment in any city cemetery. 
(e)  All interments must be inside containers of minimum standard as approved by the sexton (minimum standard is pine construction or equal). These containers must be in vaults (12 gauge steel minimum) placed underground (not applicable for section P or the baby section). 
(f)  No interment will be made in any city cemetery before payment of the fees specified in the regulations in the office of the city clerk, unless credit has been extended by the city clerk. 
(g)  No interment will be made in any city cemetery until the owner of the burial plot shall execute an affidavit directing interment of the remains of the deceased in such burial plot. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3039; Ord. No. 06-11-7, § II, 11-20-06) 
Sec. 6-37. - Charges for opening graves, interment and disinterment. 
The charges for opening graves, interment and disinterment in the public cemeteries shall be as set out in the fee schedule book of the city, as provided in section 8-36. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3040) 
Sec. 6-38. - Right to refuse immediate interment after specified hour. 
The city may refuse to make an interment until a more expedient time if the remains arrive at the cemetery entrance after 5:00 p.m. or if too many funerals arrive at the same hour. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3041) 
Sec. 6-39. - Interments or disinterments prohibited on specified City of Rome Cemetery Department holidays. 
There shall be no interments or disinterments on the following days: 
New Year's Day,  Martin Luther King Jr. Holiday (3rd Monday in January),  Good Friday,  Easter,  Mother's Day,  Father's Day,  Memorial Day,  July 4,  Labor Day,  Thanksgiving Day,  Christmas Day, 
or any holiday observed by the City of Rome. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3042; Ord. No. 06-11-7, § III, 11-20-06) 
Sec. 6-40. - Delay of interment, liability and right of city. 
The city shall be in no way liable for any delay in the interment of a body where a protest to the interment has been made, or where this chapter has not been complied with. The city reserves the right, under such circumstances, to place the body in a funeral home or a receiving vault until the full rights have been determined. The city may require any protest to be in writing and to be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3043) 
Sec. 6-41. - Reservation of right to require specified notice before interment. 
The right is reserved by the city to insist upon at least 24 hours' notice before any interment. Interment requests with less than 24 hours' notice may be refused. All requests with less than 12 hours' notice shall be refused. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3044) 
Sec. 6-42. - Liability for interment permit and identify of person sought to be interred or cremated. 
The city shall not be liable in damages for an error in the interment permit nor for a mistake or error in the identity of a person sought to be interred or cremated. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3045) 
Sec. 6-43. - Responsibility for telephone orders or mistakes caused by vague instructions. 
The city shall not be held responsible for any order given by telephone, or for any mistake occurring from the want of precise and proper instructions as to the particular space, size and location in a plot where interment is desired. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3046) 
Sec. 6-44. - Procedure when instructions from plot owner not available. 
When instructions from the plot owner regarding the location of an interment space in a plot cannot be obtained, or are indefinite, or when for any reason the interment space cannot be opened when specified, the city may, in its discretion, open it in such location in the plot as it deems best and proper so as not to delay the funeral; and the city shall not be liable in damages for any error so made. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3047) 
Sec. 6-45. - Error in interment. 
If an error is committed in the interment of the remains of any person, the city reserves the right to remove and reinter the remains in such other property of equal value and similar location as may be substituted and conveyed in lieu of the mistaken property. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3048) 
Sec. 6-46. - Disinterment—Permission prerequisite. 
No disinterment from any lot shall be made except with the express permission of the city clerk first obtained. The city clerk may insist that an order from a proper court of law first be secured by those seeking the disinterment. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3049) 
Sec. 6-47. - Same—Liability of city. 
The city shall exercise due care in making a disinterment and removal, but it shall assume no liability for damage to any casket, burial case, vault or urn, incurred in making the disinterment or removal. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3050) 
Sec. 6-48. - Removal of body for specified reasons repugnant to sense of decency prohibited. 
Removal of a body or cremated remains by the heirs of the deceased so that the plot, lot or space may be sold for profit to themselves, or removal contrary to the expressed or implied wish of the original plot owner, or if repugnant to the ordinary sense of decency, is absolutely forbidden. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3051) 
Sec. 6-49. - Limitation on number of bodies interred in same grave, vault, crypt or niche. 
Not more than one body, nor the remains of more than one body, shall be interred in any one grave, vault, crypt or niche. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3052) 
Sec. 6-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-10-8, § II, adopted Sept. 15, 2007, repealed § 6-50, which pertained to firearms within cemeteries; permit required. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 6-51. - Visitation hours; loitering in cemeteries. 
(a)  City cemeteries shall be open for visitation during the following hours, unless otherwise posted: Between one-half hour after sunup and one-half hour before sundown. 
(b)  Loitering in city cemeteries is prohibited. The presence of any person in any of such cemeteries during prohibited hours shall be prima facie evidence of loitering. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3054) 
Sec. 6-52. - Refreshments prohibited within cemeteries; exception. 
No person shall have refreshments within any cemetery except as authorized by the sexton. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3055) 
Sec. 6-53. - Persons within grounds to use only avenues, walks, alleys and roads. 
Persons within the cemetery grounds shall use only the avenues, walks, alleys and roads and shall not walk, drive or ride upon the lots, plots and spaces. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3056) 
Sec. 6-54. - Motor vehicles regulated. 
Motor vehicles shall not be driven through the cemetery grounds at a greater speed than ten miles per hour, and must always be kept on the righthand side of the cemetery roadway. Motor vehicles are not allowed to park or to come to a full stop in front of an open grave unless such motor vehicles are in attendance at the funeral. No offroad recreational vehicles shall be allowed in city cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3057) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12. 
Sec. 6-55. - Maintenance account. 
(a)  The city shall establish a maintenance account for the longterm care and preservation of all city cemeteries. Monies for this account will be derived from the sale of cemetery lots and interment fees, and from the sale of each lot or each interment fee a minimum number of dollars, as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city, as provided in section 8-36, shall be used for this purpose. However, the entire fee from the sale of lots in the Memorial Addition to Myrtle Hill Cemetery shall be placed in this account. 
(b)  The maintenance account established in this section shall be a part of the city's general trust fund and will include, in addition to the fees referred to in subsection (a), all donations and other appropriations relating to cemeteries which the city may deem proper. The city can use only the interest from such maintenance account for the care and preservation of the city cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3058) 
Sec. 6-56. - Interpretation, application and enforcement of provisions. 
This chapter shall be interpreted, applied and enforced by the public works committee. In cases of hardship, necessity or unreasonableness in the application or enforcement of any of the rules and regulations in this chapter, the majority of the public works committee shall have the right to alter the application and enforcement of these rules and regulations so as to relieve the hardship or unreasonableness, and the same shall not constitute forfeiture nor shall it have the effect of changing or abridging any rule, covenant or regulation under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3059) 
Sec. 6-57. - Violation of chapter. 
Any person performing any act forbidden by this chapter or failing to perform any act required by this chapter shall have breached this chapter and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-1, § 1, 4-7-82; Code 1981, § 5-3060) 
Chapter 7 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; city divisions and departments, § 2-2; certain boards designated, § 2-78; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; police, ch. 17. 
State Law reference— State militia, O.C.G.A. § 38-2-1 et seq.; emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; emergency funds for local government, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-8. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the state and federal governments are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin, caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill, or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, or other hostile action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions in the city. 
Energy emergency means a condition of danger to the health, safety, welfare, or economic well-being of the citizens of this city arising out of a present or threatened shortage of usable energy resources; also any condition of substantial danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of this city resulting from the operation of any electrical power-generating facility, the transport of any energy resource by any means whatsoever, or the production, use or disposal of any source material, special nuclear material, or byproduct, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (68 Stat. 919, 42 USC 2011 et seq.); also any nuclear incident, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (68 Stat. 919, 42 USC 2011 et seq.), occurring within or outside this city substantially affecting the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of this city. 
(Ord. No. 82-5-1, § 1, 5-3-82; Code 1981, § 4-3001) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 7-2. - Liberality of construction. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes. 
(Ord. No. 82-5-1, § 1, 5-3-82; Code 1981, § 4-3007) 
Sec. 7-3. - Emergency management agency—Established; office of director; nominations, appointments, general duties of director. 
There is hereby established in the city an emergency management agency. The city commission shall nominate, for appointment by the governor, a director of the emergency management agency for the city. When appointed, the emergency management agency director shall: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop in conjunction with other city departments, the plan for emergency functions set forth in section 7-1. Such plan will be consonant with the state emergency plan and shall be submitted to the city commission for approval and thence to the state director for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency in carrying out the day-to-day administration of the emergency management agency and disaster program including the rendering of required reports. 
(5)  Render reports such as financial and daily activity reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good business practices. 
(6)  Procure, with authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the city emergency operating center. 
(7)  Serve as manager of the E-911 emergency telephone system. 
(8)  During periods of a declared emergency, and under the supervision of governing officials, coordinate the activities of the city emergency operating center staff. 
(Ord. No. 82-5-1, § 1, 5-3-82; Code 1981, § 4-3002) 
Sec. 7-4. - Same—Duties of city departments. 
The emergency management agency shall be established around existing city departments and agencies, and the emergency functions listed in section 7-1 are assigned to departments of the city as provided in this section. Emergency functions are also assigned to appropriate departments of the county. 

 
Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing the plan for their assigned emergency function. Such plans shall be submitted through the emergency management agency director to the city manager and then to the city commission for approval. 
(Ord. No. 82-5-1, § 1, 5-3-82; Code 1981, § 4-3003) 
Sec. 7-5. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of an actual attack upon the United States or any other disaster which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the chairman of the city commission or, in his absence, his legally appointed successor, may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management forces. 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any property or supplies for the protection of the public. 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the city and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties and to take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-5-1, § 1, 5-3-82; Code 1981, § 4-3004) 
State Law reference— Powers of local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 7-6. - Volunteers. 
All persons other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 82-5-1, § 1, 5-3-82; Code 1981, § 4-3005) 
Sec. 7-7. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as is set out in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 82-5-1, § 1, 5-3-82; Code 1981, § 4-3006) 
Sec. 7-8. - Curfews during times of emergency or disaster. 
(a)  Authorized. Consistent with the Georgia Emergency Management Act, the city may, in times of a state of emergency, declare a curfew within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Curfew. A "curfew" is a regulation requiring the withdrawal of any person not otherwise exempt from this section from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
(2)  Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration implementing the curfew, "exempt individuals" include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, and utility emergency repairs. The declaration may, in the discretion of the Rome City Commission, the mayor, or the city manager, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to chapter 7, article I, section 7-10 of this Code, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
(3)  State of emergency. "State of emergency" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3, to-wit: "the condition declared by the Governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the state is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the state to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several localities and relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby," or shall be deemed to exist during the proclamation of a civil emergency as set forth in section 7-37 of this Code. 
(c)  Declaration of a curfew. Upon a state of emergency, the Rome City Commission, the mayor, or the city manager may declare a curfew within the city or within designated parts of the city. To the extent possible given the nature of the state of emergency, the city will make reasonable efforts to provide public notification of the curfew. 
(d)  Curfew during a state of emergency. It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a designated part of the city during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(e)  Warnings; citation or arrest. Any person, other than an exempt individual, found in public in the territory subject to a curfew shall be notified of the curfew, given a warning, and shall promptly exit the curfew area. If such person fails or refuses to promptly exit the curfew area, such person shall be subject to citation or arrest. 
(f)  Penalties. For violations of the curfew, the city may punish a violator as provided in section 1-9 of this Code for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-4-1, § I, 4-4-11) 
Sec. 7-9. - Price gouging during times of emergency or disaster. 
(a)  Authorized. Consistent with its authority under the Georgia Emergency Management Act, the city may, in times of a state of emergency or a subsequent recovery period, prohibit price gouging. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Price gouging. The term "price gouging" is defined as selling or offering for sale at retail any goods or services, including, but not limited to, gasoline, lumber, or food, necessary to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property at a price higher than the price at which such goods or services were sold or offered for sale immediately prior to the state of emergency; provided, however, that such price may be increased only in an amount which accurately reflects an increase in costs of goods or services to the person selling the goods or services or an increase in the cost of transporting the goods or services into the city due to the state of emergency. 
(2)  State of emergency. "State of emergency" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3, to-wit: "the condition declared by the Governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the state is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the state to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several localities and relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby," or shall be deemed to exist during the proclamation of a civil emergency as set forth in Section 7-37 of this Code. 
(3)  Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the underlying reason for the state of emergency continues to cause disruptions to the territory subject to the state of emergency, but shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency has been terminated unless extended by official action of the Rome City Commission. 
(c)  Prohibition against price gouging. During a state of emergency or a subsequent recovery period, no firm, partnership, corporation, individual, or other entity located or doing business within the city shall engage or participate in price gouging. 
(d)  Citation or arrest. The city, in order to enforce this Code section, may issue citations or arrest individuals found in violation thereof. Each retail sale in which a firm, partnership, corporation, individual, or other entity has engaged or participated in price gouging shall constitute a separate violation of this Code section. 
(e)  Penalties. For violations of this Code section, the city may punish a violator as provided in section 1-9 of this Code for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-4-3, § I, 4-4-11) 
Sec. 7-10. - Registration of building contractors during times of emergency or disaster. 
(a)  Authorized. Consistent with the Georgia Emergency Management Act, the city may, in times of a state of emergency, require the registration of building contractors conducting business in the city. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Building contractor. As used in this Code section, the term "building contractor" shall mean any firm, partnership, corporation, individual, or other entity engaging in, undertaking, or carrying on any business relating to the construction, repair, renovation, or making of improvements to real property within the city, including, but not limited to any buildings, structures, or fixtures on real property. 
(2)  Conducting business. For the purposes of this Code section, a Building Contractor is "conducting business" in the city if: (a) he or she has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the limits of the city, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, and provides construction, repair, renovation, or the making of improvements to real property within the city, including, but not limited to any buildings, structures, or fixtures on real property; or (b) he or she provides construction, repair, renovation, or the making of improvements to real property within the city, including, but not limited to any buildings, structures, or fixtures on real property within the city regardless of the location of the principal office. 
(3)  State of emergency. "State of emergency" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3, to-wit: "the condition declared by the Governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the state is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the state to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several localities and relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby," or shall be deemed to exist during the proclamation of a civil emergency as set forth in section 7-37 of this Code. 
(4)  Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the underlying reason for the state of emergency continues to cause disruptions to the territory subject to the state of emergency, but shall not exceed three months after the state of emergency has been terminated unless extended by official action of the Rome City Commission. 
(c)  Registration and certification of building contractors. All building contractors conducting business or proposing to conduct business within the limits of the city during a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the building inspection department. The building contractor, or an officer, agent, or employee of the building contractor, shall provide the building inspection department with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and shall give true and correct information as may be required on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the building inspection department. Upon satisfaction that the building contractor has complied with the terms of this Code section, the building inspection department shall cause to be issued to the building contractor a certificate authorizing the building contractor and officers, agents, and employees of the building contractor, to do business within the city during a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period. Such certificate shall be valid during the applicable state of emergency and subsequent recovery period, unless revoked or suspended. 
(d)  Registration fee. Before issuance of the certificate by the building inspection department, the building contractor shall pay the city a registration fee of $50.00. 
(e)  Transferability. Each certificate issued by the building inspection department pursuant to this Code section is granted to the building contractor named thereon. Such certificate shall not be transferred to another firm, partnership, corporation, individual, or other entity. 
(f)  Display of certificate. Each certificate issued pursuant to this Code section shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of the building contractor's business or shall be carried by the building contractor in a vehicle used by the building contractor to conduct business. Such certificate shall be exhibited to any authorized officer of the city upon request. 
(g)  Revocation or suspension of the certificate. Each certificate issued pursuant to this Code section is a mere permit for conducting business within the city during a state of emergency and subsequent recovery period. The city may revoke or suspend such certificate if the building contractor, or any officer, agent, or employee of the building contractor, violates this Code section or any other law, rule, or regulation of the City of Rome, the State of Georgia, or the United States. If, after the city issues a certificate, the city desires to revoke such certificate, it shall provide written notice of the revocation to the building contractor. Such revocation notice shall indicate the reason or reasons for the revocation. The building contractor may contest the revocation in the Municipal Court of the City of Rome. 
(f)  Warnings; citations. The city, in order to enforce this Code section, may issue warnings and citations. 
(g)  Penalties. For violations of this Code section, the city may punish a violator as provided in section 1-9 of this Code for each violation. Each day in which a building contractor conducts business in the city without a certificate shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-4-4, § I, 4-4-11) 
Sec. 7-11. - Authority to waive procedures during states of emergency. 
(a)  Authorized. Consistent with the Georgia Emergency Management Act, in times of a state of emergency, the city may meet in a temporary location or locations and ignore certain time-consuming procedures and formalities as prescribed by law. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Fees. For the purposes of this Code section, "fee" or "fees" shall mean any fee or rate charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, or any other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair, and clean-up of areas impacted by the underlying cause of a state of emergency. This term shall not include those fees collected by the city on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the city pursuant to a federal or state regulation, rule, or statute. 
(2)  State of emergency. For the purposes of this Code section, "state of emergency" shall mean an emergency or disaster resulting from man-made or natural causes or enemy attack, that makes it imprudent, inexpedient, or impossible to conduct the affairs of the city at the regular or usual times of places thereof or shall be deemed to exist during the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the Governor of the State of Georgia, as described in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-51, or a proclamation of a civil emergency as set forth in section 7-37 of this Code. 
(3)  Temporary dwelling. For the purposes of this Code section, "temporary dwelling" shall mean any mobile or easily-movable shelter, including, but not limited to mobile homes, trailers, or recreational vehicles, intended for occupation by persons not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular part of the city. 
(c)  Location and powers during a state of emergency. During a state of emergency, the Rome City Commission may meet at any place within the limits or outside the limits of the city upon the call of the mayor, or in his or her absence or inability to act, the mayor pro tempore, or any other two commissioners, and shall proceed to establish and designate by ordinance, resolution, or other manner alternate or substitute sites or places as the emergency temporary location or locations of where all or any part of the city's business may be transacted or conducted during the state of emergency. Such temporary location or locations may be within or outside the limits of the city, and may be within or outside the State of Georgia. During the period in which city business is being conducted at the temporary location or locations, the Rome City Commission and other officers of the city shall have and possess all of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers conferred upon the Rome City Commission and other officers by or under the City Charter, this Code, and the laws of the State of Georgia. All acts of the Rome City Commission and other officers of the city during a state of emergency and performed outside of the limits of the city shall have the same effect as if performed within the limits of the city. 
(d)  Waiver of time-consuming procedures and formalities. During a state of emergency, the powers of the Rome City Commission and other officers of the city may be exercised in the light of the exigencies of the state of emergency without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law and pertaining to the city. 
(e)  Fees. During a state of emergency, the Rome City Commission or its designee may temporarily reduce or waive fees to encourage the rebuilding or clean-up of an area within the city impacted by the underlying reason for a state of emergency. 
(f)  Purchasing and public works contracts. During a state of emergency, the Rome City Commission, the city manager, or the director of the city finance department may waive the requirements of city procurement code for public works contracts. However, any such waiver shall be recorded in the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the underlying reason for the state of emergency shall be described therein. 
(g)  Enforcement of the Code. Upon a declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the Governor of the State of Georgia, as described in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-51, or the proclamation of a civil emergency by the city, as described in section 7-37 of this Code, the Rome City Commission, mayor, or city manager may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code, or any portion thereof, where: (1) the emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside of the Code is required; (2) such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare; and (3) such suspension is not inconsistent with the federal or state constitutions or any federal or state regulations, rules, or statutes. 
(h)  Temporary dwellings. Upon a declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the Governor of the State of Georgia, as described in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-51, or the proclamation of a civil emergency by the city, as described in section 7-37 of this Code, the city may provide temporary dwelling structures in any zoning district of the city while the primary dwellings of residents of the city are being repaired, replaced, or cleaned up due to damage caused by the underlying reason for a state of emergency; provided, however, that the building inspection department shall review the plans for such temporary dwelling structures and issue a permit therefor. The duration of the permit shall not exceed six months. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the building inspection department, the permit may be extended up to an additional six months. Upon expiration of the permit or an extension thereof, such temporary dwellings shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-4-2, § I, 4-4-11) 
Secs. 7-12—7-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 7-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Civil emergency means: 
(1)  A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by mob action or civil disobedience, or by the use of actual force or violence, or by any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law. 
(2)  Any natural disaster or manmade calamity including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate limits of, or affecting, the city, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
Curfew means a prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing, motoring or otherwise being present upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city, except persons officially designated for duty with reference to such civil emergency. 
Incendiary missile means any type of bottle or container containing gasoline or other flammable or explosive material. 
Weapon means any club, bottle, board, rock, gun, knife, instrument or object of any kind used, or intended to be used against the person or property of another. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-1; Code 1981, § 4-3021) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 7-37. - Proclamation of civil emergency; powers of one proclaiming. 
Whenever, in the judgment of the chairman of the city commission, or in the event of his absence or inability to act, of the city manager, it is determined that a civil emergency exists, he shall have power to impose by proclamation any or all of the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and order of the city: 
(1)  To impose a curfew pursuant to the provisions of section 7-8 of this Code. 
(2)  To order the closing of any business establishments or clubs anywhere within the city for the period of the emergency, such businesses to include, but not be limited to, those selling intoxicating liquors, malt beverages, firearms, ammunition and explosives and gasoline or other flammable materials. 
(3)  To designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking area closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  To call upon regular and reserve law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the city to assist in preserving and keeping the peace within the city. 
(5)  To issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the preservation of peace and the protection of life and property. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-2; Code 1981, § 4-3022; Ord. No. 2011-4-1, § II, 4-4-11) 
Sec. 7-38. - When proclamation effective. 
The proclamation of emergency provided for in this article shall become effective upon its issuance in writing and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-3; Code 1981, § 4-3023) 
Sec. 7-39. - Termination and renewal of proclamation. 
Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this article shall terminate after 24 hours from the issuance thereof, or upon issuance of a proclamation determining that such an emergency no longer exists, whichever occurs sooner; provided, however, that such emergency may be extended for such additional periods of time as may be determined necessary by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-4; Code 1981, § 4-3024) 
Sec. 7-40. - Offenses. 
During the time of a proclaimed emergency under this article, the following shall be considered violations punishable as provided in section 1-9. It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any unauthorized person to remain at the place or scene of any riot or unlawful assembly after he has been ordered to disperse by the police or any other lawful authority. 
(2)  For any person not designated for duty to possess, carry or use, either on his person or within a vehicle, any weapon. 
(3)  For any person to make, possess, store, carry, use, disseminate or receive any type of fire bomb, explosive Molotov cocktail, or any other incendiary missile or the materials for the making and production of same. 
(4)  For any person not designated for duty to possess, carry or use any knife or any firearm or the ammunition for use in the same. 
(5)  For any person to possess, carry or consume alcoholic beverages in a public street or place within any restricted area designated as provided in section 7-37. 
(6)  For any person to disobey any order contained in the proclamation of emergency. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-5; Code 1981, § 4-3025) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3. 
Chapter 8 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Finance, art. X; bonded indebtedness, art. XI; taxation, art. XII. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; city divisions and departments, § 2-2; standing committees of city commission, § 2-51; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; alcoholic beverage excise taxes, § 3-351 et seq.; buildings, ch. 5. 
State Constitution reference— Taxation power of municipal governments, art. IX, § IV. 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. tit. 48; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Ad valorem tax. 
An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city is hereby levied. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by resolution of the city commission. The rate shall not exceed the total of the rates authorized by law for general, recreation, education and debt retirement needs of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3001) 
Cross reference— Parks, recreation and cultural affairs, ch. 15. 
Sec. 8-2. - Procurement code incorporated by reference. 
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the secretary, where it is available for public inspection, being known as the Rome Procurement Code, 1980 edition, adopted by the city commission on February 1, 1980, and all amendments thereto, are hereby incorporated in this section and made a part of this Code by reference. 
(Code 1981, § 3-2001) 
Secs. 8-3—8-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8-36. - Fee schedule book. 
The secretary shall keep and maintain a record of all license fees, business and occupation taxes, fees and service charges established and required by the city for the use or purchase of city services and for permits and licenses and any other regulatory or administrative fee or charge imposed by the city. The record and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by the city commission by resolution and shall be known as the fee schedule book of the city. An official copy thereof shall be maintained in the office of the secretary and shall be available for public inspection. The fee schedule book and any amendments that may be made to it are hereby incorporated into this Code and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section. 
(Code 1981, § 3-1001) 
Sec. 8-37. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31. 
(Code 1981, § 3-1002) 
State Law reference— Fiscal year, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-81-2, 36-81-3. 
Sec. 8-38. - Authority to charge penalties and interest for delinquent taxes and other unpaid bills. 
(a)  Acceptance of checks, drafts, etc. The city, by and through its authorized personnel, is hereby authorized to accept a check, draft, money order, etc., payable to the order of the city, upon which a proper receipt will be written. 
(b)  Credit. The head of a department may extend credit only as authorized by the city manager. 
(c)  Unpaid checks, drafts, etc. If any instrument of payment given to the city is returned unpaid by the bank for any reason whatsoever, there shall be added to the tax or fee being paid a penalty or collection fee as established by resolution and shown in the fee schedule of the city. 
(d)  Penalty and interest on unpaid bills. There shall be added to any tax bill, water bill or other bill not paid by the due date or within a specified grace period, penalty and interest in an amount as established by resolution and shown in the fee schedule of the city. 
(e)  Collection of delinquent taxes, bills, etc. The departments of the city shall diligently collect, or attempt collection of, all taxes, water bills or other bills, and upon their inability to do so, the city manager may enter into a contract or contracts for the collection of such delinquent taxes, bills, etc. 
(Ord. No. 84-5-3, § 1, 5-7-84; Code 1981, § 3-1004) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 22. 
Secs. 8-39—8-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE COMPANIES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal licensing of insurance companies, brokers and agents, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-12-6, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 1992, repealed former § 8-71 in its entirety, which pertained to definitions. 
Sec. 8-72. - Gross premiums tax imposed—On life insurers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident, and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 8-97. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross direct premiums means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. 
(Ord. No. 83-12-2, § 5, 12-19-83; Code 1981, § 3-4035) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-73. - Same—On all other insurers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in class (1) as set out in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross direct premiums shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Ord. No. 83-12-2, § 6, 12-19-83; Code 1981, § 3-4036) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 8-74—8-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE FEES 

Sec. 8-96. - Fee schedule. 
The amount of the license fee for each class of license levied under this division shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
Sec. 8-97. - Levied on insurers generally. 
There is hereby levied, for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter, an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $100.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 8-98, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 83-12-2, § 2, 12-19-83; Code 1981, § 3-4032; Ord. No. 92-12-6, § 2, 12-21-92) 
Sec. 8-98. - Levied on life insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this division, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of a life insurer for life insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee for each location for each year. 
(Ord. No. 83-12-2, § 3, 12-19-83; Code 1981, § 3-4033) 
Sec. 8-99. - Levied on life insurance agencies; independent life insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 8-97, for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-12-2, § 4, 12-19-83; Code 1981, § 3-4034) 
Sec. 8-100. - Due date. 
License fees imposed in this division shall be due and payable by January 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 83-12-2, § 7, 12-19-83; Code 1981, § 3-4037) 
Secs. 8-101—8-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 8-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Recurring local service revenues means: 
(1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users. 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semipublic pay station services. 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages. 
d.  Subscriber station revenues from teletype-writer exchange service. 
(2)  Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)  All charges for local private lines service (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private lines are within the city limits. 
(Code 1959, § 17-44; Code 1981, § 3-4051) 
Sec. 8-132. - Occupational license tax. 
Telephone companies operating within the corporate limits of the city shall pay an occupational license tax in the amount set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1959, § 17-45; Code 1981, § 3-4052) 
Sec. 8-133. - Payment of license tax. 
The occupational license tax levied under this article shall be paid in quarterly installments, each of which shall be due on or before the last day of the second month following the end of each calendar quarter and shall be based on taxable revenues billed during such calendar quarter. Any amount of license tax previously paid, and absorbed by the company, which is applicable to any period under this article shall be credited against the amounts imposed in this section or by subsequent ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 17-46; Code 1981, § 3-4053) 
Secs. 8-134—8-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ATTORNEYS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Annotation— Ordinance, when construed along with statutes of state, was not subject to constitutional attacks leveled against it. Robbins v. City of Rome, 230 Ga. 901, 199 S.E. 2d 802 (1973). 
State Law reference— Levy of license or occupation tax upon practitioners of professions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 

Sec. 8-166. - Application of article. 
The passage and application of this article within the corporate limits of the city recognizes that a city may levy an occupational or license tax upon the practice of the legal profession within its municipal limits, but may not regulate the legal profession, since the power to license and regulate attorneys at law is vested in the Supreme Court of the state and administered through that court and through the State Bar of Georgia. 
(Code 1959, § 17-47; Code 1981, § 3-4061) 
Sec. 8-167. - Tax levied for specified purposes. 
(a)  For the purpose of raising revenue for the support and maintenance of the government of the city, including the payment of bonds, interest on the bonded debts, paving streets and to defray any other necessary legal expense of the city, the license tax specified in this article is hereby levied and is to be collected for each fiscal year beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of each year. 
(b)  Such license tax is levied against and is to be paid by all persons who may engage in, prosecute, follow or carry on within the corporate limits of the city, the practice of law. 
(Code 1959, § 17-48; Code 1981, § 3-4062) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 20. 
Sec. 8-168. - License tax—Amount. 
The license tax for attorneys at law for each person practicing law within the city shall be in the amount set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1959, § 17-49; Code 1981, § 3-4063) 
Sec. 8-169. - Same—Default; interest and penalty; collection. 
(a)  Attorneys at law shall have until and including May 1 of each year to pay the tax levied under this article, after which date any such attorney failing to pay shall be in default. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of 30 days after such default, or sooner as the secretary deems necessary to protect the interests of the city, he shall issue a fi. fa. for the amount of the license tax with interest, as other tax fi. fas. in favor of the city are issued. Thereupon the secretary shall turn the same over to the chief of police, and it shall be the chief's duty to force collection of the same by levy and sell the same as other tax fi. fas. in favor of the city are sold. 
(c)  The tax, if not paid when due, shall bear interest at the rate of 33 1/3 percent per month from May 1 of each year, or from the date of beginning practice of such profession in the city if such practice is begun after May 1 of each year. 
(Code 1959, § 17-50; Code 1981, § 3-4064) 
Secs. 8-170—8-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 8-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Depository financial institution means state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations. 
Gross receipts has the same meaning as, and is determined in accordance with, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(Ord. No. 83-12-2, § 1, 12-19-83; Code 1981, § 3-4071) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-192. - Business license tax—Imposed. 
There is hereby levied upon depository financial institutions within the city an annual business license tax at the rate set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the minimum amount of annual business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be the amount provided in such fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 83-12-2, § 2, 12-19-83; Code 1981, § 3-4072) 
Sec. 8-193. - Same—Due date; filing of return. 
Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city by March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by state law and regulation. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1, 1984, and April 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 83-12-2, § 3, 12-19-83; Code 1981, § 3-4073) 
Sec. 8-194. - Same—Payment when no current ad valorem tax digest available. 
If as of March 1 of any year, no current ad valorem tax digest is available or no current ad valorem tax rate has been set by the city commission, savings and loan institutions doing business within the city shall file their returns and pay the taxes called for in this article within ten days of the date a current ad valorem tax computation is possible. 
(Ord. No. 83-12-2, § 4, 12-19-83; Code 1981, § 3-4074) 
Secs. 8-195—8-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MOTEL-HOTEL EXCISE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 8-226. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means not later than the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. It shall not include meeting rooms or exhibition halls. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, nursing or convalescent home, orphanage, prison, detention or other building in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Innkeeper means any person who is subject to taxation under this article for the furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations; and any person or organization who voluntarily collects the tax under this article. 
Monthly period means a calendar month of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or apartment. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right of use or possession of any guestroom in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, or a lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant of a hotel, once that occupant has stayed in the hotel for more than 30 consecutive days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, except the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided in this article. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
Tourism development purposes means the expenditure of funds, which may include capital costs and operating expenses, for the creation or expansion of physical attractions which are available and open to the public and which improve destination appeal to visitors, support visitors' experience, and are used by visitors. 
(Code 1959, § 17-62; Code 1981, § 3-6002; Ord. No. 98-8-1, § I, 8-17-98; Ord. No. 2009-9-6, § I, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 2014-5-1, § I, 5-27-14; Ord. No. 2014-11-1, § I, 11-10-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-227. - Intent. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to impose a tax, pursuant to authority granted by the General Assembly of this state, the funds from which taxation shall be used for public purposes and may be used for the purpose of promoting, attracting, stimulating, and developing conventions and tourism in the city. 
(b)  The city shall expend, for the purposes of promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows in each fiscal year during which the tax is collected an amount which is not less than the amount which would have been spent if the tax rate had not been increased from five percent to eight percent, plus 12½ percent of the total tax collected at the rate of eight percent, and plus 25 percent of the total tax collected at the rate of eight percent. Provided further that 12½ percent of the tax collected at the rate of eight percent shall be used for the marketing and promotion of the county convention center known as the Forum. Provided further that 25 percent of the tax collected at the rate of eight percent shall be used for tourism development purposes, and, more specifically, shall be allocated for maintenance, operation, and promotion expenses related to The Tennis Center of Georgia at Berry College. 
(Code 1959, § 17-61; Code 1981, § 3-6001; Ord. No. 95-6-3, § I, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 2014-5-1, § II, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 8-228. - Imposition; rate. 
There is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a tax of eight percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the city. The tax shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after July 1, 2014, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease, or other arrangement made prior to such date. 
(Code 1959, § 17-63; Ord. No. 88-1-1, § 1, 1-19-88; Ord. No. 95-6-3, § II, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 2014-5-1, § III, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 8-229. - Collection of tax by operator; receipt to occupant; rules for reporting and remittance of taxes collected. 
(a)  Every operator maintaining a place of business in the city and renting guestrooms in the city shall collect a tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 8-230. 
(b)  Such operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant to whom the tax is charged, showing the amount of rent and the amount of all taxes by category. 
(c)  All taxes shall be due and collected at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(d)  The proceeds of such taxes shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b). 
(Code 1959, § 17-64; Code 1981, § 3-6004; Ord. No. 88-7-2, § 1, 7-18-88; Ord. No. 95-6-3, § III, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 05-5-10, § I, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 2014-5-1, § IV, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 8-230. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a permanent resident or upon Georgia state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Code 1959, § 17-65; Code 1981, § 3-6005; Ord. No. 88-1-1, § 1, 1-19-88) 
Sec. 8-231. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided therefor. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the city clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Code 1959, § 17-66; Code 1981, § 3-6006; Ord. No. 2014-5-1, § V, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 8-232. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  All amounts of the tax shall be due and payable monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, each operator of each hotel shall file a return with the city clerk, showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, rent from government officials or employees while traveling on official business, taxable rent, amount of taxes due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(c)  Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction shall be the rate authorized for deductions from the state sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. 
(Code 1981, § 3-6007; Ord. No. 2014-5-1, § VI, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 8-233. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the accuracy of the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, the city clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the city clerk's possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the due date of the tax, until the date of payment. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service. The city clerk or his designated representatives shall give to the operator written notice of the city clerk's determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  When any innkeeper or operator fails to make any return or to pay the full amount of the tax required by this article, there shall be imposed, in addition to other penalties provided by law, a penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than 30 days and an additional five percent or $5.00, for each additional 30 days or fraction of 30 days during which the failure continues. The penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater. If the failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the city clerk in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance is made within ten days of due date, the return may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. In the case of a false or fraudulent return or a failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the City of Rome of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
(f)  All civil penalties and interest added to any tax imposed under this article and collected by the City of Rome shall be included as revenue derived from such tax for purposes of the expenditure requirements imposed on the city as provided by Georgia law. 
(Code 1959, § 17-68; Code 1981, § 3-6008; Ord. No. 2014-5-1, § VII, 5-27-14; Ord. No. 2014-11-1, § II, 11-10-14) 
Sec. 8-234. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  If any person fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in, or may come into, the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 8-233(c). 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the due date of the tax, until the date of payment. 
(Code 1959, § 17-69; Code 1981, § 3-6009; Ord. No. 2014-5-1, § VIII, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 8-235. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in the city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers and in such form as the city clerk may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the city clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by the city clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(Code 1959, § 17-70; Code 1981, § 3-6010; Ord. No. 2014-5-1, § IX, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 8-236. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or any other person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1959, § 17-71; Code 1981, § 3-6011; Ord. No. 2014-5-1, § X, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 8-237. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this article becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this section sells or otherwise transfers his business, then the purchaser, or the seller's successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount from the purchase price of the business to cover any deficient amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk showing that all taxes due under this article have been paid or a certificate from the city clerk stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure of purchaser to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Overpayments. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this section, it may be offset by the city clerk. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, he shall have three years from date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city clerk, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators, executors, successors or assigns. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-6, § I, 11-20-06) 
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fire regulations, § 2-10. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; city divisions and departments, § 2-2; entertainment at pouring outlets, § 3-278; buildings, ch. 5; moving structures on public streets, § 5-4; building code adopted, § 5-76; fire limits, § 5-80; electricity, § 5-111 et seq.; emergency management, ch. 7; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; fire sales, § 11-161 et seq.; standards for issuance of parade permit, § 11-563; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; officers of fire department directing traffic at scene of fire, § 12-68; following or parking near fire apparatus, § 12-178; crossing fire hose, § 12-179; privately owned fire alarm system, § 14-19; police, ch. 17; police assistance at fires, § 17-2; solid waste, ch. 19; enforcement of solid waste chapter, § 19-2; procedures for approval of private subdivision developments in city, § 21-59; water supply in subdivisions, § 21-128; utilities, ch. 22; opening fire hydrants, § 22-38; purposes of zoning chapter, § 23-3; procedures for approval of private subdivision developments, § 23-104; maintenance of mobile home parks, § 23-140; mobile home park license, § 23-137. 
State Constitution reference— Power of city to provide fire protection services, art. IX, § II, par. III. 
State Law reference— Fire escapes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; forest fires, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-89; transmitting false report of fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. tit. 25; municipal fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firemen's pensions, O.C.G.A. § 47-7-1 et seq.; liability of firemen for activities, O.C.G.A. § 51-1-30. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1—9-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 9-36. - Chief of fire department; police power. 
The chief of the fire department (also known as the fire chief) shall have authority to exercise police powers in the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance provision pertaining to the fire department, right-of-way, inspection of buildings and fire escapes, or other provisions or ordinances pertaining to fire protection. 
(Code 1959, § 14-1; Code 1981, § 4-2001) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings, ch. 5. 
Sec. 9-37. - Facilities and equipment, use in extinguishing fire authorized. 
In case of fire all firefighters on duty are authorized to use all available public or private facilities and equipment in extinguishing such fire. 
(Code 1959, § 14-2; Code 1981, § 4-2002) 
Sec. 9-38. - Interference with firefighters prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a firefighter on duty in the firefighter's use of any public or private equipment being used by the firefighter in fighting and extinguishing a fire. 
(Code 1959, § 14-3; Code 1981, § 4-2003) 
Sec. 9-39. - Riding on fire vehicles restricted to firefighters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, not a member of a fire company of the city, to ride upon any vehicle or apparatus going to or returning from a fire. 
(Code 1959, § 14-4; Code 1981, § 4-2004) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12. 
Sec. 9-40. - Maliciously injuring or obstructing firefighting apparatus. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or knowingly to interfere or tamper with or to injure or damage in any way or by any means whatever any equipment or material or apparatus of any kind connected with or used by any fire company as a part of their machinery or material for extinguishing fires, or knowingly or willfully to put any obstruction in front of any fire station. 
(Code 1959, § 14-5; Code 1981, § 4-2005) 
Sec. 9-41. - Water being used in extinguishing fire; cutting off or order to cut off prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut off or order the water cut off at any public or private water hydrant when the water is being used by the fire department in fighting and extinguishing a fire. 
(Code 1959, § 14-6; Code 1981, § 4-2006) 
Cross reference— Water supply and distribution, § 22-36 et seq. 
Sec. 9-42. - Obstructing fire hydrants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use of fire hydrants, or to obstruct approaches to same, by the fire department. 
(Code 1959, § 14-7; Ord. No. 90-4-3, § I(4-2007), 4-16-90; Code 1981, § 4-2007) 
Sec. 9-43. - Persons permitted within vicinity of fire. 
No person except firefighters, city commissioners and other city officers, the police force, the property owner and their agents and insurance agents, shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of the fire, except by request of the fire chief or the officers in command of the fire department. 
(Code 1959, § 14-8; Code 1981, § 4-2008) 
State Law reference— Driving or parking vehicle near fire apparatus, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247. 
Sec. 9-44. - Electricians; duty at fire or other emergency. 
It shall be the duty of the Georgia Power Company to have a competent electrician to turn off the electric current, or to take such other means as are necessary to protect the safety of firefighters and other citizens, at fires. Such electrician, immediately upon arrival at a fire, shall report to the command officer, and at the request of the command officer, disconnect wires, cut off electrical current or take such other action as may be necessary to safeguard firefighters and other citizens from electrical hazards. Upon failure of such company to have an electrician at each fire as required by this section the company shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1959, § 14-9; Ord. No. 90-4-3, § I(4-2009), 4-16-90; Code 1981, § 4-2009) 
Cross reference— Electricity, § 5-111 et seq. 
Sec. 9-45. - Looters at fires. 
The fire chief, or the officer in command at the fire, shall cause to be arrested any person who shall be caught stealing goods or any article of value from any store, house or the vicinity thereof during a fire. 
(Code 1959, § 14-10; Code 1981, § 4-2010) 
Sec. 9-46. - Insurance reports of fire losses paid. 
All fire insurance companies or their authorized representatives operating within the county shall file with the chief of the fire department a report of all fire losses paid within 15 days after each claim is paid. 
(Code 1981, § 4-2011) 
Secs. 9-47—9-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LIFE SAFETY CODE 

Sec. 9-71. - Adoption. 
There is hereby adopted the current and latest edition of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 101, Life Safety Code, published by the National Fire Protection Association, as promulgated into law with modifications by Chapter 120-3-3 of the Rules and Regulations of the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4). The Life Safety Code is adopted for the purpose of providing rules and regulations for the construction, erection, use, occupancy, and maintenance of buildings and structures within the city with minimum standards for safety to life from fire and other emergencies in the local public interest, welfare, and safety. 
(Code 1959, § 14-14.1; Ord. No. 82-6-2, § 1, 6-7-82; Ord. No. 85-11-2, § 2, 11-4-84; Ord. No. 89-6-5, § I(a), 6-19-89; Code 1981, § 4-2021(a); Ord. No. 99-2-1, § I, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 2011-2-2, § I, 2-7-11; Ord. No. 2018-10-1, § I, 10-22-18) 
Sec. 9-72. - Copy on file. 
At least one copy of the adopted Life Safety Code and any adopted amendments or additions thereto shall be on file in the offices of the building inspector, the fire chief, the fire marshal, and the city clerk at all times. 
(Code 1959, § 14-14.1; Ord. No. 82-6-2, § 1, 6-7-82; Ord. No. 85-11-2, § 2, 11-4-84; Ord. No. 89-6-5, § I(b), 6-19-89; Code 1981, § 4-2021(b); Ord. No. 2011-2-2, § II, 2-7-11) 
Sec. 9-73. - Amendments. 
None. 
(Code 1959, § 14-14.1; Ord. No. 82-6-2, § 1, 6-7-82; Ord. No. 85-11-2, § 2, 11-4-84; Ord. No. 89-6-5, § I(c), 6-19-89; Code 1981, § 4-2021(c); Ord. No. 99-2-1, § II, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 2011-2-2, § III, 2-7-11; Ord. No. 2018-10-1, § I, 10-22-18) 
Secs. 9-74—9-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 9-101. - General. 
This article shall be known as the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Rome, Georgia, and it may be cited as "The Fire Prevention Code." 
(Ord. No. 83-4-4, § 1, 4-4-83; Ord. No. 87-4-1, § 1(1), 4-6-87; Ord. No. 89-6-6, § (1)(1), (2), 6-19-89; Ord. No. 90-6-1, § 1(1)—(3), 6-19-90; Ord. No. 92-1-1A, § I(4-2031), 1-6-92; Code 1981, § 4-2031) 
Cross reference— Application of building and fire safety codes to existing buildings, § 16-86 et seq. 
Sec. 9-102. - Organization and administration. 
9.102.1 Purposes and intents; organization; division of fire prevention; administration. 
(a)  Purposes and intents. It is the primary purpose of this article to provide for the reasonable and realistic protection of life and property from the hazards created by fire out of control, smoke, explosion, or panic created from a fear of fire out of control, smoke, or explosion. It is the basic intent of this article to accomplish its primary purpose: 
(1)  Through education efforts and programs designed to change high-risk attitudes and behaviors that are the root causes of most fires out of control; 
(2)  Through consultations and informational programs, develop in the citizens of and visitors to the City of Rome and Floyd County, an awareness of the provisions of this article, and other applicable laws, codes, and standards, and aid them to determine the options available to correct hazards, problems, or violations identified; 
(3)  By providing through this article reasonable, realistic and practical safeguards against fire out of control and its related hazards; and 
(4)  As may be deemed necessary, initiate enforcement and legal proceedings as set forth in this article to gain compliance with the provisions of this article and the codes and standards adopted by this article. 
This article is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through safety to life and property from fire out of control, explosion and other hazards incident to the use and occupancy of buildings, structures, facilities or premises located in the City of Rome. 
(b)  Organization and programs. There is hereby created the division of fire prevention within the Rome Fire Department for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this article. The division shall be under the direction and general supervision of the fire marshal. The fire marshal is the fire code official for the purposes of this article for the City of Rome. The fire marshal is responsible to the fire chief for the administration, implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this article and for the direction and supervision of the division. The division shall strive to improve the safety and lives and property from fire out of control and its associated hazards within the City of Rome through programs of safety education, through consultations, and through the inspection of buildings, structures, facilities and premises as often as deemed appropriate by the fire marshal and fire chief. As the fire chief and fire marshal deem appropriate, the division may develop and implement, in coordination and cooperation with other departments, agencies or organizations, public or private, a comprehensive program of community emergency education. 
(c)  Appointment of the fire marshal. The fire marshal shall be appointed by the fire chief on the basis of an evaluation of the applicant's qualifications. The appointment shall continue until the fire marshal vacates the position or is removed for cause in accordance with the applicable policies and regulations of the City of Rome and Rome Fire Department. 
(d)  Assistance to the fire marshal. The fire chief may detail or assign members of the Rome Fire Department to the division of fire prevention to assist the fire marshal. Such members shall be under the direction and supervision of the fire marshal during their detail or assignment to the division. The fire chief, upon request of the fire marshal, may fill positions deemed necessary for carrying out the purposes and programs of the division, in accordance with the personnel policies and regulations of the City of Rome. The selections shall be open to members and nonmembers of the Rome Fire Department. Employees assigned to fill positions with the division shall be under the direction and supervision of the fire marshal. 
(e)  Enforcement assistance. The chief of police, the city marshal, the building official or law enforcement officers of the City of Rome shall render assistance to the fire chief or the fire marshal upon request in the implementation and enforcement of this article. 
9.102.2 Applicability of this article and adopted codes and standards. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this article, and the codes and standards adopted by this article, shall apply to all new and existing buildings, structures, premises, facilities and conditions within the City of Rome; provided, however, existing situations or conditions not in strict compliance with this article or the codes and standards adopted by this article, and not in contravention with state law, rules or regulations, may be continued unless they are deemed by the fire marshal to constitute a distinct hazard to life or to property from fire out of control, smoke or explosion. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the interior of one-family or two-family dwellings or to premises upon which such dwellings are located or to the interior of any apartment dwelling unit, provided such dwellings or apartments are used strictly for residential purposes. This article and the codes and standards adopted by this article shall apply to such dwelling units whenever an activity coming under this article is conducted therein and/or which creates a hazard from fire out of control, smoke or explosion to life or to property. 
(b)  Existing and special historic buildings. The provisions of this article shall apply to existing buildings or structures in the City of Rome as provided in this article; provided, however, the provisions of this article shall be coordinated by the fire marshal with the provisions of chapter 16, article IV, of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia, "Application of Building and Fire Safety Codes to Existing Buildings." The provisions of this article shall apply to special buildings or structures identified by the state or the federal government or by the City of Rome as historic buildings; provided, however, the provisions of this article shall be coordinated by the fire marshal with the applicable provisions of state laws or regulations and with the provisions of chapter 23, article V, of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia, "Historic Districts." 
(c)  Federal or state authority. The provisions of this article shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing body having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this article or any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive an individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
9-102.3 Administrative and municipal liability. 
(a)  Administrative liability. Any officer or employee of the City of Rome empowered or authorized to administer or act under the provisions of this article or other applicable codes or standards in force in the City of Rome or required by the State of Georgia, and acting for the city or state in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not be held liable personally, and he or she is hereby relieved from all personal liability from any damages that may accrue to any person or property as a result of any act required, implied or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties, or as required, implied or permitted by this article or other applicable codes in force in the city or adopted or required by the State of Georgia, or as a result of the omission of any action required or authorized by this article or other applicable codes in force by the city or adopted or required by the State of Georgia. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee of the City of Rome in connection with the implementation of the provisions of this code or other applicable codes in force in the City of Rome or adopted or required by the State of Georgia shall be defended by the legal representative of the City of Rome until such matter is settled. 
(b)  Municipal liability. The City of Rome shall not be liable for any damage to persons or property from any act or any failure to act in connection with any provision of this article or other applicable law, regulation or codes in force in the city or adopted or required by the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection, approval or permitting of any building or plan by any employee of the division of fire prevention of the fire department of the City of Rome, under the requirements of this article, shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building or the adequacy of such plan. Neither the City of Rome nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building or plan, nor for any component of such building which may occur subsequent to such inspection, approval or permitting. 
9-102.4 Conducting inspections; right of entry; related provisions. 
(a)  Inspections. The fire marshal is authorized to inspect, or cause to be inspected, as he or she deems appropriate or necessary based on fire experience in the City, on complaint, or on other applicable grounds, and as resources permit, buildings, structures, premises and facilities coming within the scope of this article. The purpose of such inspections is to ascertain if any conditions exist which could be reasonably construed to cause a fire out of control or explosion, or that could contribute to the spread of a fire out of control or its byproducts, or to ascertain any significant nonconformance with the purposes, intents and other provisions of this article or any other applicable law, rule or regulation affecting safety to life and/or property from fire out of control, explosion or the hazards related to same. The fire marshal is authorized to apply other applicable laws and to cause to be corrected any conditions which could be reasonably construed to cause a fire out of control or explosion or that could contribute to the spread of a fire out of control, or any significant nonconformance with the purposes, intents or provisions of this article affecting safety to life and/or property from fire out of control, explosion or the hazards related to same. 
(b)  Right of entry to conduct inspections. The fire marshal or his or her authorized representatives may, to the extent permitted by law, have free access to and the right to enter at all reasonable times any building, structure, facility or premises, except single-family or two-family dwellings, located within the City of Rome, whether completed or under construction, for the purpose of conducting inspections and otherwise implementing the provisions of this article. Before entering any building, structure, facility or premises not normally open to the public, except when a fire out of control or other emergency condition exists or has occurred, the fire marshal or his representatives shall obtain the consent of the occupant, owner or person in charge at the time. Where consent to enter is refused, the fire marshal may seek an order or an administrative search warrant from the Municipal Court of the City of Rome, or if deemed appropriate, from the Superior Court of Floyd County, authorizing his or her entry or that of his or her representatives for the purpose of conducting the inspection or investigation. The term "emergency condition," for the purposes of this section, shall mean any condition or circumstance which the fire marshal or the fire chief determines to constitute an immediate threat or danger to the occupants of the building, structure, facilities or premises or to persons or property exposed to a fire out of control, the hazards associated with fire out of control, explosion, the threat of fire or explosion, or exposed to risks from some other hazardous condition or circumstances. 
(c)  Implied consent. Any application for, or the acceptance of, any approval, permit, license or certificate requested or required pursuant to this article, any applicable code or other applicable law or ordinance of the City of Rome or the state, constitutes agreement and consent by the person making the application, or accepting the approval, permit, license or certificate to allow the fire marshal or his or her representatives to enter the building, structure, facility or premises at any reasonable time to conduct inspections as may be deemed appropriate by the fire marshal or as otherwise provided by this article or other applicable state law or ordinance, or rules or regulations. 
9-102.5 Notice of, or order to, eliminate dangerous or unlawful conditions. 
(a)  Notice of violations. Whenever the fire marshal or his or her designated representatives find any violations of this article, applicable adopted codes, or standards, or any fire hazards, as defined herein, they are authorized to issue or serve a written notice of the findings of an inspection as set forth in section 9-102.4 and to notify the building official. For the purposes of this article, a fire hazard means any thing or act which increases or may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire out of control to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing fires out of control; or which may obstruct, delay, hinder or interfere with the operations of the Rome Fire Department or the egress of occupants in the event of fire out of control or other emergency condition, actual or perceived. 
(b)  Abatement order—Written. Whenever the fire marshal or his or her designated representatives find any violations of this article or any fire hazards, which are deemed to create a serious or significant potential for fire out of control or explosion or which are deemed to create a serious or significant potential threat to life in event of fire out of control or explosion, they are authorized to issue a written order to correct or abate the violations or hazards. Such order when issued shall set forth a reasonable and realistic time frame or date limit for correction, abatement or compliance. The time frame for correction, abatement or compliance established by or as directed by the fire marshal or his or her designated representative may be reasonably correlated by him or her or them to the seriousness or relative degree of hazard, and/or to the complexity of the means of correction or abatement. 
(c)  Abatement order—Verbal. Where deemed necessary, due to the potential risk to life or property, the fire marshal or his or her representative may issue a verbal order for the immediate correction or abatement of a violation or fire hazard. This may be followed by a written order of notice or action. 
(d)  Summary abatement. The fire marshal or the fire chief shall have the authority to summarily abate any violation of this article or any fire hazard, which constitutes an immediate or imminent danger or threat to life in their judgment, and where the following of the provisions for obtaining corrective action or abatement as set forth elsewhere in this article is not practical in their judgment. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or structures. Any building or structure which is deemed to be structurally unsafe or which is not provided with adequate means of egress, or which is deemed to constitute a serious fire hazard, or which is otherwise deemed dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitutes a hazard to the safety, health or welfare to the public by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire damage, disaster damage, vandalism, flood damage or abandonment, as specified in this article or by any other applicable codes or ordinances in force in the City of Rome, is deemed to be an unsafe building or structure. 
9-102.6 Serving notices or orders. 
(a)  Generally. The service of notices or orders issued in connection with [subsections] 9-102.5(a) and 9-102.5(b) of this article may be made by the fire marshal or his or her representatives upon the owner, occupant or person in charge of the building, structure, facility, premises or portion thereof where the hazards or violations were found, or by delivering a copy of the notice or order to any or all of the persons noted. If such person(s) cannot be served by delivery as noted, service may be accomplished by affixing a copy of the notice or order in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the building, structure, facility or premises, or by delivering or sending a copy of the notice or order to the known agent of the owner or occupant, or in the event of an absentee owner with no known agent, by sending a copy by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known residence, business or post office address. 
(b)  To occupants of certain premises. If the building, structure, facility or premises is owned by one or more persons and is occupied by one or more other persons under lease or otherwise, the notice or order issued in connection with this section shall apply to the occupants thereof, except where the notice or order requires the addition to or changes in the building, structure or premises such as would immediately become real estate and become the property of the owners and not the occupants unless it is otherwise agreed between or among the owners and the occupants. 
9-102.7 Penalty provisions. 
(a)  General penalty; separate violations. Any person who shall fail to comply with an order of correction or abatement as set forth in this section, or who shall build or act in violation of this article or of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved under authority of this article in connection with any approval, certificate, or permit issued thereunder, or who shall perform any act deemed to create a serious potential for fire out of control, or explosion and for which the issuance of an order to correct or abate is not adequate, and who is found guilty shall be guilty of a violation of this article. A person found guilty under this section shall, for each violation and noncompliance, respectively, be subject to punishment by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $5,000.00, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 120 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and the responsible persons shall correct or abate such violation within a time limit as ordered by the court. When not otherwise specified, each five days a prohibited condition or violation continues following an order of the court to correct or abate the same shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Procedures upon determination of violation—Generally. When the fire marshal, the fire chief or their authorized representatives determine that violations of this Code warrant the filing of charges or action of the court as provided for in [subsection] 9-102.7(a), the issuing of a citation of charges and/or summons to appear before the Municipal Court of the City of Rome shall be served by the city marshal or his authorized representative or by any certified law enforcement officer of the City of Rome upon request of the fire marshal, the fire chief or their authorized representative. 
(c)  Same—Injunctive relief. In addition to the filing of charges as specified in [subsections] 9-102.7(a) and 9-102.7(b), or as a separate remedy at law, the fire marshal or the fire chief may seek injunctive relief for any fire hazard, violation, or condition that threatens the safety of life or property based on the provisions of this code or any applicable code or ordinance of the City of Rome or of the State of Georgia. 
(d)  Removal of prohibited conditions. The application of penalties by the court as provided for in [section] 9-102.7 shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions or violations. 
9-102.8 Removal of notices or order; illegal use of buildings. 
(a)  Removal, generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any notice or order issued in connection with this article and affixed to a building, structure, facility or premises, without the approval of the fire marshal or his or her authorized representative. 
(b)  Unlawful use of building or facility. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a building, structure, facility or premises in violation of the provisions of this article where an order has been affixed to same prohibiting the use of same under authority of any provisions of this article without the approval of the fire marshal or his or her authorized representative or the court. 
(c)  Change of occupancy or use of building. When it is determined that the occupancy or use of a building has changed from that shown on the certificate of occupancy issued by the building official, the fire marshal, or the state fire marshal, the fire marshal may issue such notice or orders as necessary and in conformance with this article to remove or remedy any noted violations or hazards, and he or she shall refer the building to the building official, or as appropriate, the state fire marshal, for any repairs, alterations, remodeling, removing or demolition required. 
9-102.9 Coordination with and application of related codes and standards. 
(a)  Changes in existing buildings or facilities. Any alterations, additions or changes required in existing buildings, structures, facilities or premises because of a change in use, occupancy, exit design or other reason shall be made in compliance with the codes and standards adopted under this article and as set for in section 9-103 of this article. 
(b)  Review of plans coordinated. The fire marshal and the building official shall coordinate their review of plans on new construction and/or renovations or alterations of existing buildings or structures so as to ascertain compliance with this article and the codes and standards adopted by this article under their respective jurisdictions. The building official, pursuant to state, shall not issue any building permit on buildings under the jurisdiction of the state fire marshal (O.C.G.A. §§ 25-2-13 and 25-2-14), until the required state construction permit is issued by the state fire marshal. 
(c)  New construction. The fire marshal and the building official shall have the authority to jointly consider and approve a modification of any of the applicable codes for new construction with regard to matters relating to fire protection and safety to life in the event of fire out of control or related emergencies where the proposed designed, fire protection system, building use, or construction method involved is unusual or where it involves an unusual hazard, condition, or hardship, and the provisions of the codes and standards in force do not clearly or adequately deal with the proposed design, protection system application or design, building use, or construction method, in their judgment. Such approvals shall not result in a condition(s) that is/are less protective than any code or standard adopted by the state. 
(d)  Alternate materials. It is the intent of this provision to allow the use of designs, systems, methods, or devices of equivalent or superior quality, strength, fire resistance, effectiveness, durability, and safety to those prescribed by the applicable codes and standards, provided that technical documentation, data, or other information or material acceptable to the fire marshal and building official is submitted for review and such demonstrates to their satisfaction the equivalency of the design, system, method, or device for the intended use. Any modification or alternate safeguard jointly approved by the fire marshal and the building official shall not afford a condition less safe to life, and where appropriate, property, than in their judgment would be provided with compliance with the provisions of applicable codes or standards. 
9-102.10 Modifications and appeals. 
(a)  Existing conditions. The fire marshal shall have the authority to modify any of the provisions of the adopted codes or standards adopted by reference by this article, except regarding buildings under the jurisdiction of O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13, upon application in writing by the owners and/or occupants of an existing building, structure, facility or premises, or by their authorized agents, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this code or the codes or standards adopted by reference by this article or the City of Rome. Such modification may be granted by the fire marshal, provided that in his judgment, the spirit, intents and purposes of this article are observed, the public safety shall be reasonably and practically secured, the modification is in the interest of the community and substantial justice will be done. The particulars of any modification granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire marshal thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the division. 
(b)  Right to appeal. Whenever the fire marshal or the fire chief shall issue an order pursuant to this article, disapprove an application, refuse to grant a permit, refuse to grant a waiver or modification, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this article or the codes and standards adopted by reference by this article or the City of Rome do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of same have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant or aggrieved person may appeal from the order or decision of the fire marshal or the fire chief to the board of adjustments as established by the adopted building code of the City of Rome within 30 days after the decision is rendered by the fire marshal or the fire chief. The provisions of the applicable building code relative to time limits, variations and modifications, and decisions as connected with the appeals to the board of adjustments shall be applicable to appeals from the fire marshal or the fire chief relating to this article. If the applicant or aggrieved person is not satisfied with the decision of the board of adjustments, appeal may be made to the court of appropriate jurisdiction. Every decision of the board of adjustments relative to this article shall be filed in the office of the fire marshal. 
9-102.11 General provisions. 
(a)  Interference with fire officials. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, abuse, or obstruct in any way the fire chief, the fire marshal or their representatives in carrying out any actions in accordance with their official duties as set forth by this article, or by any other applicable local ordinance, or by any law or regulation of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Unlawful use of credentials; unlawful impersonation of fire official. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to use an official or unofficial badge or credential so as to impersonate an authorized fire official or to otherwise impersonate a fire official. 
(c)  Authority to investigate fires, explosions, false alarms or related incidents. The fire chief, the fire marshal or his authorized representatives are authorized to investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of any fire or explosion, or to investigate any incident resulting from the sending or sounding of a false alarm of fire or a bomb threat. When, in the judgment of the fire marshal, reasonable cause exists that a fire or explosion may have been of criminal origin, the fire marshal or his or her authorized representative is authorized to locate and take custody of any and all physical evidence relating to the cause of the fire or explosion and to continue the investigation to the extent deemed appropriate within the limits of division resources and within the limits of applicable state laws. The fire marshal shall inform the Rome Police Department of each fire of criminal or suspected criminal origin, false alarms or bomb threats. The fire marshal shall also assist the Rome Police Department in its investigations of reported incidents, if so requested by that department. The Rome Police Department shall be responsible for the investigation of fires and/or explosions of criminal or suspected criminal origin, false alarms or bomb threats so as to identify, apprehend and assist in the prosecution of the persons responsible for such criminal acts. 
(d)  Evacuation of buildings, structures, facilities or premises. When, in the judgment of the fire chief, the fire marshal, or their authorized representatives in their absence, there is an actual or serious potential danger to the occupants of or persons in close proximity to any building, structure, facility or premises because of unsafe structural conditions, or the presence of explosives, explosive fumes or vapor, toxic fumes, gases or materials, the fire chief, the fire marshal, or their authorized representatives in their absence, may order the complete or partial immediate evacuation of any building, structure, facility or premises and, as necessary, areas in such proximity to these as to be endangered. All persons under order to evacuate shall promptly leave the evacuation area and shall not reenter until authorized to do so by the official who issued the evacuation order. This section shall not pertain to bomb threats where no bomb or explosive device is known to exist. In such bomb threat situations, the decision to evacuate or not to evacuate is the responsibility of the person in charge of the building, structure, facility or premises at that time. 
(e)  Permits and approvals. A person shall not maintain, store or handle materials, or conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property, or install equipment used in connection with such activities without first obtaining approval, or as appropriate based on the provisions of section 9-102.11 of this article, a permit from the fire marshal. Where conditions or activities are also regulated by a state or federal agency and a permit, license or certificate is required by the regulating agency, then no local permit is required; provided, however, the approval of the fire marshal is required and he shall have the authority to apply the provisions of this article where a hazardous condition is discovered. 
(f)  Tests. All equipment required by this article or other applicable codes adopted by the City of Rome or by the State of Georgia shall be maintained in a safe, sound, and operational condition. The fire marshal may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests and reports are to be made at the expense of the owner or his agent by an approved testing laboratory or other approval agency or firm acceptable to the fire marshal. 
(g)  Authority to expose or stop work. Whenever any construction or installation coming under this article is subject to inspection prior to use and is covered or concealed without having first been inspected, the fire marshal may require by verbal and/or written order that such work be exposed for inspection. The fire marshal shall be notified when the installation is ready for inspection within a reasonable period of time. When any construction or installation work is being performed in violation of the plans, specifications or understandings as approved by the fire marshal, a written order may be issued to the responsible person to stop work on that portion of the work which is in violation. The order shall state the nature of the violation. No work shall be continued on that portion until the violation has been corrected and the order is lifted by the fire marshal or his or her designated representative. 
(h)  Effect of court decision. If, for any reason, any provision, section, subsection, clause or phrase of this article, or any code or standard adopted by reference by this article, is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this article, or of any code or standard adopted by reference by this article. 
9-102.12 Approvals and fire regulatory permits; related provisions. 
(a)  Generally. A person shall not maintain, store or handle materials, or conduct processes, which produce conditions hazardous to life or property, or install equipment used in connection with such activities, without first obtaining approval, or as appropriate a fire regulatory permit, from the fire marshal as provided by various provisions of this article. Where conditions or activities are also regulated by a state or federal agency and a permit, license or certificate is required by the regulating agency, then no local fire regulatory permit is required; provided, however, the approval of the fire marshal is required and he shall have the authority to apply the provisions of this code where a hazardous condition is discovered. 
(b)  New activities. Any person desiring to conduct or engage in any new process or activity requiring a fire regulatory permit under this article shall apply for a permit as set forth in this section and shall be issued such permit prior to engaging in the conducting of the process or activity, or before occupying a building or structure requiring a permit. 
(c)  Existing activities. Persons known to be conducting processes or activities required to be permitted under this article on or before January 1, 2009, shall be advised that a permit is required. Such persons may also be advised of any violations noted under this article that must be corrected before a permit can be issued. The fire marshal shall exercise reasonableness and shall apply the applicable provisions of subsections 9-102.2(a), 9-102.2(b), 9-102.9(a) and 9-102.10(a) when applying the provisions of this article or any of the technical codes or standards adopted by reference under this article or otherwise adopted by the Rome City Commission, when such are being applied to existing conditions or activities. No existing process or activity requiring a permit under this article and found to be in significant noncompliance with the applicable provisions of this article shall be authorized to continue for a period of one year from the date the person is notified of the permit requirement. Where there is noncompliance, the fire marshal may issue a temporary permit with an established expiration date. A temporary permit issued in connection with this subsection may be extended, provided a plan of corrective action has been submitted prior to the expiration of the permit, evidence clearly indicates that compliance is being obtained, and there are practical difficulties in completing the corrective action by the expiration date. 
(d)  Permit—Effect. A fire regulatory permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or handle materials, or to conduct processes which may produce conditions hazardous to life or property, or to install equipment used in connection with such activities. A permit shall not be a substitute for any license or certificate required by law. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of this article or any code or standard adopted by reference under this article. The issuance of a permit shall not be construed as preventing the fire marshal from thereafter requiring correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations of this Code. 
(e)  Permit—Transfer duration. A fire regulatory permit shall not be transferable, and any change in use or occupancy of a building or premises shall require a new permit. A fire regulatory permit shall continue until revoked or for such a period of time as is designated at the time of issuance. 
(f)  Application for permit. An application for a permit shall be made to the fire marshal on a form available at the division of fire prevention. The form shall be fully completed. The application shall be accompanied by such data as may be required by the fire marshal and by the required fee, as set forth in [subsection] 9-102.12(h) of this article. 
(g)  Agreement to comply; responsibility. The filing of an application for a permit or a request for an approval from the fire marshal under this article constitutes an agreement on the part of the persons the applicant represents to comply with the provisions of this article and of the technical codes and standards adopted by reference under this article otherwise adopted by the Rome City Commission. Such filing shall also constitute an understanding on the part of the permittee that the permittee, not the City of Rome, the fire marshal or the fire chief, shall bear the full responsibility for any damages to persons and/or property in connection with any fire, explosion or other accident or event involving any process, material, installation or activity covered by a permit or approval issued in connection with any of the provisions of this article. 
(h)  Processing fee. There shall be a processing fee of $50.00 for the issuance of a fire regulatory permit. The fee shall accompany the permit application when it is filed. If an inspection conducted to determine compliance with this article reveals that a condition exists which would preclude the issuance of a permit, the processing fee shall not be refunded. Further, where a permit is denied due to violations and hazards noted, the activity for which the permit is required shall not be deemed in compliance. The fire marshal may require the filing of a new application and fee if he deems the original application and fee to have been filed prematurely or filed with false or incomplete information. Such fee shall not be 
required of government, charitable or religious organizations. The fire marshal shall be responsible for maintaining records of and permits issued and fees collected. The disposition funds collected shall be in compliance with the applicable policies and procedures of the City of Rome. 
(i)  Review of applications; issuance. The fire marshal or his authorized representatives shall review applications submitted and issue approvals or permits as required, provided, however, that the data on the application and plans and specifications submitted therewith, indicate to a reasonable degree, compliance with the provisions of this article and the technical codes and standards adopted by reference under this article or otherwise adopted by the Rome City Commission. Permits for activities requiring evidence of financial responsibility on the part of the permittee as required by this article, and/or state law, shall not be issued unless proof of required financial responsibility is furnished. 
(j)  Rejected. If an application for a permit or approval is rejected by the fire marshal or his authorized representative, the applicant shall be advised of the reasons for such rejection. The permittee shall have the right of appeal as set forth in subsection 9-102.10(b). 
(k)  Display of permits. A copy of the fire regulatory permits issued and any exceptions granted shall be maintained in the division of fire prevention. Such record shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours upon request to the fire marshal or his or her designated representative. 
(l)  Records. A record of fire regulatory permits issued and any exceptions granted shall be maintained in the division of fire prevention. Such record shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours upon request to the fire marshal or his or her designated representative. 
(m)  Duration of permits; limitations on issuance. A fire regulatory permit issued under this article shall continue until revoked or for the period of time designated therein at the time of issuance of the permit. The permit shall be issued to one person only and for the location or purpose described in the permit. Any change which affects any of the conditions of the permit shall require a new permit. The fire marshal may grant an extension of the permit period where an expiration date has been established upon presentation by the permittee of a satisfactory reason for failure to start or complete the work or activity authorized by the permit by the designated expiration date. A permit issued shall become invalid unless the use authorized by such is commenced within six months after issuance, or if the use authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the use of the permit is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not to exceed 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. Extensions granted by the fire marshal shall be in writing. 
(n)  Temporary permit. When a potentially hazardous situation or activity of a temporary nature is encountered, and such is not specifically regulated by this article, a permit may be required by and issued by the fire marshal to cover the duration of the situation or activity. He shall require the filing of an application and fee as set forth for a regular fire regulatory permit. 
(o)  Consolidated permit. Only one permit shall be required for each location of a firm which may be required to obtain more than one permit under the permit requirements of this chapter. Such consolidated permit shall list all of the materials or activities covered by the permit. Revocation of any of the permitted materials or activities covered by the consolidated permit shall require the revocation of the permit and issuance of a new permit. In such situation, a new and revised permit may be issued by the fire marshal for the materials or activities not covered by the revocation. No new application is required; however, a new fee is required for the revised consolidated permit. 
(p)  Revocation of permits. The fire marshal may revoke his approval or a permit, issued under the provisions of this article when it is determined there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application or in the plans on which the approval or permit was based. The fire marshal may revoke his approval or a permit upon determination by him that the occupancy, operation, material, or activity for which the approval or permit was issued is in violation of, or is not in conformity with, the provisions of this article or with other applicable codes or technical standards adopted by the City of Rome or with applicable laws, rules or regulations of the State of Georgia. Where a state or federal agency also has jurisdiction, the fire marshal may notify the responsible agency of any noted violation, nonconformance or condition deemed to be hazardous. 
(q)  Fire regulatory permit and fire department services fee. The fire chief, fire marshal or their authorized representatives shall enforce the provisions of the fire regulatory permit and fire department services fees. These fees are located in the Fee Schedule Book of the City of Rome as authorized by City of Rome Code Section 8-36. 
For purposes of this Code, the word "permit" as used in the International Fire Code (IFC), shall be construed as being a "Fire Regulatory Permit" as required under section 9-102.12 of the Rome Fire Prevention Code. The fire regulatory permit fees shall be separate from the application process fee required by [subsection] 9-102.12(h). The permit application and issuance process established by [section] 9-102.12 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2011-2-3, § I, 2-7-11; Ord. No. 2011-4-5, § I, 4-4-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-2-3, § I, adopted Feb. 7, 2011, repealed former § 9-102, and enacted a new § 9-102 as set out herein. Former § 9-102 pertained to Standard Fire Prevention Code adopted as amended by the state; incorporated by reference; local amendments and derived from Ord. No. 83-4-4, § 1, 4-4-83; Ord. No. 87-4-1, § 1(1), 4-6-87; Ord. No. 89-6-6, § (1)(1), (2), 6-19-89; Ord. No. 90-6-1, § 1(1)—(3), 6-19-90; Ord. No. 92-1-1A, § I(4-2032), 1-6-92; Code 1981, § 4-2031 and Ord. No. 96-4-3, § VI, 4-15-96. 
Sec. 9-103. - International Fire Code and referenced codes and standards adopted as amended by the state; incorporated by reference; purposes and intents; local amendments. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted, for the local purposes of the public safety and welfare, that certain fire prevent code known as the International Fire Code, particularly the edition adopted with amendments or modifications by Chapter 120-3-3 of the Rules and Regulations of the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4), except such portions as are deleted, modified, amended or added in this article. Such code, including the additions, modifications or amendments, as well as technical codes and standards referenced by the International Fire Code or the Rules and Regulations of the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, is hereby incorporated by reference and made part of this article as if fully set forth in this section. Copies of the specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file for public inspection in the offices of the fire chief, the fire marshal, and the building official. 
(b)  Section 9-102 of Article IV, Fire Prevention Code, shall regulate the administration, application implementation, interpretation, and enforcement of the International Fire Code and the technical codes and standards adopted by reference under section 9-103(a). 
(c)  Purposes and intents. It is the primary purpose of this article to adopt and enforce the state minimum fire safety standards by transferring the authority from the State of Georgia and the responsibilities of the office of the insurance and safety fire commissioner to the City of Rome pursuant to O.C.G.A § 25-2-12(b), including all subsequent revisions thereof. 
(1)  Enforcement. The City of Rome will enforce the state minimum fire safety standards as set forth in O.C.G.A § 25-2-12 (a) with respect to those buildings and structures listed in O.C.G.A § 25-2-13, except for hospitals, nursing homes, jails, ambulatory health care centers, and penal institutions and except for buildings and structures which are owned and operated or occupied by the state. 
(2)  Duties of safety fire division. The safety fire division of the office of the insurance and safety fire commissioner shall continue to perform those duties specified in O.C.G.A § 25-1-12 (a)(2) with respect to hospitals, nursing homes, jails, ambulatory health care centers, and penal institutions and except for buildings and structures which are owned and operated or occupied by the state. 
(3)  Responsibilities and duties of the City of Rome. The City of Rome will be responsible for enforcing such fire safety standards within its jurisdiction and will: 
a.  Conduct fire safety inspections on existing buildings and structures. 
b.  Review plans and specifications for proposed buildings and structures, issue building permits when plans are approved, and conduct fire safety inspections of such buildings and structures. 
c.  Issue permanent and temporary certificates of occupancy. 
d.  Conduct arson investigations. 
(4)  Fees. The City of Rome will charge and retain appropriate fees for performing the duties required in O.C.G.A § 25-2-12(2)(A), (B). 
(d)  The following deletions, modifications, amendments, and additions are hereby made to the adopted International Fire Code. 
(1)  Chapter 1 of the adopted International Fire Code for local purposes regarding the local administration, application, implementation, interpretation, and enforcement is hereby deleted and is replaced by Section 9-102 of Article IV, Fire Prevention Code, of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia. Nothing herein shall be construed as deleting modifications to said Chapter 1 of the Rules and Regulations of the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner or the Georgia Department of Community Affairs that are applicable to administrative, implementation and enforcement provisions as they apply to the state fire marshal's office or buildings, structures, facilities, premises, or hazardous materials coming under the jurisdiction of the state fire marshal as set forth by O.C.G.A. Chapter 25, Title 2. 
(2)  Chapter 2 of the adopted International Fire Code is hereby modified by including the following local definitions of the City of Rome with those in Section 202, General Definitions: 
Alter : any change or modification in the construction, occupancy or use of any building, structure, facility or premises. 
Approved : acceptable to the fire marshal, or, as appropriate, the fire chief, of the City of Rome. In determining acceptability of installations, equipment, materials or procedures, the fire marshal, or as appropriate, the fire chief, may base acceptance on compliance with nationally recognized standards. The fire marshal, or, as appropriate, the fire chief, may require evidence of proper installation, proper use, or use of proper procedures. The fire marshal, or, as appropriate, the fire chief, may also refer to listings or labeling practices of recognized testing laboratories, inspection agencies or other recognized organizations concerned with product evaluations and which are in a position to determine compliance with appropriate standards for the current production of listed items and the satisfactory performance of such equipment or materials in actual usage. 
Building code : the building code adopted in Chapter 5, Article III, of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
Building official : the building inspector of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
Chief of police : the Chief of the Police Department of Rome, Georgia. 
Chief of the division of fire prevention : the fire marshal of the division of fire prevention of the Fire Department of Rome, Georgia. 
Chief of the fire department/fire chief : the Fire Chief of the Fire Department of Rome, Georgia. 
Combustible : capable of undergoing combustion. 
Electrical code : the electrical code adopted in Chapter 5, Article IV, of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
Gas code : the gas code adopted in Chapter 5, Article V, of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
Mechanical code : the mechanical code adopted by Chapter 5, Article VII, of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
The division : the division of fire prevention and community emergency education within the Rome Fire Department. 
Zoning code : the zoning code in Chapter 23 of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2011-2-3, § II, 2-7-11; Ord. No. 2018-10-2, § I, 10-22-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-10-2, § I, adopted Oct. 22, 2018, amended § 9-103 and in so doing changed the title, as set out herein. 
Chapter 10 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 10-1. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives 
(a)  Authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Rome, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(d)  Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10-2, § I, 10-5-09) 
Sec. 10-2. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
(b)  Basis for area of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Floyd County Georgia are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: 
Rome/Floyd County Inspection Department  Environmental Compliance Section  607 Broad Street, Room 211  Rome, Georgia 30162 
(c)  Establishment of flood area permit. If development or construction is proposed within or affecting a special flood hazard area (SFHA), approval of a flood area permit application shall be required. An application for a flood area permit may be included with and reviewed as part of a land development permit application. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. Upon adoption this ordinance shall replace Article 6.14 Flood Damage Prevention of the "Unified Land Development Code of Floyd County and the City of Rome, Georgia". 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Floyd County and/or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both, or be sentenced to community service and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Rome from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10-2, § I, 10-5-09) 
Sec. 10-3. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The chief building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the jurisdiction, the chief building official may designate a technical official to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Permit procedures. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the chief building official or designee on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, and dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsection 10-4(b)(2); and 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The chief building official or designee shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the chief building official or designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, and require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 10-2(b), then the chief building official or designee shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source in order to administer the provisions of Section 10-4; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 10-3(b)(2); 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsection 10-3(b)(2); 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the chief building official or designee shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsections 10-3(b)(1)c. and 10-4(b)(2) or subsection 10-4(d)(2); 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas; 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process, and assure that flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained; 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the chief building official or designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter; 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the Rome/Floyd County Building Inspection Department and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10-2, § I, 10-5-09) 
Sec. 10-4. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 10-4(a)(4), "elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Sufficient fill shall be placed, if necessary, to provide at least 15 feet of clearance at the ground surface between all faces of any building containing a dwelling unit and the base flood limits. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to two feet above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 10-3(c)(7). 
a.  Sufficient fill shall be placed, if necessary, to provide at least 30 feet of clearance at the ground surface from the face of the building, at its principal entrance, and the base flood limits. 
(3)  Flood storage capacity and impediments. Any cut or fill within the floodplain must be graded to provide positive drainage to the main watercourse. Fill placed within the floodplain shall be limited such that at no point is the cross-sectional area of the floodplain outside the floodway and below the base flood elevation as measured perpendicular to the direction of the watercourse reduced by more than 60 percent. 
(4)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
(i)  Individual lots or parcels, 
(ii)  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, 
(iii)  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, 
(iv)  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement as provided in subsection 10-4(a)(6). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must: 
(i)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
(ii)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(iii)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections 10-4(b)a. and (b)c. 
(5)  Floodway. Located within special flood hazard areas established in subsection 10-2(b) are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 10-4. 
(c)  Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). Located within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection 10-2(b), where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 10-2(b), then the chief building official or designee shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 10-4. If data is not available from these sources, only then shall subsections (2) and (3) apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 10-4(a)(4), "elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The chief building official or designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(d)  Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. Located within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection 10-2(b), where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with subsection 10-4(b). 
(e)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). Areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 10-2(b) may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 10-4(a)(4), "elevated buildings". 
The chief building official or designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 10-3(b)(1)c. and 10-3(b)(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(g)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data plan adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals within a residential zoning district shall have lots with no less than 70 percent of the minimum lot size, as established in Section 3.5 of the Unified Land Development Code of Rome and Floyd County. 
(6)  All subdivision proposals within a nonresidential zoning district shall have lots with no less than 40 percent of the minimum lot size, as established in Section 3.5 of the Unified Land Development Code of Rome and Floyd County. 
(g)  Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress away from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10-2, § I, 10-5-09) 
Sec. 10-5. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of appeals as established by the City of Rome and Floyd County shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. An application for an appeals request including all supporting technical documentation must be submitted to the Rome/Floyd County Department of Planning and Zoning. 
(b)  The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the chief building official or designee in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Floyd County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this chapter are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this chapter and all standards specified in this chapter and all subdivision and project standards found within Article 6 of the Unified Land Development Code of Rome and Floyd County (ULDC) including the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(2)  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(3)  Susceptibility of the facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage to the individual owner. 
(4)  Importance of the services provided to the community. 
(5)  Availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(6)  Availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(7)  Compatibility of the use with existing and anticipated development. 
(8)  Relationship of the use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area. 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effect of water action, if applicable to the site. 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, as, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(h)  Conditions for variance. 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction. Therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The chief building official or designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10-2, § I, 10-5-09) 
Sec. 10-6. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter it's most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent load-bearing wall, shall be considered "New Construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the chief building official's or designee's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depth from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in Article 2, Section B. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) is the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, VI-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before: 
September 15, 1978—City of Rome 
May 19, 1987—Unincorporated Floyd County 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before: 
September 15, 1978—City of Rome 
May 19, 1987—Unincorporated Floyd County 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge opening, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 15, 1978 within the City of Rome, or May 19, 1987 within unincorporated Floyd County, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 15, 1978 within the City of Rome, or May 19, 1987 within unincorporated Floyd County, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after September 15, 1978 within the City of Rome, or May 19, 1987 within unincorporated Floyd County. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. 
The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief approved by the board of adjusts for the City of Rome and Floyd County from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10-2, § I, 10-5-09) 
Sec. 10-7. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10-2, § I, 10-5-09) 
Chapter 11 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Business regulations, § 2-10; licenses, art. XIII. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; animals, ch. 4; buildings, ch. 5; license of electrician, § 5-211 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 6; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; wrecker and towing services, § 12-301 et seq.; conditions constituting nuisances, § 14-51; arborist's license, § 16-140; solid waste, ch. 19; scavengers, § 19-15; subdivisions, ch. 21; duties of waste haulers, § 22-197; zoning, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Commerce and trade, O.C.G.A. tit. 10; professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. tit. 43; disabled veterans and blind persons engaging in peddling, operating businesses or practicing professions, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1 et seq.; persons selling agricultural products and implements, jugs and flowerpots, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6; exemptions from municipal taxes and license fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354 et seq.; specific, business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - OCCUPATION FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, adopted Dec. 5, 1994, did not specifically repeal former art. I, §§ 11-1—11-26; hence, said ordinance has been treated as superseding the provisions of former art. I, at the discretion of the editor. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of this ordinance. 

Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any person who, within the corporate limits of the city, engages in, causes to be engaged in, and/or represents himself to be engaged in, any occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage either directly or indirectly. Any person advertising by any means, including, but not limited to, signs, cards, circulars, and newspapers, that he is engaged in a business of any kind, shall be liable for the appropriate occupational fee payment certificates required under this chapter and the payment of the approximate fee therefor. No business required by this chapter to secure an occupational fee payment certificate shall be exempt from the payment of such occupation fee on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to such purpose. 
Business fee registration, business registration or registration shall mean and is synonymous with the term occupation fee payment certificate and the submission of that information necessary to obtain same. 
Business license as used in this chapter means and is synonymous with the term occupation fee payment certificate and shall be issued upon satisfaction of all the requirements as provided in this chapter. 
Date of commencing operations means the date on which a business theretofore not engaged in commercial transactions within the city becomes engaged in business. 
Engaged in business refers to any person who performs any act of selling any goods or services for sale for payment primarily in an attempt to make a profit, including the sales or services of the character as made by a wholesaler or retailer, or involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer; all of the foregoing either as an owner, operator, or agent in any business, trade, profession, or occupation within the city. 
Occupation fee means the fixed occupation fee imposed by this article for an occupational fee payment certificate to engage in business in the city for each calendar year as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-2. - Occupation fee required; occupation fee required for business dealings in the city. 
For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the City of Rome, Georgia, whether with a location in the city or, in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia, exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation fee for said business, trade, profession, or occupation. When the fee is paid and an occupation fee payment certificate is issued, said certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the person has a permanent business location in the city. If the person has no permanent business location in the city, such fee certificate shall be shown to the city clerk or his or her deputies or to any police officer of said city, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-3. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the terms "city," "City of Rome" or "Rome" are used herein, such term shall be construed to mean the City of Rome, Georgia; wherever the term city or county is used herein, it shall be construed to mean Rome and Floyd County, Georgia. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Administrative fee means a component of an occupation fee which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation fee. 
(2)  a.  Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: 
1.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
2.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
3.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
4.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
5.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
b.  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
1.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
2.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
3.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2); 
4.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and 
5.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
(3)  Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
(4)  Occupation fee means a fee levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
(5)  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(6)  Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
(7)  Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization. 
(8)  Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
(9)  Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation fee. 
(10)  Number of employees of the business or practitioner, as computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of this computation an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. 
(11)  Profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-4. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation fee structure. 
A non prorated, non refundable administrative fee of $55.00 shall be required on all businesses and occupation fee accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95; Ord. No. 06-11-12, § I, 11-30-06) 
Sec. 11-5. - Occupation fee levied; restrictions. 
(a)  Occupation fees shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the number of employees and the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. 
(b)  Occupation fee schedule. 
(1)  Gross receipts in combination with the number of employees and profitability ratios. The fee rate determined by gross receipts in combination with the number of employees and profitability rations for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city as provided, and as amended from time to time, in a separate resolution. 
a.  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation fee for each of its locations. 
b.  No occupation fee will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business's gross receipts. 
c.  No occupation fee will be required on receipts on which such fee has been levied in other localities or states. 
d.  An occupation fee shall be required from real estate brokers, agents, or companies whose offices are located outside the city and who sell property inside the city. 
e.  An occupation fee shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
f.  Out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia shall be assessed occupation fees based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in O.C.G.A. § 14-13-7 which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-6. - Paying occupation fee of business with no location in Georgia. 
An occupation fee is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business' largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-7. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the City of Rome shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-8. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts or engages in business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation fee. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-9. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), paragraphs 1 through 18. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation fee one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation fee based on gross receipts combined with the number of employees and profitability ratios as set forth in section 11-5 of this article; or 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such fee to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the city relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-10. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation fee for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-11. - Purpose and scope of fee. 
The occupation fee levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the fee made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation fee only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-12. - When fee due and payable; effect of transacting business when fee delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation fee shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation fee shall be payable each year and shall, if not paid by May 1 of each year, be subject to accumulating interest charges for delinquency as prescribed in this article. 
(1)  All license fees assessed and fixed in accordance with this article shall be due not later than May 1 of each year. Interest charges of 1.5 percent per month (18 percent per annum) of the amount of the license fee or occupational fee shall be assessed against those persons who fail to pay the same by May 1 of each year. 
(2)  Any costs or expenses incurred by the city, including attorney fees, for the collection of any license or occupational fee shall also be assessed against those persons against whom collection efforts are pursued. 
(3)  A penalty of 50 percent of the amount of the calculated license or occupational fee shall apply immediately to any person or business that did not have a occupation fee payment certificate for the immediate preceding year. 
(b)  On any new profession, trade, business or calling begun in the city in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and fee shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning or engaging in business and a $500.00 penalty may be imposed for failure to immediately so comply. The fee registration or occupation payment certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the municipal judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment not to exceed ten days, either or both in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(c)  In addition to the above remedies, the sheriff may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions all amounts owing under this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-13. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intra- or interstate locations. 
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation fee assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
Where the business has locations outside of the city and a fee is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-14. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation fee is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or fee on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 100 percent of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-15. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration or occupational fee payment certificate may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-16. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory requirement shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration or occupational fee payment certificate, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-17. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation fee levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration or occupational fee payment certificate. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-18. - When registration and fee due and payable; effect of transacting business when fee delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration or occupational fee payment certificate shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all fees as provided for herein by May 1 of each year, and on or by May 1 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting, offering to transact, or engaging in the city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 11-19. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation fee, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation fee to which the penalty is applied. Any and all penalties provided for in this article may be pursued by the city, in addition to any penalties referenced in this section. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation fee becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-19. - Penalty of article violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction by the municipal judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisoned not exceeding ten days, either or both, in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-20. - City clerk's office; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The city clerk and the duly designated officers shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-21. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation fee or other type of fee pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-22. - Occupation fee inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation fee shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-23. - Occupation fees levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. 
(a)  All occupation fees levied under this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the current calendar year. However, for convenience of both the city and the fee-payer, each business subject to the occupation fee shall, on or before the dates hereinafter set forth, file with the city clerk the return hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payments on the occupation fee for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of fee levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth here. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager, secretary or other officer of the business subject to said occupation fee of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before April 25 of the current calendar year, file with the city clerk of the City of Rome, on a form furnished by said officer, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the final fee for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation fee for the current year. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation fee for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the occupation fee liability. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-24. - Filing of return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year; procedure where fees overpaid or underpaid. 
(a)  On or before April 25 of each year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation fee levied for the year shall file with the city clerk on a form furnished by the city clerk, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  If the amount of the occupation fee for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said fee provided for in this article, is less than the amount of occupation fee theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 11-23 hereof, the difference in said amount shall be due and payable to the city on or before May 1 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before said date. 
(c)  If the amount of the occupation fee for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said fee provided for in this article, exceeds the amount of occupation fee theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 11-23 hereof, the difference in said amount shall be refundable by the city; or, if said business continues to be conducted in said city during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation fee to be paid to the city by said business for the current year. This election is to be taken by the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-25. - When occupation fee due and payable; payment options. 
The amount of occupation fee shall be payable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-26. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation fee for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation fee shall estimate the number of employees or gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such fee shall be paid within 30 days from the date of commencing operations. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-27. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business will pay an occupation fee in accordance with the prevailing method for computing the fee and fee rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-28. - Returns confidential. 
(a)  The applications and returns made to the city for an occupational fee payment certificate pursuant to this article shall be confidential and shall not be made public except in the event of litigation with respect thereto; nor shall they be subject to the inspection of any person except the city manager, the city attorney, the city clerk, the director of finance, the city auditor, and their authorized agents. The city commission shall have the right to open such returns to the inspection of a committee composed of not more than three members of the commission to effect an analysis of the fee rates, or an investigation of the operation of the license fee department, or to secure date regarding a case in litigation. It shall be unlawful for any person to make public or inform any other person as to the contents of such application or return, or to permit inspection thereof by any person except as required in this section. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section as it pertains to gross receipts or gross income shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $500.00 or by imprisonment in accordance with provisions of section 11-19. In addition, any employee of the city who divulges such information shall be subject to immediate discipline. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city of various statistics, so classified as to discourage the identification of particular returns and the item thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified tax or investigative employees of the federal, state or county government. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-29. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the city clerk, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The city clerk shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city clerk such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the occupation fee payment certificate currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city clerk at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of 15 percent of the correctly assessed business fee plus 125 percent (per annum) of the prime interest rate times the amount any deficiency will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-30. - Fee registration to be revoked for failure to pay fee, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation fee or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business fee registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business fee registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation fee herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 11-19. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation fee. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-31. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after fee registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in the city after the registration for said business has been revoked as above, hereby required to make occupation fee returns, and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation fee. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-32. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation fee. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation fee herein levied, the city clerk, upon any fee or installment of said fee becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said fee against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said fee, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such fee or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said fee, all as provided by the ordinances and charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The lien of said occupation fee shall become fixed on and date from the time when such fee or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the marshal of the city upon the property of the delinquent located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charter of the city and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation fee, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the fee in full together with all interest and costs accrued, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the fees. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-33. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city commission to assess and collect any of the fees or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and fee rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation fee provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation fees upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-34. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where fees levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such fee, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such fee, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-35. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk and the city police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation fees are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city clerk, and his assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-36. - Requirement of public hearing before fee increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the city commission shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation fee as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-37. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation fee. 
The city commission may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation fee to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation fee shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority or a plan. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-38. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 11-39. - Severability. 
If any section, provision, or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 94-12-1, § I, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 95-12-1, § I, 12-4-95) 
Secs. 11-40—11-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MISCELLANEOUS LICENSING AND REGULATION 

Sec. 11-51. - Private detectives. 
(a)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Private detective means any person who accepts employment for hire, fee or reward to furnish or supply information as to the location, personal character, actions or identity of any person or as to the character or kind of business or occupation of any person. The term shall not include a detective or officer belonging to the law enforcement agencies of the United States, or of any state, county or city. 
(b)  License required. No person shall operate as a private detective in the city without first obtaining a business license as such in the manner set out in this section. 
(c)  Written approval of chief of police required. An application for a business license to operate as a private detective in the city shall be accompanied by written approval of the chief of police, who shall investigate the applicant and issue such approval when he finds that: 
(1)  The applicant is of good moral character. 
(2)  The applicant has never been convicted of any felony or any offense against the decency and morals of the community. 
(3)  The applicant and his proposed operation will not be detrimental to the city. 
(4)  The applicant meets any applicable state standards for private detectives. 
(d)  Rejection of applicant; appeal. Should the chief of police not approve the applicant, he shall so notify the applicant in writing within ten days after the date upon which the applicant files, whereupon such person may appeal the denial of the chief's approval to the public safety committee of the city commission by filing with the secretary written notice of appeal within five days after receipt of his notice of rejection. 
(Ord. No. 82-6-3, § 1, 6-7-82; Code 1981, § 9-9001(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Private detectives, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-1 et seq. 
Sec. 11-52. - Security guards. 
(a)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Security guard means any person who accepts employment for hire, fee or reward, patrolling, supervising, observing or other duties associated with providing security of private or public property. The term shall not include any police officer, detective or other officer belonging to the law enforcement agencies of the United States, or of any state, county or city. 
(b)  License required. No person shall operate as a security guard within the city without first obtaining a business license as such in the manner set out in this section; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to individuals employed by an agency which has obtained a business license to operate a security guard service as set out in this section. 
(c)  Written approval of the chief of police required. An application for a business license to operate as a security guard or to operate a security guard service in the city shall be accompanied by written approval of the chief of police, who shall investigate the applicant and security guards employed by the applicant and issue such approval when he finds that: 
(1)  The applicant and his employees, if any, are of good moral character. 
(2)  The applicant and his employees, if any, have never been convicted of any felony or any offense against the decency and morals of the city. 
(3)  The applicant and his proposed operation will not be detrimental to the city. 
(4)  The applicant meets any applicable state standards for security guards. 
(d)  Rejection of applicant; appeal. Should the chief of police not approve the applicant, he shall so notify the applicant in writing within ten days after the date upon which the applicant files, whereupon such person may appeal the denial of the chief's approval to the public safety committee of the city commission by filing with the secretary written notice of appeal within five days after receipt of his notice of rejection. 
(e)  Uniforms; identification. Security guards operating within the city shall be in uniform, and such uniform shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  The outer garment (jacket/shirt) of such uniform shall be provided with a patch on each sleeve which clearly reads "Private Security Guard" in lettering that clearly contrasts in color with the surrounding patch background. 
(2)  There shall be on the outer garment (jacket/shirt) of such uniform shoulder epaulets of a color contrasting with the color of the garment. 
(3)  The uniforms and patches shall be approved as being in compliance by the chief of police prior to use within the city. 
(4)  Security guards operating within the city shall wear an identity card with a photograph thereon. The identity card shall clearly indicate that the holder is a private security guard and whether he is an independent operator or an employee of a firm. 
(Ord. No. 82-6-3, § 1, 6-7-82; Code 1981, § 9-9001(b)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Private security businesses, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-1 et seq. 
Sec. 11-53. - Professional bondsmen. 
(a)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Professional bondsman means any person who, for compensation, holds himself out as a signer or surety of criminal or other bonds. 
(b)  License required. No person shall operate as a professional bondsman without first obtaining a business license as such in the manner set out in this section. 
(c)  Written approval of chief of police required. An application for a business license to operate as a professional bondsman in the city shall be accompanied by written approval of the chief of police, who shall investigate the applicant and issue such approval when he finds that: 
(1)  The applicant is of good moral character. 
(2)  The applicant has never been convicted of any felony or any offense against the decency and morals of the community. 
(3)  The applicant and his proposed operation will not be detrimental to the city. 
(d)  Grounds for refusal and revocation of license. Any violation of O.C.G.A. title 17, chapter 6 (§ 17-6-1 et seq.) shall constitute grounds for refusal to issue and/or revocation of the business license. 
(e)  Rejection of applicant; appeal. Should the chief of police not approve the applicant, he shall so notify the applicant in writing within ten days after the date upon which the applicant files, whereupon such person may appeal to the public safety committee of the city commission by filing with the secretary written notice of appeal within five days after receipt of his notice of rejection. 
(Code 1981, § 9-9002) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sureties on criminal bonds, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-30 et seq.; professional bondsmen, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50 et seq. 
Sec. 11-54. - Building contractors; subcontractors. 
No person shall operate as a building contractor or subcontractor in the city without first obtaining a business license as such, and no business license shall be issued to any person without a certificate of qualification as provided for in chapter 5, if necessary. 
(Code 1959, § 17-35; Code 1981, § 9-9004) 
State Law reference— Bonds for public contractors, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-100 et seq. 
Sec. 11-55. - Boxing, wrestling, sparring, judo, karate. 
(a)  No person shall conduct, participate in, promote or assist in any boxing, wrestling, sparring, judo or karate match or exhibition, or similar contests or exhibitions, without first obtaining a business license therefor and a permit to carry on such a contest. 
(b)  Applications for a business license to carry on such contests in the city shall be accompanied by a form completed and executed in such a manner as to permit investigation of the moral and financial character of the applicant, and of the fact that the proposed operation will not be detrimental to the city. 
(c)  In addition to a business license, each contest shall require an individual permit, application for which, containing date, time and place, shall be made to the public safety committee of the city commission. 
(Code 1959, § 17-37; Code 1981, § 9-9005) 
State Law reference— Boxing match licenses, O.C.G.A. § 31-31-1 et seq. 
Sec. 11-56. - Amusement centers. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement center means the operation by any person of 20 or more coin operated amusement devices for public use, upon premises solely within one enclosure. 
Coin-operated amusement device means any amusement machine or device which is operated or put into operation in whole or in part by the insertion of a coin, token or similar object. The term does not include coin-operated musical devices, bona fide vending machines in which gaming or amusement features are incorporated, any gambling device or slot machine or any coin-operated machine or device which exhibits or allows viewing of photographs or moving pictures of an obscene or pornographic nature. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the use of any device prohibited by law. 
(b)  License required to keep amusement center. No person shall keep within the city any amusement center unless such person shall have first procured an amusement center license as provided in this section. 
(c)  Annual license required to own, operate or permit operation of amusement center. No person shall own, operate or permit the operation of an amusement center on premises owned, leased or operated by him, or engage in the business of operating an amusement center in the city, unless an annual amusement center license has been obtained. Such amusement center license shall be in lieu of any other license required by this chapter. 
(d)  Applications for licenses. Applications for amusement center licenses shall be made to the secretary with the payment of the annual license taxes prescribed therefor. The application must be signed and sworn to by the applicant in the case of a sole proprietorship. In case the applicant is a partnership, all partners must sign and verify the application. In case the applicant is a corporation, any authorized officer and the secretary must sign and verify the application and indicate their official position. The information required in the application form must be furnished as to each person signing the application. Each application shall be accompanied by the required license tax and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name. 
(2)  The applicant's residence address. 
(3)  The applicant's business address. 
(4)  The address of the proposed amusement center. 
(5)  The name and address of every person who has any interest in the amusement center and the nature of that interest. 
(6)  Whether or not the applicant has been arrested for or convicted of any felony, or of pandering, gambling, operation of a gambling device, operating of a gaming house or being a keeper of a house of ill fame or any other misdemeanor. 
(7)  Whether or not the applicant is at the time of making the application keeping or in any way connected with a gaming house or a house of ill fame. 
(8)  Whether or not the applicant, his spouse, or any member of the applicant's household is a member or employee of the police department, whether or not any member or employee of the police department is interested in any way, directly or indirectly, in the license applied for, the devices or the operation of the same; and whether or not the applicant has received or borrowed money or anything else of value or accepted credit from any member or employee of the department or the spouse or any member of the household of any member or employee. 
(9)  A statement that the applicant permits a record of his fingerprints to be made by the police department for the purpose of additional investigation to determine whether or not the application should be granted. 
(10)  Written approval of the chief of police, who shall issue such approval when he finds that the applicant is not guilty of any of the violations or facts listed in subsection (d)(6), (7) or (8). 
(e)  Issuance of license. Upon receipt of the proper application and the tax, the secretary shall then issue a license for the center. 
(f)  Location. No license shall be valid except for the location shown in the application. 
(g)  Regulations. 
(1)  No amusement center nor any coin-operated amusement device therein shall be operated so as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to maintain order on the licensed premises at all times. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to see that the licensed premises do not become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of persons therein. 
(4)  The licensee shall provide a full-time adult attendant upon the licensed premises during business hours. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of operating an amusement center to sell, offer for sale or knowingly permit to be sold or offered for sale or to be dispensed or consumed or brought on the licensed premises any alcoholic or malt beverages. 
(6)  Every amusement center licensed under this section shall have affixed on its premises in plain view evidence of the issuance of its license. 
(7)  The license required and described in this section shall be purely a personal privilege and shall not constitute property. It is not transferable in any manner. 
(8)  Any violation of the Criminal Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.), or of any ordinance, pertaining to obscene materials as defined and regulated in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 et seq., shall result in immediate revocation of a license issued under this section. 
(Code 1959, § 17-38; Ord. No. 78-12, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 79-3, 4-16-79; Code 1981, § 9-9006) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-57. - Rummage sales. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term rummage sale means any sale of used or new goods by persons not regularly engaged in the business of such sales and shall include garage sales, yard sales, attic sales, flea markets and other such sales however named. 
(b)  No person shall conduct at his or her place of residence rummage sales for more than two, two-day periods in any one calendar year. 
(c)  Any person who conducts a rummage sale away from his or her place of residence and in a C-3 zone may do so only after having purchased a rummage sale license from the city. 
(d)  Any person who conducts a rummage sale away from his or her place of residence and outside a C-3 zone may do so only after having purchased an itinerant vendor license from the city. 
(e)  The rummage sale license and the itinerant vendor license provided for in subsections (c) and (d), respectively, above may be issued without a fee to bona fide charity and nonprofit organizations, such as churches, schools and civic groups. 
(Code 1981, § 9-9007; Ord. No. 93-1-2, § I, 1-4-93) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-58. - Dealers in precious metals. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer in precious metals means any person engaged in the business of buying, selling or pawning precious metals, whether for cash or trade, and whether or not a fixed place of business is maintained for such purposes. 
Precious metals means any form of gold, silver or platinum. 
(b)  Notice required. Prior to any buying, selling, trading or otherwise dealing in precious metals, and prior to advertising to carry on such activities, a person shall, at least 72 hours prior to such activity and/or advertisement, file with the chief of police a written notice of intent to conduct such business in the city. Such notice shall include the following: 
(1)  The full name and address of the person. 
(2)  The full name and address of the person's employer, if any. 
(3)  The length of stay within the city, including dates of opening and closing business. 
(4)  The address and time at which the business will be conducted. 
(c)  Records. Every precious metal dealer shall keep a well-bound record book or register into which shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged, traded, purchased or sold by him. Such description shall include all the information required for the reports to the police department, as provided for in this section, and shall contain a copy of each receipt, bill of sale, or document transferred between the dealer and his customer. All entries shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible and in no event more than two hours after such transaction. 
(d)  Report to police department; contents; submission. Every dealer in precious metals shall make to the police department a written report of all transactions in which he has been involved. The report shall be delivered to the police department not less than 24 hours after a day's transactions, and in addition to any other information required by the chief of police, the report shall contain the following information under column titles as follows: 
(1)  Articles. The entry in this column shall be a description of the class of goods within which the purchased items belong (coins, rings, silverware, etc.). 
(2)  Description of articles. The entry in this column shall be a full description of the articles, including style, material, color, design, number of stones in jewelry, and any and all identifying names, weights and numbers. 
(3)  Amount paid. In this column, there shall be entered the amount paid for the articles by the precious metals dealer. 
(4)  Name and address of seller. The entry in this column shall contain the name and address of the person presenting the goods for sale, and such name shall be substantiated and verified by the dealer in precious metals by examination of the driver's license, social security card or other reliable identification, which shall also be entered, including driver's license or social security number or other identification. 
(5)  Description of person. The entry in this column shall include the physical description of the seller, indicating sex, race, age, hair color, height and weight. 
(e)  Duty to retain goods. No precious metals received by a dealer in precious metals shall be sold or permitted to be removed from his place of business for a period of five working days from the time of receiving same, and all such items shall be retained in the original condition in which they were received during the five working days' period. 
(f)  Notice of altered goods. With respect to any items which normally have a serial number or other means of identification, if any dealer in precious metals becomes aware that such items have had the serial number or other means of identification removed, mutilated, defaced, destroyed, or melted down, such fact shall be immediately reported by the dealer to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent. 
(g)  Surrender of stolen property. If it is determined that any item bought, sold, traded or received by the precious metals dealer is the subject of any theft, the precious metals dealer shall, upon demand of the chief of police or his designated agent, surrender the same to the police department. 
(h)  Dealing with minors. No precious metals dealer shall receive in pawn, trade, purchase or sale, any precious metals from a person under 18 years of age. 
(i)  Violations. Any violation of this section shall be grounds for refusing or revoking a license, and the person responsible may be punished as provided for in section 1-9. 
(Ord. of 12-8-80, § 1; Code 1981, § 9-9008) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq. 
Sec. 11-59. - Public dances. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public dance means any dance held or conducted on city property. 
(b)  Public dances may be held within the corporate limits of the city, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The city commission is hereby authorized to issue permits to responsible organizations that desire to sponsor public dances within the corporate limits of the city. A record of such permits shall be maintained by the secretary and such permits shall remain effective until and unless revoked by the commission. It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor a public dance within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained, and having in force at the time, such a permit. 
(2)  No public dance shall be held within the corporate limits of the city unless the police department shall have been given at least three days' notice in writing of the date, time and place of the proposed dance. The person sponsoring such dance shall be responsible for providing such police attendance and protection as, in the opinion of the chief of police, is adequate to meet the need therefor. 
(Code 1959, §§ 20-8, 20-9, 20-11; Code 1981, § 9-9009) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Roadhouses and public dance halls, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-50 et seq. 
Sec. 11-60. - Sidewalk cafes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Sidewalk cafe means an area of food service located outside, but connected with, a part of, and adjacent to, an indoor restaurant or cafe located in the city. 
(b)  Application for permit. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 20-1 through 20-4, a licensed restaurant may apply to the city's office of downtown development for a permit to operate a sidewalk cafe. Such application shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the licensee; 
(2)  The proposed location; 
(3)  A description of the proposed use or occupancy of the public right-of-way; and 
(4)  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the office of downtown development. 
(c)  Condition for permit issuance. Upon review and approval of the office of downtown development, the city clerk's office shall issue a permit containing restrictions, terms, and conditions to ensure the proper use for public property and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the city, including the following: 
(1)  The area permitted for sidewalk cafes shall be so located and maintained that only the following portion of the sidewalk shall be used: 
a.  Within the CBC district, no more than an eight-foot portion of the sidewalk measured from the face of the restaurant perpendicularly toward the curb. 
b.  Within the eight feet outside wall of the restaurant and perpendicular to the curb, a minimum of four feet shall be provided at all times from continuous unobstructed pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk between the sidewalk cafe and the curb or nearest obstacle. 
c.  Permanent plantings, city-owned waste receptacles, streetlight poles and other permanent fixtures along the sidewalk must be considered when determining the boundaries set forth in a permit. 
d.  The office of downtown development shall serve as the review agency for site plans, specifications, fixtures, materials and annual renewals. 
(2)  Any special construction proposed to encroach upon or occupy any of the public right-of-way shall be permitted only by prior approval of such plans by the chief building official. 
(3)  The permit holder of any sidewalk cafe shall at all times ensure that: 
a.  No encroachment on public rights-of-right, other than as stated in this section, shall be allowed to exist. 
b.  All restrictions, terms and conditions of any permit granted for sidewalk cafes shall be met. 
c.  All general provisions and clean community regulations of the refuse collection and disposal provisions of chapter 19 are complied with. 
(4)  The issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit shall not be construed or interpreted to convey any property rights or any other rights not expressly set forth in such permit. 
(5)  Permits are renewed within the first quarter of each calendar year. 
(d)  Regulations. Except as otherwise provided, a sidewalk cafe operating in the city shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Limitations on area. The area in which a sidewalk cafe is operated shall abut the outside front wall of the restaurant of which it is an extension and shall not extend in either direction beyond the outside front wall of the restaurant. 
(2)  Divider required. At restaurants where alcohol is served, the area permitted for a sidewalk cafe shall be separated from the remaining sidewalk area by a system of connected posts and railing that serves to contain crowds and maintain the boundaries of the cafe. The system shall be designed and constructed such that it resists movement and can be disassembled and removed, if necessary. The design must be included in the application and must be approved prior to issuance of a permit. Such divider shall not be less than three feet (36 inches) nor more than three feet six inches (42 inches) in height. All tables and chairs shall be located totally within the limits of the divider. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to maintain the divider in its exact approved location at all times. 
(3)  Sanitation. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the restaurant to which the sidewalk cafe permit is issued to maintain the area covered by the permit in a clean, neat, and orderly manner at all times. The area shall be cleared of all debris at all times. All tables and chairs are to be kept clean, sanitary, safe, and in structurally sound condition at all times. 
(4)  Removal of furnishings and suspension of operation. All tables, chairs, and dividers of a sidewalk cafe shall be removed from the public sidewalk area from time to time and outside operations suspended as required by the city for sidewalk cleaning or for such other purposes as the city may determine, in its sole discretion, for such purposes as, but not limited to: 
a.  Any permitted special event; 
b.  Any street, sidewalk, or utility construction; 
c.  Any emergency situations; or 
d.  The protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(5)  Alcoholic beverages/open containers. Sidewalk cafe permit holder shall be exempt from the restrictions on open containers if such establishment is otherwise licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under the applicable laws and ordinances. All applicable provisions of chapter 3 (Alcoholic Beverages) of the code of the City of Rome and Title 3 (Alcoholic Beverages) of the official Code of Georgia shall be enforced regarding the sale, service, possession, and consumption of alcoholic beverages. The permit holder shall post approved signs designating the limits of the open container area. 
(6)  Furnishings. Furnishings shall not be secured to lamp posts, streetlights, trees or any other public street fixtures. Furnishings may not be stacked or stored outside on the public right-of-way at any time. 
a.  Fences. A system of connected posts and railing, firmly secured, but temporarily moveable, shall serve to maintain the boundaries of the sidewalk cafe and allow visibility to the street patrons. Fences in any approved locations will in no instance be a visual barrier to vehicular traffic or impede driver visibility. Fence materials typically are to be discreet in color, design, materials and finishes and relatively transparent. Flower boxes or planters may be used to define the corner boundaries of the area. 
b.  Menu boards and signs. Menu boards, both portable and on walls, shall be subject to sign permit approval and shall comply with the City Code. 
c.  Trash receptacles. The number, type and location of trash receptacles shall be subject to approval. 
d.  Umbrellas. Each table may be equipped with an umbrella that, when open, shall extend to at least the same diameter as the table it serves and shall be anchored with a weighted base. Any umbrella protruding into public space shall be positioned at a minimum height of seven feet. An umbrella may not display the name or logo of the restaurant operating the sidewalk cafe and/or advertise a product. Each umbrella shall be maintained in good, clean, and operable condition. 
e.  Tables and Chairs. Materials. Tables and chairs shall match and be made of safe, sturdy, and durable material, such as wood, steel, or wrought iron. All furniture shall be commercial grade and manufactured for outdoor commercial use. Small round or square tables shall seat no more than four people. Use of larger tables may be granted provided that all clearance requirements are met. Round tables shall be no larger than three feet diameter. Square tables shall be no larger than three feet wide and rectangular tables no more than three x four feet. Tables shall be no more than 30 inches in height. 
(7)  Landscaping. Flower boxes or planters may be used to define the corner boundaries of the seating area. The combined height of the planters and live plants shall not exceed four feet from sidewalk grade and no wider than two feet at the base. The planting areas shall be planted with seasonal blooming or ornamental evergreen live plants year round. The permit holder shall maintain flower boxes and planting areas. The flower boxes, planters and trash receptacles shall be portable and made of safe, durable and attractive materials such as wood, steel or colored concrete. 
(8)  Hours of operation. A business with a sidewalk cafe permit may be open for breakfast, lunch and/or dinner and any combination thereof, consistent with the businesses normal hours of operation. 
(9)  Smoking. Those businesses which are prohibited by state or local law from allowing smoking within the interior of their establishments may not allow smoking within the area permitted for a sidewalk cafe. 
(10)  Guidelines. The city shall adopt standards and guidelines for consideration of applications, without amendments to this article. 
(e)  Liability and insurance. The city shall require permit holders to indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers and employees for claims and liability arising out of the permit holder's use of a sidewalk cafe. The city shall require the permit holder to obtain insurance covering the use of a sidewalk cafe and to name the city as an additional insured with respect to such insurance. The city shall prepare guidelines with respect to any indemnification and insurance requirements of permit holders. 
(f)  Revocation or suspension of permit. The approval of a sidewalk cafe permit is conditional at all times. A sidewalk cafe permit may be revoked or suspended by the city's code enforcement officer, upon approval of the city clerk's office, if it is found that: 
(1)  Any necessary business or health permit has been suspended, revoked, or cancelled. 
(2)  The permit is not incompliance with any of the city's regulations with respect to sidewalk cafes. 
(3)  The permit holder has failed to correct violations of this chapter or any other ordinance within 48 hours of receipt of the notice of same delivered in writing to the permit holder. 
(4)  The permit holder has a history of violations of this chapter of three or more within a two-year period, or immediately upon any violation depending upon severity of the violation. 
(5)  Permits may be suspended for a period up to 12 months depending upon history and severity of violations. 
(g)  Fines for violations. In addition to the possible revocation or suspension of a permit, the following minimum fines shall be imposed for violations of this chapter: 
(1)  First citation: $100.00 fine. 
(2)  Second citation (within one-year period): $250.00 fine. 
(3)  Third and subsequent citations (within one-year period): $500.00 fine. 
(h)  Americans with Disabilities Act. Any person or entity receiving a permit hereunder agrees to fully comply with all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act as currently existing or as may be hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2007-6-2, § I, 6-18-07; Ord. No. 2011-6-2, §§ I—V, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 2015-05-02, §§ I—III, 5-26-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-6-2, § I, adopted June 18, 2007, deleted in its entirety the former Art. II, § 11-60, and replaced it with a new Art. II, § 11-60 as set out herein. The former Art. II, § 11-60 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 11-61. - Fair housing. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 8-3-202, 8-3-203 and 8-3-204 are hereby adopted verbatim. 
(Ord. No. 79-4, 5-21-79; Code 1981, §§ 8-8001—8-8007) 
State Law reference— Fair housing, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-200 et seq. 
Secs. 11-62—11-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADVERTISING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Distributing advertising matter, § 19-54. 
State Law reference— False advertising, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-420 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-86. - Deceptive advertisements illegal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to publish, or place before the public in a newspaper or in any other way, an advertisement of any sort regarding goods or services offered to the public for sale or distribution and containing any representation or statement of fact which is untrue or misleading, with intent to sell or in any way dispose of such goods or services, or to induce the public in any manner to enter into any obligation relating thereto or to acquire title or interest therein. 
(Ord. No. 79-17, 10-1-79; Code 1981, § 9-3001) 
Sec. 11-87. - Price reductions must be bona fide. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or otherwise represent to the public in any manner whatsoever a reduction in the price of any goods or services, of whatsoever kind offered to the public, where the reduction is not based upon a previous bona fide sale price or cost price previously advertised or represented to the public for the articles or services so offered to the public. 
(Ord. No. 79-17, 10-1-79; Code 1981, § 9-3002) 
Sec. 11-88. - Deceptive representations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, by means of exaggerated variations in the comparative size, location or position of letters, figures or other markings or characters in any price tag, or other public representation of any nature whatsoever, to mislead or deceive the public as to the true nature, price, quantity, quality, brand or character of any goods or services, or as to the nature of, or the reason, for the sale so being made to the public. 
(Ord. No. 79-17, 10-1-79; Code 1981, § 9-3003) 
Sec. 11-89. - Sound trucks and sound amplifying devices. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Sound-amplifying equipment means any machine or device for the amplification of any sound. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated in the city any sound-amplifying devices or equipment for any purpose whatever, whether the same is stationary or operated from a vehicle, unless a permit has been obtained from the chief of police to do so; provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for any person to make any loud and raucous noise to the disturbance of the peace. Any person to whom a permit has been issued under this section who abuses his discretion and causes or permits loud and raucous noises shall subject the permit to immediate revocation. 
(Ord. No. 79-17, 10-1-79; Code 1981, § 9-3004) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12. 
Sec. 11-90. - Advertising on sidewalks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, print, write, or stamp with paint, pencil, ink, or other substances, any advertisement or notice upon the sidewalks of the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-17, 10-1-79; Code 1981, § 9-3005) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 20. 
Secs. 11-91—11-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5; zoning, ch. 23. 
State Constitution reference— Outdoor advertising devices near certain highways, art. III, § VI, par. II(a)(6). 
State Law reference— Outdoor advertising near state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

Sec. 11-116. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air and gas filled device means any sign using, either wholly or in part, forced air or other gas as a means of supporting its structure. 
Area of sign (sign area) means the area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. 
Awning/canopy means a structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to a building and/or supported by the ground. 
Banner means a sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind excluding flags, emblems, and insignia or political, professional, religious, educational, or corporate organizations, provided that such flags, emblems and insignia are displayed for non- commercial purposes. 
Building inspector means the person designated by the city as the chief building and zoning inspection official or his designated representative. 
Changeable copy sign means a permanently mounted sign designed to accept changeable letters, symbols, or other characters. 
Construction sign means a sign erected and maintained on the premises announcing the proposed or existing construction of a building or project. 
Flag means a cloth, fabric or plastic sign with one pole or angular two-sided frame intended to be mounted to a pole or on its own support that bears a company, corporation, or business emblem, logo, letters, illustrations or characters depicting that organization. This is to be exclusive of American, states' or any other jurisdiction's flag. 
Flashing sign means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. 
Freestanding sign means a permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support. 
Hanging sign means a sign which is suspended by a chain or cable from an awning, canopy or marquee. 
Height of sign means, in the case of freestanding signs, the distance in vertical feet measured from the level of an adjacent street centerline to the highest point of the sign structure, provided, however, that all freestanding sign structures shall be allowed to be built to a height of 40 feet. For other signs, the height is to be measured from the grade below the sign. 
Illuminated sign means a sign illuminated by an internal or external light source. 
Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure extending from part of the wall of a building but not supported by the ground, and constructed of a durable material. 
Moving sign means a sign which revolves, rotates, swings, undulates or otherwise attracts attention through the structural movement of parts, but not including flags, banners or pennants. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this division. 
Nonpermitted zoning district means a zoning district in the city within which signs cannot be erected. 
Nonprofit activity means an activity, project, operation, or enterprise of a temporary nature carried on by a corporation or an organization qualified as an exempt organization under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. 
Off-premises sign means a sign that advertises a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation which is not carried out on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
On-premises sign means a sign located on the same premises on which the advertised product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation is located. For the purposes of this division, this shall include: 
(1)  Actions, functions, demonstrations, displays, offerings for sale, or sales that occur on the premises. 
(2)  Actions, functions, demonstrations, displays, sales, offerings for sale, products, services or merchandise that are advertised or promoted on the premises. 
(3)  Actions, functions, products, services or merchandise that are on display on the premises. 
(4)  Actions, functions, demonstrations, displays, sales, offerings for sale, service or merchandise about which additional information and data can be received at a location on the premises. 
ON-PREMISES FREESTANDING SIGN 
Political sign means a sign identifying and urging voter support for a particular election issue, political party, or candidate for public office. 
Portable sign means any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support constructed without wheels is converted to an A- or T-frame sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground. 
Projecting sign means a sign which is affixed to a building or wall and extends beyond the line of such building or wall or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or wall to which it is affixed by more than 18 inches. 
Real estate sign means a temporary sign erected by the owner or his agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, for lease, or for sale. 
Road frontage means the width in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Roofline means the top of a flat roof or the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
ROOFLINE    ROOFLINE 
Roof sign means a sign projecting over the coping top of a flat roof, or over the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, and/or supported by or attached to such roof. 
Sidewalk, sandwich or A-frame sign means a sign which is normally in the shape of an A or some variation thereof and which is usually two-sided. 
Sign means any identification, description, illustration or device, illuminated or nonilluminated, which is visible to the general public and directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem, painting, flag, banner, pennant, balloon, or placard designed to advertise, identify, or convey information. 
Sign face means the part of a sign that is or can be used for advertising purposes. 
Street means any and all kinds of public ways, lanes or alleys and each part thereof, including the pavement, shoulders, curbing, gutters, storm drains, sidewalks and rights-of-way. 
Temporary sign means a sign of a nonpermanent nature which is permitted to be displayed by a business for not more than 30 days per calendar year. 
Wall face means a measurement of area equal to the height of the structure from the ground to the coping or eave of the roof multiplied by the width of the wall associated with the individual business. The wall face is to be measured for each wall independently. 
Wall sign means a sign applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which does not project more than 18 inches from the outside wall of such building or structure, exclusive of lighting, catwalks, etc. The total lettering on one wall face shall constitute a wall sign and be measured independently of other wall faces. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 89-12-2, § II, 12-18-89; Code 1981, § 9-3012) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-117. - Purpose. 
(a)  Regulation of the location, size, placement, and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities in the city without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the community, to take advantage of the beauty of the community's natural environment, and to protect property values therein. Accordingly, it is the intention of the city to establish regulations governing the display of signs which will: 
(1)  Promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  Enhance the economy and the business and industry of the city by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs. 
(3)  Restrict signs and lights which increase clutter or which increase the probability of traffic accidents by obstructing vision. 
(4)  Promote signs which are compatible with their surroundings. 
(b)  As these or any regulations can only establish the mechanical limits of signs and not enforce a level of visual quality in sign design, any person planning a sign is strongly encouraged to consider: 
(1)  The character of the proposed sign and the audience for which the sign is to be designed. The applicant is urged to think not only of the sign in and of itself but also in terms of the effects such a sign will have upon the character of the surrounding area. 
(2)  The character of the sign structure, that is, the physical means of supporting the sign, and whether that structure could be made an integral part of the sign rather than a separate and frequently distracting element. 
(c)  Any person contemplating a sign is also encouraged to contact the building inspector or a private firm or individual engaged in sign/graphic design for advice or assistance in the planning of such sign. 
(d)  It is also the purpose of this division to insure proper maintenance, for safety and structural soundness, as well as the appearance and attractiveness of signs. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 89-12-2, § I, 12-18-89; Code 1981, § 9-3011) 
Sec. 11-118. - General regulations. 
(a)  Except as specifically excluded from the provisions of this division, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the city without first obtaining a sign permit. A change in the sign face only of a sign shall not constitute a substantial change. Any sign face change that requires any change in frame, structure, lighting, casing, or any other alteration of the sign shall require a permit. 
(b)  No sign or sign structure shall be more than 40 feet in height. 
(c)  No sign shall be erected within ten feet of any street right-of-way, except wall signs that would be installed, erected or built on a wall that is closer than ten feet from the right-of-way, or as otherwise specified in this division. 
(d)  No sign shall be erected in the city that contains a sign area in excess of 400 square feet. 
(e)  For the purposes of this division, the straightline method of measurement shall be utilized measuring from the nearest point of the sign to the boundary line or structure involved. 
(f)  Every electric sign shall be listed and installed under the standards of an approved electrical testing laboratory or approved by the building inspector and installed in conformance with the standards of the National Electrical Code, and a separate electrical permit shall be purchased therefor. 
(g)  No sign shall be erected that does not meet the construction requirements of the Standard Building Code (SBCCI) when applicable, or the building inspector in those cases when the Standard Building Code (SBCCI) does not apply. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 89-12-2, § III, 12-18-89; Code 1981, § 9-3013) 
Cross reference— Electricity, § 5-111 et seq. 
Sec. 11-119. - Permit application. 
(a)  Applications for sign permits required in section 11-118(a) shall be filed by the sign owner or his agent in the office of the building inspector upon forms furnished by the office of the building inspection department. Such application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this division. 
(2)  The value of the sign. 
(3)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and the proposed location of the sign on the site. 
(4)  The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
(5)  The names and addresses of the owners of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(6)  The written consent of the owner or his agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the subject sign. 
(7)  A sketch or print drawn to scale showing all pertinent information required by the building inspector such as wind pressure requirements and display materials in accordance with the Standard Building Code (SBCCI) as adopted by the city commission. The building inspector may require additional information on such print or sketch to insure compliance with this division. 
(8)  The name, address, telephone number and business license number of the sign contractor. 
(9)  The name, address, telephone number and business license number of the applicant. 
(10)  An affidavit from the applicant certifying that the sign does not violate the requirements of this article. 
(b)  A sign permit shall become null and void if construction of the sign for which the permit has been issued has not begun within six months of the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3014) 
Sec. 11-120. - Sign permit fees. 
No sign permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the building inspector and appropriate fees paid. The permit fees shall be established by resolution of the city commission and set forth in the fee schedule book of the city, as provided in section 8-36. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3015) 
Sec. 11-121. - Labels required on signs. 
With each permit under this division the building inspector shall issue a sticker bearing the same number as the permit with which it is issued. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to affix such sticker to the sign in the corner area nearest to the street so it can be easily seen. The absence of a proper sticker on a sign erected subsequent to December 19, 1988, shall be prima facie evidence that the same has been or is being erected or operated in violation of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3016) 
Sec. 11-122. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Any permanent sign lawfully existing or under construction on December 19, 1988, which does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this division may be continued in operation and maintained indefinitely as a legal nonconforming sign subject to compliance with the requirements of subsection (b). 
(b)  Maintenance and repair of legal nonconforming signs, normal maintenance of legal nonconforming signs, including changing of copy, necessary nonstructural repairs, and incidental alterations which do not further extend or intensify the nonconforming features of the sign, shall be permitted. If a legal nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 50 percent or more of its current replacement value, exclusive of the cost of the support structure, the sign may not be rebuilt or used thereafter unless it conforms to all of the provisions of this division. If the damage or destruction of the nonconforming sign is less than 50 percent of the replacement value at that time, the sign may be rebuilt to its original condition and may continue to be displayed. 
(c)  If a business ceases operation for a period of time in excess of 60 days, the sign owner or lessee, or the property owner, shall immediately remove any sign identifying or advertising such business or any product sold thereby; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply where under the provisions of this division an existing conforming sign may be altered to advertise a new business or product sold thereby, and there is evidence that a new business will be in operation on the premises within 60 days. Upon the failure of the sign owner or lessee, or property owner, to comply with this section, the building inspector shall give notice in writing to the sign owner and any lessee and to the property owner, which notice shall state that such sign shall be removed within 30 days. If the sign owner or lessee, or property owner, fails to comply with such written notice to remove, the building inspector is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expense incidental to such removal shall be charged to the owner of the property upon which the sign is located and shall constitute a lien upon the property. 
(d)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Remove means: 
(1)  The sign face, along with posts, columns, or supports of freestanding signs, shall be taken down and removed from the property. 
(2)  The sign face and supporting structures of awning/canopy, marquee, projecting, roof, and wall signs shall be taken down and removed from the property. 
(3)  The sign face of painted wall signs shall be removed by painting over the wall sign in such a manner as to completely cover up and hide from sight the sign in question. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 89-12-2, § IV, 12-18-89; Code 1981, § 9-3017) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-123. - Signs and sign devices prohibited. 
The following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city: 
(1)  Roof signs, with the exception of balloons that do not pose any danger to a roof or other structures, as determined by building inspector or his representative, but only as a temporary sign. 
(2)  Sidewalk, sandwich or curb type signs except as temporary signs for nonprofit activities. 
(3)  Portable or trailer display signs. 
(4)  Air- and gas-filled devices, except as a temporary sign. 
(5)  Hanging signs, except those having less than six square feet in sign area. 
(6)  Off-premises signs, except in accordance with this division. 
(7)  Signs on public rights-of-way, except signs exempt under section 11-124. 
(8)  Searchlights or beacons. 
SEARCHLIGHTS OR BEACONS 
(9)  Moving signs. 
(10)  Signs placed on trees, rocks, and utility poles. 
(11)  Signs erected or displayed in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of a street, intersection, or ingress or egress from parking lots. 
(12)  Signs which, by reason of shape, color, or position may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or which make use of the word "stop," "danger," "go," "slow," "caution," "warning," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 89-12-2, § V, 12-18-89; Code 1981, § 9-3018) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12. 
Sec. 11-124. - Exempt signs. 
The following types of signs are exempt from the requirements of this division: 
(1)  Nonilluminated real estate or construction signs not in excess of 32 square feet, provided such signs are located on the lot or building for sale, lease or being constructed, are not located on any public right-of-way, and are limited to one sign per street frontage. Such signs shall be removed within ten days after the subject lot or building is leased, sold, or construction is completed. 
(2)  Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, erected by, or on the order of a public officer in the performance of his duty such as public notices, safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic and street signs, property street numbers, memorial plaques, and signs of historical interest. 
(3)  Signs on private property directing traffic movement, provided that such signs shall not exceed eight square feet in area nor exceed four feet in length. Such signs shall not be allowed on any public right-of-way. 
(4)  On-premises credit card identification signs up to two square feet per card. Such signs shall be at least ten feet from the public right-of-way of any street. 
(5)  Any sign not visible from public thoroughfares or any sign within a business, office, mall, or other enclosed area. 
(6)  Off-premises nonilluminated church, civic, school, hospital or other quasipublic signs not exceeding four square feet in area. However, no such sign shall be allowed on any public right-of-way. 
OFF-PREMISES  QUASIPUBLIC SIGNS  4 Sq. Ft. Max. 
(7)  On-premises or model home, model apartment, sales office signs, etc., within a residential development, provided such signs do not exceed six square feet in area and are set back at least ten feet from the right-of-way of any street. Such signs shall be limited to one per sales office, model, etc. 
ON-PREMISES MODEL HOME,  APARTMENT SALES OFFICE SIGN 
(8)  On-premises "no trespassing," "no hunting," and similar type public notice signs less than six square feet in area, provided no such signs shall be allowed on any public right-of-way. 
(9)  Restaurant menu signs on private property. Such signs shall not be allowed on any public right-of-way. 
(10)  Signs on vending machines which relate to their intended use. 
(11)  Signs on gas pumps as long as the sign area of these signs does not exceed eight square feet. 
(12)  Professional nameplates not exceeding two square feet in area, such signs to be nonilluminated and attached to the building. 
(13)  Special events signs for nonprofit activities erected with the approval of the building inspector or his representative; provided, that no such sign shall be erected without a sign permit, even though such permit is issued at no charge. 
(14)  Yard sale signs, provided that these are not larger than four square feet in size and are not on any public right-of-way. Such signs shall be removed within three days of the date of the yard sale. 
(15)  On-premises, "no parking," "no cruising" and other similar type public notice signs placed at shopping centers, shopping malls, and parking lots. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 89-12-2, § VI, 12-18-89; Code 1981, § 9-3019) 
Sec. 11-125. - Signs permitted and regulated in designated zoning districts. 
(a)  Any sign not specifically permitted in a zoning district as provided under this section shall be prohibited in that district except as otherwise provided for under this division. 
(b)  No sign shall be erected in the following zoning districts of the city: R-1A, R-1B, R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, R-HR, R-3 and A-1 except: 
(1)  Temporary real estate signs not in excess of six square feet. 
(2)  Temporary signs pertaining to the sale or lease of lots or dwellings within a residential development. 
(3)  Permanent signs identifying only the name of a residential development. 
(4)  Church bulletins, signs identifying schools, public nonprofit recreation facilities, churches, and public buildings and facilities. 
(5)  Political signs in conformance with section 11-134. 
(6)  Customary home occupation signs. Such signs are limited to one per premises and shall not be illuminated, in excess of one square foot in area, and located less than 20 feet from any property line. In all other respects, these signs shall conform and be established in accordance with chapter 23. 
(7)  A sign advertising the presence of a bed and breakfast lodging or a bed and breakfast inn. 
(c)  Only on-premises signs shall be erected in O and O-I zoning districts of the city, provided that no such sign shall exceed 32 square feet and shall not be closer than ten feet to the right-of-way of any street. 
(d)  Unless otherwise prohibited or limited in this division, all sign classifications shall be permitted in the following zoning districts: C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, PUD, M-1 and M-2. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 90-1-5, § I, 1-22-90; Code 1981, § 9-3020) 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 23. 
Sec. 11-126. - Off-premises freestanding signs. 
(a)  No off-premises sign shall be permitted within a linear distance of 1,000 feet from the nearest point of any other off-premises sign structure with each side of the road being measured independently. 
(b)  No off-premises sign shall be permitted within a linear distance of 200 feet from the boundary line of a nonpermitted zoning district located on the same side of an adjacent street. 
(c)  No off-premises freestanding sign shall be allowed within an historic zoning district. 
(d)  No off-premises sign shall be erected within ten feet of any street right-of-way. 
(e)  No off-premises sign shall be permitted which would be located within 100 feet of a residential structure located within a residential zone. 
(f)  The off-premises freestanding sign structure shall have a maximum height of 40 feet. 
(g)  No off-premises sign shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of the Coosa, Etowah, and/or Oostanaula Rivers with such distance to be measured from the 580-foot mean sea level elevation contour. 
(h)  No off-premises sign shall be permitted along the length of Riverside Parkway within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3021) 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 23. 
Sec. 11-127. - On-premises freestanding signs. 
(a)  No on-premises freestanding sign shall be erected within ten feet of any street right-of-way, provided, however, that the setback requirement may be reduced to three feet where the road right-of-way is 100 feet or more in width. 
(b)  The allowable sign area for each sign shall be an amount equal to the ratio of 1.5 square feet per one linear foot of road frontage to a maximum of 400 square feet per sign, provided, however, that every property shall be allowed a sign with a sign area of up to 25 square feet. 
(c)  One sign per property shall be allowed, except properties between 1.0 and 1.9 acres shall be allowed up to two signs, and properties over 2.0 acres shall be allowed up to three signs. 
(d)  The on-premises freestanding sign structure shall have a maximum height of 40 feet. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 91-9-3, § I, 9-16-91; Code 1981, § 9-3022) 
Sec. 11-128. - On-premises signs, excluding freestanding signs, generally. 
The maximum sign area of all on-premises signs, exclusive of freestanding signs, shall not exceed 20 percent of the square footage of the wall face upon which they are situated. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3023) 
Sec. 11-129. - Wall signs. 
(a)  Wall signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the wall face upon which they are situated. 
(b)  Wall signs shall not extend above the eave or roofline nor shall they project beyond the edge of the wall face of the building upon which they are situated. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3024) 
Sec. 11-130. - Projecting signs. 
(a)  Projecting signs shall be attached to the vertical surface of a building and shall not extend higher than 12 feet or beyond the eave or roofline of the building to which they are attached, whichever is lower. Projecting signs shall have a minimum height of nine feet. 
(b)  Projecting signs shall meet the requirements of the Standard Building Code (SBCCI) as adopted by the city commission. 
(c)  Projecting signs shall not extend farther than six feet perpendicular to the wall to which they are attached. 
(d)  The area of projecting signs shall not exceed 18 square feet. 
(e)  Off-premises projecting signs are prohibited within the city. 
(f)  A hanging sign may be attached to any awning, canopy, or marquee. The location and arrangement of all such signs shall be subject to the review and approval of the building inspector. Such signs shall have a maximum sign area of six square feet and shall have a minimum height of nine feet. 
(g)  Signs on an awning, canopy, or marquee shall not project higher than the face of the awning, canopy, or marquee to which such signs are to be affixed. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3025) 
Cross reference— Building code, § 5-75 et seq. 
Sec. 11-131. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  The owner or his agent must notify the building inspector prior to the placement of a temporary sign. Nonprofit activities shall be exempt from this requirement. Such permission may be granted to the same business for a maximum of 30 days within any calendar year. 
(b)  Temporary signs include the following: 
(1)  Signs advertising festivals, special events, etc., provided that such signs shall not be closer than ten feet from any street right-of-way. 
(2)  On-premises signs relating to the initial opening or final closing of a business or service, provided that such sign shall not be closer than ten feet to any public right-of-way. 
(3)  Air- and gas-filled devices. 
(4)  Balloons, streamers, banners, and pennants. 
(5)  Construction signs. Such signs shall be removed from the site within one week of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy from the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3026) 
Sec. 11-132. - Maintenance and appearance of signs. 
(a)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The building inspector may cause to be removed after due notice any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. 
(b)  The building inspector will give the owner 30 days' written notice to correct the deficiencies or to remove the signs. If the owner refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the signs the building inspector may have the signs removed at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3027) 
Sec. 11-133. - Illumination of signs. 
(a)  The light from any illuminated sign shall not be of an intensity or brightness which will interfere with the general welfare of residents or occupants of adjacent properties. 
(b)  No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
(c)  Neither direct nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create a hazard to operators of motor vehicles. 
(d)  Every electric sign shall be listed and installed under the standards of an approved electrical testing laboratory or approved by the building inspector and installed in conformance with the standards of the National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3028) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12. 
Sec. 11-134. - Political signs. 
Political signs shall be permitted within any zoning district of the city, subject to the following restrictions and allowances: 
(1)  Political signs shall be allowed in a residential zoning district without a permit when such signs do not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(2)  A political sign shall not be erected more than 90 days prior to the election which the sign is intended to influence; provided, that the nominee determined in a primary election shall not be required to remove a sign pending the determination of the general election. 
(3)  Any political sign shall be removed within ten days after the final election including any runoffs which the sign is intended to influence. 
(4)  Political signs located outside of commercial and manufacturing zoning districts shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(5)  Political signs must be set back a minimum of ten feet from any public right-of-way. Political signs shall not be permitted to be attached to any street sign, any sign directing or controlling traffic, any pole or post supporting such signs, any utility pole or post, nor to any tree, shrub, or plant. 
(6)  Before any political sign is erected, the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is proposed to be erected must be obtained. 
(7)  A permit for political signs exceeding 32 square feet in area shall be required. 
(8)  Political signs shall not exceed 40 feet in height. 
(9)  The city is empowered to remove or cause to be removed all political signs not conforming with the provisions of this division without notice to the candidate whose sign creates the nonconformance. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 90-5-5, § I, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 9-3029; Ord. No. 92-5-1, § I, 5-4-92) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; zoning, ch. 23. 
Sec. 11-135. - Enforcement and administration. 
(a)  This division shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector or his designated representative. 
(b)  All administration and appeal procedures relative to this division shall be handled in accordance with procedures set forth in chapter 23; provided, however, that no variance shall be allowed for sign height or sign area. Variances for setback may be granted in cases of undue hardship concerning on-premises signs only. 
(c)  The building inspector may at his discretion issue sign permits where circumstances of unnecessary hardship or where community health, safety, and general welfare demand it. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3030) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 11-136. - Remedies. 
In case any sign or other device covered by this division is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this division, the building inspector may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the appropriate person, have issued a citation for violation of this Code requiring the presence of the violator in the municipal court; or institute injunction, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, or use to correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3032) 
Sec. 11-137. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 88-12-6, § 1, 12-19-88; Code 1981, § 9-3031) 
Secs. 11-138—11-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUCTION, FIRE, BANKRUPT, ETC., SALES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 9. 
State Law reference— Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-370 et seq.; Fair Business Practices Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.; misrepresenting ownership in advertising liquidation, auction or going-out-of-business sale, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-425. 

Sec. 11-161. - Fraudulent sales. 
(a)  Any person advertising by newspapers, radio, posters or otherwise, representing that he is operating, offering or maintaining "fire sales," "wreck sales," "bankrupt sales," "closing out or going out of business sales" and similar businesses, whereby the public are led to believe that they are being offered merchandise at reduced rates on account of fires, wrecks, bankruptcies, closing out or discontinuance of business, when in fact such sales are not bona fide, but are fakes and frauds, and the advertisement and representations are untrue and false, shall be held to be guilty of an offense and of a breach of orderly and proper conduct. 
(b)  Any business advertising that it is going out of business must actually go out of business within 120 days after the commencement of such advertising. 
(Code 1959, § 6-1; Code 1981, § 9-4001) 
Sec. 11-162. - Fire and bankrupt sales; adding unaffected or undamaged goods to stock prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person conducting any sale, whether by auction or otherwise, of any goods, wares or merchandise, which are or have been, or which are claimed to be or have been in or damaged by a fire, or which are or have been or which are claimed to be or have been sold or purchased on account of any fire, or which are or have been or are claimed to be or have been the property of any bankrupt or person who has failed in business or has made a general assignment, or which are being sold or offered for sale in any other way than through the usual channels of trade, to sell or offer for sale therein any goods, wares or merchandise not so circumstanced or affected or damaged, or to add to, or to permit to be added to, or to bring into or permit to be brought into any store, warehouse or other building in the city, any goods for the purpose of adding to those goods, wares or merchandise so circumstanced or affected and on hand in any such store, warehouse or other building for the purpose of being sold at such sale. 
(Code 1959, § 6-2; Code 1981, § 9-4002) 
Sec. 11-163. - False representation—Quality of goods. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent, by advertisement or otherwise, that the goods, wares or merchandise which such person offers for sale are of a certain brand or quality, or that the goods will be sold at a certain percentage of their cost price or value, and then sell goods, wares or merchandise of a brand or quality inferior to that or those represented or advertised, or sell such goods, wares or merchandise at a higher percentage of their cost value than that represented or advertised. 
(Code 1959, § 6-3; Code 1981, § 9-4003) 
Sec. 11-164. - Same—Quality of services or materials. 
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in any business which includes the furnishing of services and materials in connection therewith, to represent falsely, by advertisement or otherwise, that any services, or any process involving the furnishing of services or material, or both services and material, which such person offers for sale are of a certain brand or quality recognized in such trade or business, and then, with intent to defraud, furnish services or materials of a brand or quality inferior to that so represented or advertised. 
(Code 1959, § 6-4; Code 1981, § 9-4004) 
Secs. 11-165—11-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLERS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-196. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or any person who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, motor vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance. One who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article, shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this article. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 2, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6002) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-197. - Location. 
No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall he be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this article, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 6, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6006) 
Sec. 11-198. - Duties of police officers. 
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person seen peddling, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his peddler's license and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 8, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6008) 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 17. 
Sec. 11-199. - Reports of violations. 
The chief of police shall report to the secretary all convictions for violations of this article, and the secretary shall maintain a record for each license issued and reports of violations therein. 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 9, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6009) 
Secs. 11-200—11-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 11-226. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler within the corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 1, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6001) 
Sec. 11-227. - Application. 
Applicants for a license under this division must file with the secretary a sworn application on a form to be furnished by the secretary which shall give the following information: 
(1)  The name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  The address (legal and local) of the applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If the applicant is employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number or other means of identification. 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 3, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6003) 
Sec. 11-228. - License fee; exception. 
(a)  The amount of the license fee shall be as set forth in the license fee schedule of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(b)  No fee shall be required of a person selling products of the farm or orchard actually produced by the seller. 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 4, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6004) 
Sec. 11-229. - Transfer. 
No license issued under the provisions of this division shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 5, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6005) 
Sec. 11-230. - Exhibition. 
Peddlers shall exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 7, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6007) 
Secs. 11-231—11-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ITINERANT VENDORS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-261. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Itinerant vendor means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who has no permanent place of business within the city and who engages in a transient business in one temporary fixed place of business, or sells goods from a vehicle. The term "itinerant vendor" shall include the terms "traveling vendor" and "transient merchant." 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 10, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6010(b)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-262. - Enforcement; reports of violations. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person seen peddling or vending, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his license and his written permission from the owner to use the property for sales, and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
(b)  The chief of police shall report to the secretary all convictions for violations of this article, and the secretary shall maintain a record for each license issued and reports of violations therein. 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 13, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6013) 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 17. 
Secs. 11-263—11-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 11-286. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of itinerant vendor within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 10, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6010(a)) 
Sec. 11-287. - Application. 
Applicants for a license under this division must file with the secretary a sworn application in duplicate on a form to be furnished by the secretary which shall give the following information: 
(1)  The name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  The address (legal and local) of the applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If the applicant is employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the license number or other means of identification. 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(8)  The applicant's state sales tax identification number. 
(9)  A copy of a written statement from the owner of the property proposed for the sales location. 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 11, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6011) 
Sec. 11-288. - License fee; exhibition. 
(a)  The amount of the license fee shall be as set forth in the license fee schedule of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(b)  No fee shall be required of a person selling products of the farm or orchard actually produced by the seller. 
(c)  The licensee shall exhibit his license in a conspicuous location in order that it can be viewed by the public. 
(Ord. No. 84-9-1, § 12, 9-4-84; Code 1981, § 9-6012) 
Secs. 11-289—11-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Charitable solicitations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-311. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to execute a registration under this article which contains any false statement, and it shall be unlawful for any person to solicit donations or contributions or sell any insignia or novelty on the streets of the city proportedly on behalf of or under the sponsorship of, any charitable, educational, religious, social, patriotic or civic club or organization which does not in fact exist or which has not been authorized to solicit pursuant to a permit issued under this article. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6027) 
Sec. 11-312. - Door-to-door and telephone solicitations; hours. 
No charitable solicitation door-to-door or by telephone shall be made before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 1981, § 9-2029) 
Sec. 11-313. - Exemption. 
This article shall not apply to any locally established organization or church operated exclusively for charitable or religious purposes if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies of any such organization or church. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6025) 
Secs. 11-314—11-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 11-336. - Registration—Required. 
Any person who wishes to solicit donations or contributions for, or to sell any insignia or novelty on the streets of the city on behalf of, or under the sponsorship of, any charitable, educational, religious, social, patriotic or civic club or organization, shall register the activity with the secretary at least 48 hours in advance of the event and to obtain a permit therefor. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6021) 
Sec. 11-337. - Same—Form. 
The registration required by this article shall be in writing, shall be signed by an officer of the club or organization and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, headquarters address, phone number and object of the charitable, educational, religious, social, patriotic or civic club or organization conducting or sponsoring the solicitation or sale to which the registration relates. 
(2)  The days on which the solicitation or sale will take place. 
(3)  The purpose and object for which the funds to be derived from the solicitation or sale will be utilized. 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of the chief officer of the club or organization in direct control of conducting or sponsoring the solicitation or sale and of the person preparing the registration form. 
(5)  Whether or not the club or organization, if not exempt under state law (O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9), has registered with the state. 
(6)  An outline of the methods to be used in conducting the solicitation or sale. 
(7)  The estimated cost of the solicitation or sale. 
(8)  The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any persons in connection with the solicitation or sale and the name and addresses of all such persons. 
(9)  A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city, or by any department or officer thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6022) 
Sec. 11-338. - Fee. 
Before a permit is issued, there shall be paid to the city such a sum as set out in the fee schedule book of the city, as provided in section 8-36, and any additional fees as may be required for each facsimile copy of the permit that is desired. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6028) 
Sec. 11-339. - Issuance. 
The secretary shall issue the permit provided for in this division whenever he shall find the following facts to exist: 
(1)  That all of the statements made in the application are true. 
(2)  That the control and supervision of the solicitation will be adequate to prevent fraud and danger to the public and to the solicitors. 
(3)  That the applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise. 
(4)  That the solicitation will not be a fraud on the public. 
(5)  That the solicitation is to finance and promote the purpose or object described in the application and will not be conducted primarily for private profit. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6024) 
Sec. 11-340. - Exhibition. 
Solicitors shall carry on their person and exhibit their permits or copies thereof provided by the city at the request of any person. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6026) 
Sec. 11-341. - Transfer. 
No permit or badge issued under the provisions of this division shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the person to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6030) 
Sec. 11-342. - Time period. 
The permit under this division shall be valid only for the days on which the solicitation or sale will take place. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6023) 
Secs. 11-343—11-375. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; parking of taxicabs, § 12-249; taxicab stands, § 12-250. 
State Constitution reference— Municipal ambulance and emergency rescue services, art. IX, § II, par. III. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle accident insurance, O.C.G.A. § 33-34-1 et seq.; liability of owner of leased vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-207; "proof of financial responsibility" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-9-2(5); insurance for person renting U-drive-it vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-9-102. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-376. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chauffeur's permit means written authority given by the chief of police pursuant to the provisions of this article to any person to drive or operate a taxicab on the public streets of the city. 
Permit means the written authority granted by the public safety committee of the city commission under this article to engage in the taxicab business in the city, as such business is defined by the provisions of this article. 
Taxicab means any motor-driven vehicle for transportation for hire of passengers and which is operated wholly or principally within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 31-1; Code 1981, § 9-8001) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-377. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on, engage in or conduct the business of operating taxicabs for the transportation of persons within the limits of the city without first having obtained a license from the city as provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 31-3; Code 1981, § 9-8003) 
Sec. 11-378. - Liability insurance—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, driver or chauffeur of any taxicab to drive or operate the same on the public streets of the city unless such owner, operator, driver or chauffeur shall have first procured and filed with the secretary a liability insurance policy, issued by a good and responsible insurance company, or a surety bond issued by a good and responsible surety company, which insurance company or surety company must have authority to do business in the state and possess a certificate duly issued by the state which insurance company or surety company must be approved by the secretary. The amount of liability insurance or surety bond for each taxicab shall be as follows: 
(1)  An amount not less than $15,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident, and subject to such limit for one person, not less than $30,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and not less than $10,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident. 
(2)  Ability to respond in compensation to certain injured individuals, without regard to fault, in an amount not less than $5,000.00 per injured person in compliance with the Georgia Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act (O.C.G.A. § 33-34-1 et seq.). 
The policy of insurance or surety bond may be in the form of a separate policy or separate surety bond for each taxicab, or may be in the form of a fleet policy covering all taxicabs operated by such owner, driver or chauffeur, in which latter event the policy of insurance or surety bond shall provide the same liability for each taxicab operated. Every taxicab while in service shall have conspicuously placed therein some sign evidencing the fact that the provisions of this section have been complied with, the form thereof to be prescribed by the secretary. 
(Code 1959, § 31-8; Code 1981, § 9-8008) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-9-2. 
Sec. 11-379. - Same—Cancellation. 
No policy of insurance or surety bond required in this division shall be canceled until the expiration of ten days' notice of intended cancellation thereof has been given in writing to the secretary by registered mail or personal delivery of the notice, and a provision therefor shall be made a part of the policy or surety bond. 
(Code 1959, § 31-9; Code 1981, § 9-8009) 
Sec. 11-380. - Taxicabs—Use for lewdness prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab operated in the city to permit any person to accompany or use such taxicab for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation, or to direct, take or transport or to offer or agree to direct, take or transport any other person with knowledge or reasonable cause to believe that the purpose of such directing, taking or transporting is for prostitution, lewdness or assignation. 
(Code 1959, § 31-16; Code 1981, § 9-8016) 
Sec. 11-381. - Same—Display of owner's name. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to be driven or operated upon the streets of the city unless the name of the person either owning or operating the taxicab shall be conspicuously painted on the taxicab in letters not less than two inches in height. 
(Code 1959, § 31-17; Code 1981, § 9-8017) 
Sec. 11-382. - Same—Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of any taxicab to drive or operate the taxicab for more than 12 hours in any 24 hours. 
(Code 1959, § 31-18; Code 1981, § 9-8018) 
Sec. 11-383. - Rates—Schedule to be posted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner, driver or operator of a taxicab to allow the taxicab to be operated upon the streets of the city or the police jurisdiction thereof, unless such taxicab has posted in a place clearly discernible and visible a schedule of rates for the transportation of persons within the corporate limits of the city and to and from the areas outside the corporate limits, and no charges shall be made for the transportation of persons in excess of the rates so posted. 
(Code 1959, §§ 31-19, 31-19.3; Ord. No. 79-14, § 1, 8-20-79; Code 1981, §§ 9-8019, 9-8022) 
Sec. 11-384. - Same—Reports. 
All persons licensed as required by section 11-377 shall report to the secretary in writing the rates for transportation of persons which such persons regularly charges. At least 15 days prior to any change in such rates, notice of the change shall be filed in writing with the secretary. 
(Code 1959, § 31-19.1; Ord. No. 79-14, § 2, 8-20-79; Code 1981, § 9-8020) 
Sec. 11-385. - Payment to be made at termination of trip; unlawful charges. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to charge any passenger a rate or fare greater than that rate on record in the office of the secretary as provided in this article. It shall be unlawful for any passenger to fail or refuse to pay any such lawful fare immediately upon termination of the employment, unless a later time of payment has been mutually agreed upon prior to employment. 
(Code 1959, § 31-19.2; Ord. No. 79-14, § 3, 8-20-79; Code 1981, § 9-8021) 
Sec. 11-386. - Additional engagement prohibited. 
No driver shall permit any person to occupy or ride in a taxicab other than the persons first employing or engaging the taxicab. 
(Code 1959, § 31-19.4; Code 1981, § 9-8023) 
Sec. 11-387. - Taximeters—Required in all taxicabs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own and operate or cause to be operated any taxicab in the city unless and until the taxicab shall be equipped with a practicable, standard taximeter in good and workable condition, designed to mechanically and accurately measure distance traveled, to record the time the vehicle is in waiting and upon which there shall be indicated by means of figures the fare charged. It shall be the duty of each person owning or operating a taxicab to keep the taximeter thereon in good and workable condition, and, at the beginning of every employment, to set the taximeter in the usual way so that it will register and compute on a mileage basis while the vehicle is running, and a time basis while waiting, and while the service is being rendered, show the fare to be charged. Any such taximeter shall be so placed that the fare thereof, where the fare is registered, will be well lighted and plainly visible to the passengers within the vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 31-19.5; Code 1981, § 9-8024) 
Sec. 11-388. - Same—Flag, telltale lights and seal required. 
(a)  No driver of a taxicab, while carrying passengers, shall display the flag attached to the taximeter in a position to denote that the vehicle is not employed, or shall throw the flag of the taximeter into a recording position when the vehicle is not actually employed, or shall fail to throw the flag of the taximeter in a nonrecording position at the termination of every service. 
(b)  There shall be adequate telltale lights indicating that the taxicab is employed with the taximeter operating, or that it is unemployed with the taximeter not operating. 
(c)  Adequate provision shall be made for sealing all taximeters in such a manner that no adjustments, alterations or replacements affecting in any way the indications, the time or mileage rates or, in general, the accuracy of the taximeter, can be made without mutilating or destroying the seal. 
(Code 1959, § 31-19.6; Code 1981, § 9-8025) 
Sec. 11-389. - Terminals or stations required; parking on streets prohibited. 
All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city shall have drive-in terminals or stations in which all vehicles shall be parked while not engaged in the actual transportation of passengers, and no such vehicle shall be parked on the streets of the city while not in actual use. 
(Code 1959, § 31-20; Code 1981, § 9-8026) 
Sec. 11-390. - Records of trips—Required. 
All persons operating taxicabs in the city shall keep a record of each trip made, which shall include the following: 
(1)  Mileage at the time the taxicab leaves the station. 
(2)  Mileage when it returns. 
(3)  All pickup trips must be recorded. 
(4)  Amount charged for the trip. 
(5)  Name of the driver of the taxicab. 
(6)  Number of the taxicab. 
(7)  Destination of the taxicab. 
(Code 1959, § 31-21; Code 1981, § 9-8027) 
Sec. 11-391. - Same—Responsibility for keeping. 
Each owner or operator of taxicabs in the city shall require each driver to keep the record described in section 11-390, and both the driver and the owner and operator failing or refusing to keep such record shall be guilty of violating this chapter and shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1959, § 31-22; Code 1981, § 9-8028) 
Sec. 11-392. - Violation of laws—Duty to report. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to notify the secretary of any and all violations of any ordinances by any taxicab operator or chauffeur. 
(Code 1959, § 31-23; Code 1981, § 9-8029) 
Sec. 11-393. - Same—Hearing, suspension or revocation of permit. 
Whenever any person engaged in the taxicab business or any operator or driver of a taxicab within the city is found to be violating the provisions of this article or the laws of the state or any other law of the city, the public safety committee of the city commission may, upon complaint or upon its own motion, issue an order to such person to appear at a fixed time and place for investigation. If the public safety committee shall be satisfied, after such hearing, of the violation of the laws of the city or the state or any terms of any permit issued, the committee may suspend, for a fixed period in its discretion, or revoke, the permit. 
(Code 1959, § 31-24; Code 1981, § 9-8030) 
Secs. 11-394—11-415. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT TO OPERATE BUSINESS 

Sec. 11-416. - Operation subject to regulations; permit required. 
The operating of taxicabs within the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this article, and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated in the city any taxicabs unless a permit for the operation thereof shall have been first issued by the secretary. 
(Code 1959, § 31-4; Code 1981, § 9-8004) 
Sec. 11-417. - Applications. 
Application for permits under this division shall be made to the secretary by a petition which shall set forth the name, address and place of business of the applicant, if an individual, and if a partnership the name and residence of each of the partners, and the place of business of the partnership, and if a corporation, the name and address of each of the officers of the corporation and the place of business of the corporation; the trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business; the name of the insurance company or surety company with which the applicant has made arrangements to secure his insurance or surety bond as required by this article; a financial statement of the company; and such other information as may be required by the secretary. 
(Code 1959, § 31-5; Code 1981, § 9-8005) 
Sec. 11-418. - Investigation of applicant. 
The secretary shall make or cause to be made an investigation including any hearing deemed necessary as to each application for permit for the operation of taxicabs. In determining whether a permit shall be issued, the secretary may investigate the fitness of the applicant to engage in the business of operating taxicabs and shall make or cause to be made an investigation in order to determine whether the demands of public convenience, necessity and safety justify the issuance of such permit. 
(Code 1959, § 31-6; Code 1981, § 9-8006) 
Sec. 11-419. - Issuance or denial; transfer. 
(a)  If the secretary determines to grant a permit for the operation of taxicabs, he shall issue the applicant a permit under this division, and such permit shall not be transferable except upon the consent of the secretary. If the secretary finds and decides that the public convenience, necessity and safety do not justify the issuance of the permit, or that the insurance company or surety company in which the applicant has made arrangements to secure insurance as required by the provisions of this article is not a good and responsible insurance or surety company, or that the provisions of the proposed policy or surety bond do not give ample protection to the public, or that the applicant is not a fit and proper person to conduct the taxicab business, then no permit shall be issued, and notice of the decision of the secretary shall be given to the applicant, setting forth the reason for the refusal of the permit. 
(b)  The applicant may appeal any decision of the secretary to the public safety committee by written request to the secretary, who will schedule a hearing before the public safety committee not later than 31 days after receipt of the written request. 
(Code 1959, § 31-7; Code 1981, § 9-8007) 
Secs. 11-420—11-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CHAUFFEUR'S PERMIT 

Sec. 11-451. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city unless such person shall have first obtained from the chief of police a chauffeur's permit, as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 31-10; Code 1981, § 9-8010) 
Sec. 11-452. - Eligibility, application, investigation, issuance and subsequent procedures. 
Any person having resided continuously in the city for not less than six months immediately preceding the making of application for a chauffeur's permit, being 18 years of age or over, may make an application with the chief of police for a chauffeur's permit. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make an investigation to determine the moral character and fitness of the applicant and the applicant's knowledge of the traffic laws of the city. It shall be the duty of the chief of police, if the applicant is a person of good moral character and fitness and possesses sufficient knowledge of the traffic laws of the city, to issue such person a written permit, which shall be signed by the chief of police, shall be sealed with the corporate seal of the city, and shall contain the name, address, sex, race, age and signature of the person. The chief of police shall procure or cause to be procured fingerprints and two photographs of the applicant; one of the photographs shall be retained by the chief of police for the files of the police department, and the other shall be attached to the chauffeur's permit, if the same shall be granted to the applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 31-11; Code 1981, § 9-8011) 
Sec. 11-453. - Destroying or defacing prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a chauffeur's permit to deface, obliterate or destroy the same, or to cause same to be defaced, obliterated or destroyed. 
(Code 1959, § 31-12; Code 1981, § 9-8012) 
Sec. 11-454. - Display in taxicab. 
Every driver of any taxicab operated in the city shall have his chauffeur's permit displayed in the taxicab in a prominent place in the front thereof so as to be easily discernable by any person occupying the taxicab. 
(Code 1959, § 31-13; Code 1981, § 9-8013) 
Sec. 11-455. - Suspension; revocation. 
The public safety committee of the city commission, upon recommendation of the chief of police or upon the suggestion of the committee itself or one of its members, may suspend or revoke any chauffeur's permit issued by the chief of police, if upon investigation the committee shall find that the holder of the permit has violated any of the provisions of this article, has been convicted of a felony, or has been convicted of driving a taxicab or other motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquors, or if the person is suffering from a contagious or communicable disease or defect or impairment of vision, or if the person is not a person of good moral character and fitness; but before the permit shall be suspended or revoked by the committee, notice of intention thereof shall be served upon the person either by registered mail or by personal service. The person shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and the hearing shall be conducted by the committee. 
(Code 1959, § 31-14; Code 1981, § 9-8014) 
Sec. 11-456. - Renewal. 
Chauffeur's permits shall be renewed not later than the birth date of the permittee in each year. 
(Code 1959, § 31-15; Code 1981, § 9-8015) 
Secs. 11-457—11-475. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS; PARADES; RACES[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting processions, meetings, etc., O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; operation of motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-476. - Bikeathons, walkathons, running road races, etc. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start any bikeathon, walkathon, running road race, or other organized event of similar import on any major thoroughfare or bridge in the city. For the purposes of this section, major thoroughfares in the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  U.S. route no. 27 and U.S. route no. 411. 
(2)  State route no. 1, state route no. 20, state route no. 53, state route no. 101, state route no. 293, and state route no. 703. 
(3)  The Second Avenue bridge at the Oostanaula River, the Turner-McCall Boulevard bridge at the Oostanaula River, the Turner-McCall Boulevard bridge at the Etowah River, the East Second Avenue bridge at the Etowah River, the South Broad Street bridge at the Etowah River, and the North Fifth Avenue bridge at the Oostanaula River. 
(4)  Turner-McCall Boulevard from Martha Berry Boulevard to the city limits, Martha Berry Boulevard from Turner-McCall Boulevard to the city limits, Shorter Avenue from Martha Berry Boulevard to the city limits, Broad Street from the Etowah River to East First Street, North Broad Street from East First Street to the city limits, East First Street from North Broad Street to the city limits, Riverbend Drive from Turner-McCall Boulevard to East Second Avenue, North Fifth Avenue from Broad Street to Martha Berry Boulevard, and Calhoun Avenue from North Broad Street to the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 81-2-2, § 1, 2-2-81; Code 1981, § 9-7040) 
Secs. 11-477—11-500. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ASSEMBLIES ON CITY STREETS, SIDEWALKS, PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-4-2, § II, adopted April 6, 2009, repealed former Art. IX, Div. 2, §§ 11-501—11-511, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. Former Div. 2 pertained to pickets; demonstrations; assemblies and derived from Code 1959, §§ 23A-1—23A-11 and Code 1981, §§ 9-7001—9-7011. 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 20. 

Sec. 11-501. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assembly means any outdoor event, regardless of the number of participants, which meets the following definition: 
(1)  Any demonstration, rally, protest, march, parade, motorcade, procession of any kind, or similar display, consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, having a common purpose, design, destination, or goal, which does not fit into the exclusions set forth in subsection (2) below: 
(2)  The following events or occurrences shall not be deemed to be an assembly: 
a.  Funeral processions, or 
b.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in education classes, provided this conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities, or 
c.  An event or occurrence sponsored by a governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions, or 
d.  A family gathering. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-2, § II, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 2017-9-1, § I, 9-25-17) 
Sec. 11-502. - Assembly permit. 
No person shall, without first being permitted by the chief of police or his/her appointed designee ("permitting officer") after application made according to the requirements set out hereinafter, conduct, engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start an assembly: 
(1)  In any city building, structure, parking lot, recreational facility, or square, or 
(2)  Upon any street, sidewalk, park, or public right-of-way in the city which requires the temporary closing or obstruction of all or a portion of any city street, sidewalk, park, or public right-of-way, or 
(3)  Upon any street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or any other city property involving a motorized vehicle, or 
(4)  Upon any street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or any other city property involving the use of any electronic sound amplification system (other than a radio or recorder or other device which is possessed and used by an individual for his/her own enjoyment and is operated in such a manner so as to not interfere with the use and enjoyment of any other person). 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-2, § II, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 2017-9-1, § II, 9-25-17) 
Sec. 11-503. - Permit application. 
(a)  An applicant seeking the issuance of an assembly permit shall file an application with the Rome City Chief of Police. Application forms are available at the police office located at 5 Government Plaza, Suite 300, Rome, Georgia 30161. An assembly permit shall be effective for thirty days from the date on which it is issued, but only for the dates and times explicitly denoted in the permit application and approved by the permitting office. 
(b)  Applications for assembly permits must be filed with the permitting officer not less than four days before the date on which the proposed assembly is to occur. A ten dollar nonrefundable application fee must be paid at the time of filing the application. 
(c)  Applications for assembly permits shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such assembly. 
(2)  If the assembly is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the organization's headquarters and the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  If the assembly is to be held by, on behalf of, or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant shall file, in addition to the assembly permit application, a written authorization from such person authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on their behalf. 
(4)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be present at the assembly at all times and who will be responsible for the assembly and the conduct of its participants ("designee"). 
(5)  The date or dates of the assembly. 
(6)  The hours when the assembly will start and end. 
(7)  The exact location of the assembly, or if the assembly is processional or mobile, the specific rouse to be traveled. 
(8)  The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles which will constitute the assembly, the type of animals and a description of the number and types of vehicles to be used during the assembly. 
(9)  Whether sound amplification equipment will be employed, and, if so, a description of the equipment to be used sufficient to allow the permitting officer to evaluate the application. 
(10)  Whether artificial lighting will be employed and, if so, a description of the equipment to be used sufficient to allow the permitting officer to evaluate the application. 
(11)  Whether any temporary static structures will be constructed or employed, and if so, a description of the number and type of such structures sufficient to allow the permitting officer to evaluate the application. 
(12)  A description of the anticipated need for safety, police, medical, sanitation, and other required personnel or equipment. 
(13)  Whether any sign, display, flag, placard, or banner larger than three feet by three feet, or composed, in whole or in part, of wood, metal, or a hard plastic material, and if so, the anticipated number thereof. 
(14)  A disclosure as to whether the applicant or any entity for whom the application is being made is, or has been, a party to any legal action, criminal, civil, or administrative, arising out of any event of a nature substantially similar to the one proposed in the application. And, if so, a brief factual summary, including the date and location, of any such events. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-2, § II, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 2017-9-1, § III, 9-25-17) 
Sec. 11-504. - Review of application. 
(a)  It is the intent of the City of Rome in enacting this division to reasonably regulate only the time, place, and manner of such assemblies and not to unduly burden, suppress, or regulate the content or message of any speech or expressive conduct contained therein. In furtherance of this intent: 
(1)  No permit shall be denied nor shall the applicant be given less favorable treatment as to the time, place, and manner of an assembly, on account of the race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, or gender identity of the applicant and/or participants of the assembly. 
(2)  No permit shall denied nor shall the applicant be given less favorable treatment as to the time, place, and manner of an assembly, based upon the message of the assembly, the content of speech of the assembly, nor based on the identity or associational relationships of the applicant and/or participants. 
(3)  Nothing above withstanding, reasonable accommodation as to time, place, and manner may be required in order for the city to ensure and preserve the rights and liberties of its citizens and the safety, health, and good order of its society. 
(b)  Within four working days of the receipt of a fully completed, executed, and filed application, the permitting officer shall review the application in light of the goals set forth above and the considerations provided below, and render a decision to grant or deny, in whole or in part, the application for an assembly permit. If the permit is denied in whole or in part, the permitting officer shall provide a written statement of the reasons for said denial to the applicant. Such written statement of denial shall be postmarked no later than four working days after receipt of a fully completed, executed, and filed application. 
If the permitting officer modifies the plans for the assembly as set forth in the application, an assembly permit shall be issued to the applicant only upon the applicant's written acceptance of the permitting officer's modifications. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-2, § II, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 11-505. - Denial or revocation of permit. 
The City of Rome Chief of Police, or his/her designees, may deny an assembly permit, or revoke a previously granted assembly permit, for any of the following considerations or a combination thereof: 
(1)  The application does not contain all of the required information or materials, or the information is so incomplete, vague, or ambiguous as to prevent a meaningful review by the permitting officer. 
(2)  The application contains material omissions, falsehoods, or misrepresentations. 
(3)  The applicant lacks authority to represent the entity for which the application is being made. 
(4)  The applicant or entity for which the permit is sought has on prior occasions substantially damaged city streets, sidewalks, parks, and/or other city real or personal property. 
(5)  The applicant or entity for which the permit is sought has on prior occasions materially violated permitting ordinances in connection with events of a substantially similar nature. 
(6)  If the assembly is being held for an unlawful purpose, and/or violates a federal, state, or local law or ordinance. 
(7)  The assembly would conflict with previously planned programs or events organized by the City of Rome and previously scheduled for substantially the same time and place. 
(8)  A fully executed prior application for an assembly permit has been granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit multiple occupancy of that particular space. 
(9)  When, due to the scope of the assembly and the number of police, safety, or city personnel required to provide protection and traffic control for the assembly, and due to the need for police, safety, or city personnel elsewhere in the city, the assembly would require the diversion of such a number of police, safety, or city personnel that it will be more likely than not that normal police and safety protection elsewhere in the city cannot be provided continuously and safely for the duration of the assembly. 
(10)  The assembly as proposed is likely to present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of participants in the assembly or other members of the public (though not through the agency of any predicted reaction by onlookers or members of the public). 
(11)  The assembly as proposed is likely to substantially restrict and/or congest traffic (vehicular or pedestrian) on any of the public roads, rights-of-way, sidewalks, or waterways in the immediate vicinity of such assembly. 
(12)  Due to the city's substantial and compelling interest in ensuring the health and safety of its citizens, a permit may be denied and an assembly may be terminated for public safety reasons by the chief of police and/or the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-2, § II, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 11-506. - Appeals. 
(a)  Upon receipt of any decision by the permitting officer denying an application, the applicant may, within four business days, file a written notice of appeal with the secretary of the city manager. 
(b)  Such appeal shall succinctly state the grounds upon which it is asserted that the determination by the permitting officer should be modified or reversed. The applicant must attach a copy of the application and the permitting officer's letter of denial or modification to their written appeal. 
(c)  The city manager shall act upon the appeal within ten days after its receipt. Within three business days of the city manager's decision to affirm, modify, or reverse the permitting officer's decision, the city manager shall send a written notice its decision to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-2, § II, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 11-507. - Prohibited conduct during assemblies. 
Regardless of whether an assembly permit is required, or has been obtained, the following conduct shall not be permitted during any assembly: 
(1)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any assembly, or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating in or used in an assembly. 
(2)  No driver or vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising an assembly when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as an assembly, unless specifically authorized to do so by Rome City Police Department personnel. 
(3)  No person shall carry or possess glass bottles, glass jars, glass containers of any kind, bricks, stones, rocks, pieces of asphalt, or concrete, or any other type of weapon, including but not limited to: any air rifle, air pistol, paintball gun, paintball rifle, explosive, blasting cap, knife, hatchet, ax, slingshot, blackjack, metal knuckles, mace, iron buckle, ax handle, chains, crowbar, hammer, or any club, bludgeon or any other instrumentality used, or intended to be used, as a dangerous weapon. 
(4)  No person shall carry, possess, or assemble, any sign, display, flag, placard, or banner larger than three feet by three feet, or composed, in whole or in part, of wood, metal, or a hard plastic material, unless said sign, display, flag, placard, or banner has been approved by the permitting officer prior to it being use during an assembly. No sign, display, flag, placard, or banner may be draped or affixed to any City of Rome property, including, but not limited to, the streets, sidewalks, trees, buildings, or any other property of the city. 
(5)  No electronic sound amplification equipment shall used or employed during an assembly (except for a radio or recorder or other device which is possessed and used by an individual for his/her own enjoyment and is operated in such a manner so as to not interfere with the use and enjoyment of any other person), unless prior authorization from the permitting officer is obtained. 
(6)  No vehicles shall be used in an assembly, unless prior authorization from the permitting officer is obtained. 
(7)  No person shall violate the terms of their assembly permit or deviate from the approved information submitted in the application for the permit, if the assembly is such that a permit is required. 
(8)  No person engaged in, participating in, conducting, attending, or observing an assembly shall violate any federal, state, or local law or ordinance. 
(9)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a disabled person from carrying, possessing or using a wheelchair, cane, walker, or similar device necessary for providing mobility so that person may participate in an assembly. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-2, § II, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 11-508. - Retention of permit. 
The assembly designee shall be present during the entire assembly, and shall carry the assembly permit during the entire assembly, including set-up and break-down. Upon request, the designee shall provide the assembly permit to any City of Rome personnel during the assembly. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-2, § II, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 11-509. - Compliance. 
The applicant, designee, and all assembly participants shall comply with all of the permit terms, directions, and conditions, and with all applicable laws and sections of this division and other ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-2, § II, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 11-510. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any person violating this division shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, be punished according to the provisions of section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-2, § II, 4-6-09) 
Secs. 11-511—11-519. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL PICKETING[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-4-2, § II, adopted April 6, 2009, repealed former Art. IX, Div. 3, §§ 11-531—11-570. Former Div. 3 pertained to parades and derived from Code 1959, §§ 23A-12, 23A-14—23A-26 and Code 1981, §§ 9-7021—9-7035. 

Sec. 11-520. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Residential picketing means: 
(1)  To patrol or station oneself upon, before, or immediately about an individual residence, bearing some insignia or sign designed to persuade or protest; or 
(2)  Staging a public or private protest of any kind upon, before, or immediately about an individual residence; or 
(3)  Obstructing passage to or from an individual residence; or 
(4)  Promoting a strike or a boycott upon, before, or immediately about an individual residence. 
Individual residence means a single-family dwelling or a single duplex dwelling, but shall not mean a multifamily dwelling such as an apartment, condominium, townhome complex. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-3, § I, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 11-521. - Prohibited conduct. 
In order to protect the public health, welfare, and good order of the city, and to ensure that every citizen has the opportunity to experience peace, well-being and privacy in their homes, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in residential picketing. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-3, § I, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 11-522. - Penalty. 
Any person who is found guilty of violating this section shall be penalized as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4-3, § I, 4-6-09) 
Secs. 11-523—11-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FRANCHISES[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Charter reference— Franchises, art. XVI. 
Cross reference— Diversion of utility service, § 14-17; utilities, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Municipal franchises, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); avoiding charges for cable television service, etc., O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 11-601—11-625. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TELESCRIPPS CABLE COMPANY 

Sec. 11-626. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cable television means a system of transmitting audio and video signals and electrical impulses. 
Gross revenues means all billed revenues, minus bad debts, in whatever form and from whatever source, received by the company or by any associate or subsidiary of the company from operations of the cable TV system or service within the city. It is intended that revenues shall be included in the computation if received by the company, regardless of changes in transmission means, in technology or in programming, so long as the revenues are derived from the provision of cable TV services. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, §§ II, VII, 2-20-89) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-627. - Rights granted. 
In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the conditions and reservations specified in this division, the nonexclusive right is hereby granted to TeleScripps Cable Company, its successors and assigns (referred to in this division as the "company") to erect, maintain, and operate television transmission and distribution facilities and additions thereto in, under, over, along, across, and upon the streets, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, bridges, alleys and other public places in the city and subsequent additions thereto, for the purpose of transmission and distribution of television impulses, both community antenna and closed circuit, in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States of America and the state and the ordinances and regulations of the city, for a period of 20 years, with the option of a 20-year extension, subject to agreement of terms. The intent of the parties is to comply with the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § I, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 11-628. - Use of poles generally. 
The poles currently used for the company's distribution system are those of the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company, the Georgia Power Company, and others when and where practical, including poles of the company where necessary, provided that mutually satisfactory agreement for attachment can be entered into with such companies. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § III, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 11-629. - Location, construction, and maintenance of system. 
(a)  The company's transmission and distribution system, poles, wires, and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or to interfere with any improvements the city may deem proper to make, or hinder unnecessarily in the opinion of the city commissioners or their designated agents, or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges or other public property. 
(b)  The matter of height of lines and the placement of the same on poles shall be subject to the direction of the electrical inspector of the city. 
(c)  Construction and maintenance of the transmission and distribution system, including house connections, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association, and such applicable ordinances and regulations of the city affecting electrical installations which may be presently in effect or may be enacted by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § IV, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 11-630. - Streets and public places; openings; obstructions; improvements. 
(a)  In the maintenance and operation of its television transmission and distribution system in the streets and alleys, and in the course of any new construction or addition to its facilities, the company shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by the company in the course of its operations shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences or boardings, the bounds of which during periods of dusk and darkness shall be clearly designated by appropriate warning lights. Any openings in streets shall be temporarily covered to the extent practical, without impeding the work progress, to minimize the public inconvenience. 
(b)  Whenever the company shall take up or disturb any pavement, sidewalk, or other improvement of any street, avenue, alley or other public place, a permit must first be obtained from the director of public works. The same shall be replaced and the surface restored in as good condition as before entry within 48 hours after completion of the company's work. Upon failure of the company to make such restoration within such time, or if the restoration cannot be made within such time, to begin the restoration within such time, or upon the company's delay of more than 24 hours in the continuation of a restoration begun, the city may serve upon the company notice of the city's intent to cause the restoration to be made, and the city may, unless the company within 24 hours after receipt of such notice begins or resumes the proper restoration, cause the proper restoration to be made, including the removal of excess dirt, and the expense of the same shall be paid by the company upon demand of the city. 
(c)  The company shall at all times comply with any and all rules and regulations which the city commission has made or may make applying to the public generally with reference to the removal or replacement of pavements and to excavations in streets and other public places, not inconsistent with their use for the purposes contemplated by this division. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § V, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 11-631. - Service to be furnished. 
The company shall furnish to its subscribers a service capable of providing 12 channels, beginning with a minimum of eight channels. The company shall provide such additional channels as deemed feasible and practical, so long as this does not conflict with rules and regulations of the Federal Communication Commission and other public service programs already scheduled. Upon request, the company shall furnish the use of a channel (but not equipment) to be shared by the city government and by the county government; however, the company may utilize such channel at such times as it is not used by either the city or the county. The company shall also furnish basic service from the CATV system free of charge to each public school, police station, firehouse and municipal building, now or hereafter located in the city, which is located upon a street upon which the service shall exist; provided the utility companies have made space available for the company's cable. Where multiple service in these public buildings is required, the company shall provide, at cost, necessary distribution equipment and materials, but is not expected to install inside wiring for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § VI, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 11-632. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  The company shall pay to the city as a franchise fee during each calendar year during the existence of the franchise a sum of money determined as follows: 
(1)  January 1, 1988, through December 31, 1989, 3.5% of gross revenues. 
(2)  January 1, 1990, through December 31, 1991, 4.0% of gross revenues. 
(3)  January 1, 1992, through December 31, 1993, 4.5% of gross revenues. 
(4)  January 1, 1994, through December 31, 2007, 5.0% of gross revenues. 
(b)  The company shall not be required to pay any city business license fee or tax, except ad valorem taxes. 
(c)  Payments shall be made annually and shall be accompanied by a warranty from the company that the statement of gross revenues derived by the company from the operation of the system is true and correct. The city may require, at any time, an audit of revenue figures for the immediately prior year. Audits of other years may be required if material error is found in the current audit. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § VII, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 11-633. - Conformance to requirements of Federal Communications Commission. 
The company's distribution system shall conform to the requirements of the Federal Communications Commission, particularly with respect to freedom from spurious radiation. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § VIII, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 11-634. - Service to be provided; duration. 
The company shall provide cable television service to the city as contemplated and provided for by this division until the termination of this division. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § IX, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 11-635. - Claims for injury or damages; indemnification; insurance; defense of proceeding against city. 
(a)  The company shall indemnify and hold the city harmless at all times during the term of this grant from and against all claims for injury or damages to persons or property both real and personal caused by the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of any structure, equipment, appliance or products authorized or used pursuant to authority of this division. 
(b)  The company shall carry insurance in such form and in such companies that are licensed to do business in the state to protect the city and itself from and against any and all claims for injury or damages to persons or property, both real and personal, caused by the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of any structure, equipment, appliance or products authorized or used pursuant to authority of this division. The amount of such insurance against liability due to damage to property shall be not less than $150,000.00 as to any one person and $250,000.00 as to any one accident, and against the liability due to injury or death of persons the amount of such insurance shall not be less than $500,000.00 as to any one person and $1,000,000.00 as to any one accident. 
(c)  The company, upon receipt of due notice in writing from the city, shall defend at its own expense, or cause the same to be done, proceedings against the city in which it is claimed that the injury or damage arose from the company's activities in the operation of its television system. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § X, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 11-636. - Rights and duties upon termination or forfeiture of franchise. 
(a)  Upon termination or forfeiture of this grant in accordance with any of its terms, the company may sell its cables, wires and appliances and business to any person or persons entitled to operate a cable television system in the city. If the company does not sell such assets within a reasonable time, the company will, upon reasonable written request therefor, undertake to remove its cables, wires and appliances from the city streets, lanes, sidewalks, alleys, bridges, highways, and other public places within the city and subsequent additions thereto in sufficient time to make available the poles (referred to in section 11-628 and used by the company) for use by any person or persons entitled to operate a cable television system in the city, as such person or persons proceed to use such poles. 
(b)  In the event of the failure of the company to perform the obligations of this section, the city shall have the right to make a written demand on the company to proceed to carry out the removal of such equipment within 30 days from the date of such demand. Upon a failure of the company to proceed with such a removal expeditiously, the city shall have the right to remove the same and retain it as the city's property without accounting therefor to the company, and the expense of such removal shall be charged to and paid by the company after giving credit for the value, if any, of the equipment removed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § XI, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 11-637. - Right of city to revoke franchise on default of company. 
If the company shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of this grant, or default in any of its obligations, as provided for in section 11-634, and shall fail, within 75 days after written notice from the city to correct such default or noncompliance, the city commission shall have the right to revoke this division, and all rights of the company hereunder, unless and until such failure or default shall be so corrected. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § XII, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 11-638. - Assignment, transfer, or sublease of franchise limited. 
The company shall not assign, transfer or sublet the privilege granted in this division and will not sell such privilege without the prior consent in writing of the city commission; provided, however, that a mortgage, lien, deed to secure debt, security interest or other encumbrances of such privilege as a part of acquiring, constructing, equipping or maintaining CATV systems shall not be considered a violation of this section, and any such creditor shall be entitled to all the rights and remedies granted to the same in any documents relating to such a transaction, including, without limitation, a foreclosure or voluntary conveyance to the creditor or assigns and any subsequent sale or other disposition of the security referred to in any such documents without such consent. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § XIV, 2-20-89) 
Sec. 11-639. - Franchise fee on sale of franchise. 
If the company should sell a controlling interest in the privilege under this division after receiving consent thereto to the extent required by section 11-638, the company shall pay to the city the sum of $50,000.00 as a retroactive franchise fee due to the city in the year in which any such sale takes place, provided that such payment does not cause the total franchise fee for that year to exceed five percent of gross revenue. 
(Ord. No. 89-2-2, § XV, 2-20-89) 
Secs. 11-640—11-649. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PAWNSHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 11-650. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means any person who works in a pawnshop, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, regardless of whether remuneration is received or not. 
Pawnbroker means any person who works in a pawnshop in the capacity of manager or owner or both. 
Pawnshop means any business that takes or receives by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any kind as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement redeemable upon certain terms and with the implied power of sale or default. 
(Ord. No. 99-5-2, § I, 5-12-99) 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-130 et seq. 
Sec. 11-651. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The city police department shall see that the provisions of this article are observed and enforced. 
(Ord. No. 99-5-2, § I, 5-12-99) 
Sec. 11-652. - Employees. 
No person shall be an employee of a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has been fingerprinted by the public safety department and has been issued an annual permit authorizing such person to be employed by a pawnshop. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to assure that there is compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-5-2, § I, 5-12-99) 
Sec. 11-653. - Character of person connected with pawn business. 
No owner, employee, pawnbroker or any person connected with a pawnshop for which a license or permit is sought shall have been convicted of a crime involving "moral turpitude" or shall have been convicted of any crime involving felony theft, burglary, robbery, or a violation of the "Family Violence Act." 
(Ord. No. 99-5-2, § I, 5-12-99) 
Sec. 11-654. - Annual permit. 
Before operating a pawnshop or becoming an employee of a pawnshop, any person must first file an application with the city police department for a permit to operate or be employed in the pawnshop, pursuant to the following: 
(1)  The application shall be made on an annual basis; 
(2)  No permit shall be issued until a fee in an amount established by action of the city board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, is paid to the city; 
(3)  The application shall state the address of the pawnshop; 
(4)  The application shall contain the full name, address, phone number, date of birth and Social Security Number of any employee or pawnbroker; 
(5)  The chief of police or any other officer of the city designated by the city commissioners, shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall report to the city board of commissioners whether such applicant is a person of good character and has not been convicted of a criminal offense an indicated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-5-2, § I, 5-12-99) 
Sec. 11-655. - Records of transactions. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent electronic record of its pawn transactions in which an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop can be transmitted to the city police department via an electronic automated reporting system. Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop and shall be made at the time of each transaction, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase, pawn or sale of the property. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the customer making the pledge, trade or sale. 
(3)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card which contains a photograph of the customer. 
(4)  A description of the pledged or purchased property by serial, model or other number, if available, and by any identifying marks (e.g., brand name, color, style, etc.) 
(5)  The number of the receipt or pawn transaction issued for the property pawned or bought. 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned. 
(7)  The maturity date of the transaction, if a pawn. 
(8)  A photograph of the customer and the item pawned or bought which will be taken with the electronic automated reporting system at the time of the transaction. 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
(b)  Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system or may elect to upload electronically via the internet a batch file of all transactions for each business day to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system immediately at the conclusion of each business day. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the city police department. 
(c)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, pawnshops and pawnbrokers will be notified as soon as possible. In this event, the pawnbrokers will be required to make records of transactions in paper form. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in paragraph (a) of this Code Section. Pawnbrokers shall maintain a three-day supply of these paper forms. 
(d)  Any duly authorized law enforcement officer may, during the ordinary hours of business or any other reasonable time, inspect any pawnbroker's electronic records at the pawnbroker's place of business to ensure compliance with this section. 
(e)  The chief of police or his designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system. There will be a fee assessed to the pawnshop for each reported transaction; said fee shall be set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. This fee will be invoiced to the pawnbroker and collected by the chief of police or his designee, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Ord. No. 99-5-2, § I, 5-12-99; Ord. No. 06-9-2, § I, 9-5-06) 
Editor's note— Section II of Ord. No. 2006-9-2 provides for an effective date of Dec. 1, 2006. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-132, 44-12-133 et seq. 
Sec. 11-656. - Waiting period for disposal of articles. 
Any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop who makes a loan on pledged goods, or buys pledged goods on the condition that the seller may repurchase said goods, shall hold said goods for at least 30 days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Nonpledged goods bought under this section shall be held for at least seven calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 99-5-2, § I, 5-12-99) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 44-12-138 
Sec. 11-657. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to receive goods in pawn, trade, purchase or sale from a person under 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 99-5-2, § I, 5-12-99) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 44-12-137 
Sec. 11-658. - Lost or stolen items. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating or employed by a pawnbroker's license or permit, to report to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent any article or goods sold or pawned to him if he shall have a reason to believe that the article or goods was stolen or lost when presented by seller or customer. 
(b)  With respect to any items which would normally have a serial number or other means of identification, if any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop becomes aware that such items have had the identification removed, defaced or destroyed, such fact shall be immediately reported to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent. 
(c)  If it is determined that an item bought, sold, traded or pawned by a seller or customer to the pawnbroker or his employee is the subject of any reported theft, then the surrender of said item to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent shall be done upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 99-5-2, § I, 5-12-99) 
Sec. 11-659. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to violate any of the provisions of this article, whether or not such person or employee is the holder of a current valid permit issued according to the terms of this article. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this article or other rules, ordinances and regulations as may be passed by the city board of commissioners for conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, shall upon conviction, have the license to conduct business revoked. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in an application for any permit provided for in this article. 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by the terms of this article. 
(3)  Violate any criminal law of this state while acting in the course of business as a pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker. 
(c)  Persons who violate this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 99-5-2, § I, 5-12-99) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 44-12-137. 
Secs. 11-660—11-699. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 11-700. - Findings. 
OCGA § 36-43-1 et seq. authorizes municipalities to establish city business improvement districts for the purpose of providing supplemental service to such districts by imposing assessments on property and collecting business license surcharges. The city has received a petition requesting the renewal and modification of the business improvement district, originally created in 2006, from property owners representing more than 51 percent of the total property value in proposed district. 
(Ord. No. 06-3-1, § I, 3-6-06; Ord. No. 2015-05-01, § I, 5-26-15) 
Sec. 11-701. - Creation of business improvement district; adoption of district plan; management of plan; amendments. 
(a)  There is hereby created a business improvement district in Rome, Georgia (the "District"). The legal boundaries of the District shall be set forth on an official map (the "Business Improvement District Map") which is a part of an official plan for the District (the "District Plan"). A copy of the Business Improvement District Map shall remain on file and available for inspection in the office of the Floyd County Tax Commissioner and the City of Rome Downtown Development Authority. The Business Improvement District Map attached hereto as a part of Exhibit A is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
(b)  The District Plan, also known as the Management Plan, attached hereto as Exhibit A, is hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance. A copy of the District Plan shall remain on file and available for inspection in the office of the Rome Department of Downtown Development Authority. 
(c)  The District Plan may be amended from time to time by the city commission by adopting an official amendment to this ordinance. The District Plan must set forth, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The Business Improvement District Map; 
(2)  A description of the boundaries of the District; 
(3)  The maximum millage rate, if any, to be levied in the District; 
(4)  The proposed time for implementation and completion of the District Plan; 
(5)  Design and rehabilitation standards, if any, to be applied to buildings and structures within the District; 
(6)  The maximum surcharge, if any, to be levied on existing businesses and occupations within the District; 
(7)  The supplemental services to be provided within the District; 
(8)  Any other rules and regulations applicable to the District; 
(9)  The method of management of the District. 
(d)  Management of Plan. 
The Business Improvement District shall be managed by the downtown development authority for the City of Rome. The downtown development authority shall submit an annual financial statement to the City of Rome Commission for review and publication. 
(Ord. No. 06-3-1, § I, 3-6-06; Ord. No. 07-1-1, §§ I, II, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 2015-05-01, § I, 5-26-15) 
Sec. 11-702. - Supplemental services; continuation of services. 
(a)  Supplemental services provided in the District pursuant to the District Plan shall commence on January 1, 2016, and the District shall terminate on December 31, 2025, unless renewed by ordinance. 
(b)  The level of services presently provided to the District by the city will continue to be provided at the same level as before the District was created. It is the intent of the city that the provision of supplemental services within the District shall not reduce or otherwise replace existing services provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-3-1, § I, 3-6-06; Ord. No. 2015-05-01, § I, 5-26-15) 
Sec. 11-703. - Separation of funds. 
Funds collected within the District under this article shall not be used for any other purpose other than those set forth in the District Plan. 
(Ord. No. 06-3-1, § I, 3-6-06; Ord. No. 2015-05-01, § I, 5-26-15) 
Secs. 11-704—11-799. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - SECONDHAND DEALERS 

Sec. 11-800. - Secondhand dealers. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means any person who works for a secondhand dealer, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, regardless of whether remuneration is received or not. 
Exempt items means clothing, music and video compact discs, furniture, any consignment item, motor vehicles, motorcycles, motorized water craft, waste paper, books, magazines, tires, lumber or wood products, and any recycled goods. 
Purchase means buying, exchanging, transferring, collecting, or otherwise acquiring regulated property from another person not a secondhand dealer, for resale, exchange, or transfer by the purchaser. This includes taking possession of regulated property with an express or implied agreement or understanding that the regulated property shall be returned at a subsequent time at a stipulated price or in exchange for payment of a storage or handling fee. 
Regulated secondhand items means articles or merchandise of any kind, including: hand tools, power tools, sporting equipment, electronic equipment, watches, jewelry, precious stones, precious metals, scrap gold, coins, musical instruments, electrical appliances, washers, dryers, refrigerators or any other items not specifically exempt under this section that have been previously sold or put into action or service. 
Secondhand dealer means any sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, family limited partnership, joint venture, association, cooperative, trust, corporation, personal holding company, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, or any other form of organization whose business is dealing in, purchasing, selling, or trading regulated secondhand items. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-2, § I, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 11-801. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The city police department shall enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-2, § I, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 11-802. - Character of secondhand dealer. 
No person convicted of a crime involving "moral turpitude" or any crime involving felony theft, burglary, or robbery shall receive a permit to be a secondhand dealer for five years following such conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-2, § I, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 11-803. - Annual permit. 
Before operating as a secondhand dealer, any person must first file an application with the city police department for a permit to operate as a secondhand dealer, pursuant to the following: 
(1)  The application shall be made on an annual basis; 
(2)  No permit shall be issued until a fee in an amount established by action of the city board of commissioners; said fee shall be set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36; 
(3)  The application shall state the physical address of the secondhand dealer; 
(4)  The application shall contain the full name, address, phone number, date of birth and Social Security number of all owners; and 
(5)  The chief of police or any other officer of the city designated by the city commissioners, shall investigate each applicant for such license. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-2, § I, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 11-804. - Records of transactions. 
(a)  Every secondhand dealer shall maintain a permanent electronic record of its transactions so that an accurate description of all property purchased by the secondhand dealer can be transmitted to the Rome City Police Department via an electronic automated reporting system. Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property purchased by the secondhand dealer and shall be made at the time of each transaction, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase, or trade of the property; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the customer making the trade or sale; 
(3)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card which contains a photograph of the customer; 
(4)  A description of the traded or purchased property by make, model, serial number, or other identifying number, and by any identifying marks (e.g. brand name, color, style, etc.); 
(5)  The number of the receipt or transaction issued for the property bought or traded; 
(6)  The price paid; 
(7)  A photograph of the customer and the item purchased which will be taken with the electronic automated reporting system at the time of the transaction; 
(8)  Any secondhand dealer that purchases regulated secondhand items at a yard sale, flea market, auction, or other similar events must report the secondhand item with all required information with the exception of the photograph of the seller; 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
(b)  Every secondhand dealer shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system or may elect to upload electronically via the internet a batch of all transactions for each business day to the administrator of the electronic reporting system immediately at the conclusion of each business day. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the city police department. 
(c)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, secondhand dealers will be notified as soon as possible. In this event, the secondhand dealer will be required to make records of transactions in paper form. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in paragraph (a) of this Code Section. Secondhand dealers shall maintain a three-day supply of these paper forms. 
(d)  Any duly authorized law enforcement officer may, during the ordinary hours of business or at any other reasonable time, inspect any secondhand dealer's electronic records and inventory at the secondhand dealer's place of business to ensure compliance with this section. 
(e)  The chief of police or his designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system. There will be a fee assessed to the secondhand dealer for each reported transaction; said fee shall be set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. This fee will be invoiced to the secondhand dealers and collected by the chief of police or his designee, which may be a third part administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(f)  Only transaction records containing complete information shall be deemed to comply with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-2, § I, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 11-805. - Tagging regulated property for identification. 
Each secondhand dealer shall affix a tag to every item of regulated property, which must contain a unique, legible number. That unique number must either be the same as the transaction report number for that item or be referenced to the transaction report required by the Rome Police Department or assigned by the approved reporting method described in the records of reporting. After the holding period has expired, the transaction number must remain identifiable on the property until sold. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-2, § I, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 11-806. - Waiting period for disposal of articles. 
Any secondhand dealer who purchases goods under this section shall hold such goods for at least seven calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-2, § I, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 11-807. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer or his employee to receive goods by trade, purchase or sale from a person less than 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-2, § I, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 11-808. - Lost or stolen items. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating as or employed by a secondhand dealer to report to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent any article or item purchased by him if he shall have a reason to believe that the article or item was stolen or lost when presented by a seller or customer. 
(b)  With respect to any items which would normally have a serial number or other means of identification, if any owner or employee of a secondhand dealer becomes aware that such items have had the identification number removed, defaced or destroyed, such fact shall be immediately reported to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent. 
(c)  If it is determined that an item bought, sold, or traded by a seller or customer to the secondhand dealer or his employee is the subject of any reported theft, then the surrender of said item to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent shall be done upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-2, § I, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 11-809. - "Secondhand dealers" not included. 
The following shall not be considered secondhand dealers and are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  A business whose acquisitions of regulated secondhand items consist exclusively of donated items and/or were purchased from 501(c)(3) organizations; or 
(2)  A person whose only business transactions with regulated secondhand items in the City of Rome consist of the sale of personal property acquired for household or personal use; or 
(3)  A person whose only business transactions with regulated secondhand items in the City of Rome consist of a display space, booth, or table maintained for displaying or selling merchandise at any trade show, convention, festival, fair, circus, market, flea market, swap meet, antique mall or similar event; or 
(4)  Regulated secondhand items sold by a licensed auctioneer at an auction; or 
(5)  Regulated secondhand items sold at an estate sale, yard sale or similar event. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-2, § I, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 11-810. - Fixed physical location. 
No person or business may operate as a secondhand dealer within the City of Rome unless the person or business maintains a fixed physical business location. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-2, § I, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 11-811. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or employee of a secondhand dealer to violate any of the provisions of this article. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this article or other rules, ordinances and regulations as may be passed by the city board of commissioners for conduct of the business of a secondhand dealer shall upon conviction, have the permit to conduct business revoked. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or employee of a secondhand dealer to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in an application for any permit provided for in this article. 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by the terms of this article. 
(3)  Violate any criminal law of this state while acting in the course of business as an owner or employee of a secondhand dealer. 
(c)  Persons who violate this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-2, § I, 11-3-08) 
Secs. 11-812—11-829. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 11-830. - Purpose; findings and rationale. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city commission, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); Sewell v. Georgia, 435 U.S. 982 (1978); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 19 (1989); and 
Stardust, 3007 LLC v. City of Brookhaven, 899 F.3d 1164 (11th Cir. 2018); HH-Indianapolis, LLC v. Consol. City of Indianapolis/Marion County, 889 F.3d 432 (7th Cir. 2018); HH-Indianapolis, LLC v. Consol. City of Indianapolis/Marion County, 265 F. Supp. 3d 873 (S.D. Ind. 2017); Flanigan's Enters., Inc. v. City of Sandy Springs, 703 F. App'x 929 (11th Cir. 2017); Maxim Cabaret, Inc. v. City of Sandy Springs, 816 S.E.2d 31 (Ga. 2018); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. City of Doraville, 297 Ga. 513 (2015); Trop, Inc. v. City of Brookhaven, 296 Ga. 85 (2014); Goldrush II v. City of Marietta, 267 Ga. 683 (1997); Flanigan's Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County, 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); Peek-a-Boo Lounge v. Manatee County, 630 F.3d 1346 (11th Cir. 2011); Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); Jacksonville Property Rights Ass'n, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 635 F.3d 1266 (11th Cir. 2011); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 331 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Williams v. Pryor, 240 F.3d 944 (11th Cir. 2001); Williams v. A.G. of Alabama, 378 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2004); Williams v. Morgan, 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); Gary v. City of Warner Robins, 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350 (11th Cir. 2002); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry, 187 F3d 1251 (11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 200 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker, 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); International Food & Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale, 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); 5634 E. Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), aff'd, 2008 WL 4276370 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curiam); Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County, 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33 (1998); World Famous Dudley's Food & Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson, 242 Ga. 214 (1978); Entm't Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 721 F.3d 729 (6th Cir. 2013); Lund v. City of Fall River, 714 F.3d 65 (1st Cir. 2013); Imaginary Images, Inc. v. Evans, 612 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 2010); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Ocello v. Koster, 354 S.W.3d 187 (Mo. 2011); 84 Video/Newsstand, Inc. v. Sartini, 2011 WL 3904097 (6th Cir. Sept. 7, 2011); Plaza Group Properties, LLC v. Spencer County Plan Commission, 877 N.E.2d 877 (Ind. Ct. App. 2007); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 360 (6th Cir. 2009); Entm't Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 372 (6th Cir. 2009); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); Fantasy Ranch, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 459 F.3d 546 (5th Cir. 2006); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Knox County, 555 F.3d 512 (6th Cir. 2009); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); DCR, Inc. v. Pierce County, 964 P.2d 380 (Wash. Ct. App. 1998); City of New York v. Hommes, 724 N.E.2d 368 (N.Y. 1999); Taylor v. State, No. 01-01-00505-CR, 2002 WL 1722154 (Tex. App. July 25, 2002); Fantasyland Video, Inc. v. County of San Diego, 505 F.3d 996 (9th Cir. 2007); U.S. v. Baston, 818 F.3d 651 (11th Cir. 2016); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); Starship Enters. of Atlanta, Inc. v. Coweta County, No. 3:09-CV-123, R. 41 (N.D. Ga. Feb. 28, 2011); High Five Investments, LLC v. Floyd County, No. 4:06-CV-190, R. 128 (N.D. Ga. Mar. 14, 2008); 10950 Retail, LLC v. Fulton County, No. 1:06-CV-1923, R. 62 Order (N.D. Ga. Dec. 21, 2006); 10950 Retail, LLC v. Fulton County, No. 1:06-CV-1923, R. 84 Contempt Order (N.D. Ga. Jan. 4, 2007); Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. v. City of Littleton, Civil Action No. 99-N-1696, Memorandum Decision and Order (D. Colo. March 31, 2001); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion's Den, Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); Starship Enterprises of Atlanta, Inc. v. Gwinnett County, No. 176A-00699-1 (Order Granting Summary Judgment and Permanent Injunction, Jan. 12, 2018); 
and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, "Correlates of Current Transactional Sex among a Sample of Female Exotic Dancers in Baltimore, MD," Journal of Urban Health (2011); "Does the Presence of Sexually Oriented Businesses Relate to Increased Levels of Crime?" Crime & Delinquency (2012) (Louisville, KY); Metropolis, Illinois - 2011-12; Manatee County, Florida - 2007; Hillsborough County, Florida - 2006; Clarksville, Indiana - 2009; El Paso, Texas - 2008; Memphis, Tennessee - 2006; New Albany, Indiana - 2009; Louisville, Kentucky - 2004; Fulton County, GA - 2001; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Jackson County, Missouri - 2008; Ft. Worth, Texas - 2004; Kennedale, Texas - 2005; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Houston, Texas - 1997, 1983; Phoenix, Arizona - 1995-98, 1979; Tucson, Arizona - 1990; Spokane, Washington - 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); Dallas, Texas - 2007; "Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Businesses," 19 Criminal Justice Policy Review 153 (2008); "Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence," by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota; "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000; Sex Store Statistics and Articles; Indianapolis / Marion County Board of Zoning Appeals Documents; Law Enforcement and Private Investigator Affidavits (Adult Cabarets in Forest Park, GA and Sandy Springs, GA); DeKalb County Testimony and Reports - 2014; and Strip Club-Trafficking Documents, the City Commission finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, human trafficking, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. Alcohol consumption impairs judgment and lowers inhibitions, thereby increasing the risk of adverse secondary effects. 
(2)  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
(3)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. The city's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this article are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects, 
The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such secondary effects. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-831. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. 
Adult arcade means a commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited that maintains booths or rooms smaller than 100 square feet, wherein image-producing devices are regularly maintained, and where a fee is charged to access the booths or rooms or to view the images displayed on the image-producing devices. 
Adult bookstore means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." A "principal business activity" exists where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of said items; or 
(2)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of said items; or 
(3)  The establishment maintains at least 25 percent of its floor space for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to access said items, as well as cashier stations where said items are rented or sold, shall be included in "floor space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); or 
(4)  The establishment maintains at least 500 square feet of its floor space for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to access said items, as well as cashier stations where said items are rented or sold, shall be included in "floor space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); or 
(5)  The establishment regularly offers for sale or rental at least 500 of said items; or 
(6)  The establishment regularly makes said items available for sale or rental and holds itself out, in any medium, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited that maintains viewing rooms that are 100 square feet or larger wherein where films or videos characterized by their emphasis upon "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown. 
Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this article, no business shall be classified as a sexually oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
City means Rome, Georgia. 
City clerk means the City of Rome City Clerk or his or her designee. 
Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who works or engages in activity for pay on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full time, part time, temporary, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, lessee, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Floor space means the floor area inside an establishment that is visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. 
Hearing officer means an attorney, not an employee of the city, who is licensed to practice law in Georgia, and retained to serve as an independent tribunal to conduct hearings under this article. 
Influential interest means the actual power influence or control the operation, management, or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. An individual is deemed to have an "influential interest" if he or she (1) is the on-site general manager of the sexually oriented business, (2) owns a financial interest of 30 percent or more of a business or of any class of voting securities of a business, or (3) holds an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In the case of an employee, it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually oriented business employee license has been issued. 
Nudity or nude conduct means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. For purposes of this article, a "fully opaque covering" must be non-flesh colored, shall not consist of any substance that can be washed or peeled off the skin (such as paint, make-up, or latex), and shall not simulate the appearance of the anatomical area that it covers. 
Operator means any person who causes a business to function or keeps it in a state of doing business, and shall include a person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who manages, supervises, or controls the business or a portion thereof. A person may be found to be an operator regardless of whether such person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a sexually oriented business license. 
Regional shopping mall (enclosed) means a group of retail and other commercial establishments that is planned, developed, and managed as a single property, with on-site parking provided around the perimeter of the shopping center, and that is generally at least 40 acres in size and flanked by two or more large "anchor" stores, such as department stores. The common walkway or "mall" is enclosed, climate-controlled and lighted, usually with an inward orientation of the stores facing the walkway. 
Regularly means the consistent and repeated doing of an act on an ongoing basis. 
Semi-nude or semi-nudity means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Semi-nude lounge means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment that regularly offers live semi-nude conduct. No establishment shall avoid classification as a semi-nude lounge by offering nude conduct. 
Sexual device means any three dimensional object designed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, buttocks, nipple, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt plugs, nipple clamps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexual device shop means a business: 
(1)  Where more than 100 sexual devices are regularly made available for sale or rental; or 
(2)  Where sexual devices are regularly made available for sale or rental and the business regularly: 
a.  Gives special prominence to sexual devices (such as by using lighted display cases, having a room or discrete area of the establishment significantly devoted to sexual devices, positioning sexual devices near cash registers or similar points of sale, or by holding events focused on sexual devices); or 
b.  Holds itself out, in any medium, as a place that caters to adult sexual interests. 
This definition shall not be construed to include any establishment located within an enclosed regional shopping mall or any pharmacy or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical products. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, an adult bookstore, an adult motion picture theater, a semi-nude lounge, or a sexual device shop. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal activity means any of the following specified crimes for which less than five years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
(1)  Rape, child molestation, sexual assault, sexual battery, aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual battery, or public indecency; 
(2)  Prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, or pandering; 
(3)  Obscenity, disseminating or displaying matter harmful to a minor, or use of child in sexual performance; 
(4)  Any offense related to any sexually-oriented business, including controlled substance offenses, tax violations, racketeering, crimes involving sex, crimes involving prostitution, or crimes involving obscenity; 
(5)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; or 
(6)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Georgia, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(2)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsection (1) of this definition. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
Viewing room means the room or booth where a patron of a sexually oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video on an image-producing device. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-832. - License required. 
(a)  Sexually oriented business license. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  Employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an employee, as defined in this article, of a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business employee license, except that a person who is a licensee under a valid sexually oriented business license shall not be required to also obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person at the establishment who does not have a valid sexually oriented business employee license. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the city clerk a completed application made on a form provided by the city clerk. A sexually oriented business may designate an individual with an influential interest in the business to file its application for a sexually oriented business license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be signed as required by subsection (d) herein and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in this subsection (c), accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license, a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by a governmental agency, or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(4)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business. 
(5)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(6)  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
(7)  A statement of whether any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to a court order of closure. 
(8)  An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor area occupied by the business and a statement of floor area visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration requirements of this article shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable regulations. See sections 11-842 and 11-845. The city clerk may waive the requirements of this subsection (8) for a renewal application if the applicant adopts a legal description and a sketch or diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(9)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, a signed and sworn affidavit verifying the lawful presence of each individual that executes the application on behalf of the applicant. With regard to a renewal application, if an individual has previously complied with the requirements of this subsection (9), the city clerk may waive the requirements of this subsection for that individual. 
(10)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, a signed and sworn affidavit attesting that the establishment either uses the federal work authorization program in accordance with federal regulations or that the applicant employs fewer than 11 people or otherwise does not fall within the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. 
(11)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business employee license, the name and address of the establishment where the applicant intends to use the employee license. 
The information provided pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  Signature. A person who seeks a sexually oriented business employee license under this section shall sign the application for a license. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license under this section is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the sexually oriented business or in a legal entity that controls the sexually oriented business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this article and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  [Confidentiality.] The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the office of the city clerk on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by governing law or court order. Any information protected by the right to privacy as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to such disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-833. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Sexually oriented business license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the city clerk shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the completed application is from a preexisting sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating in the city and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 30 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business license application, the city clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The city clerk shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  An applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  The sexually oriented business, as defined herein, is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this article. 
(5)  The sexually oriented business, as defined herein, is not in compliance with the location standards in section 11-847 of this article or the location requirements of the Rome-Floyd County Unified Land Development Code (ULDC). 
(6)  Any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure. 
(7)  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(b)  Employee license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the city clerk shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the applicant seeks licensure to work in a licensed sexually oriented business and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business employee license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 30 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business employee license application, the city clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The city clerk shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(6)  The applicant has expressed the intent to use the sexually oriented business employee license at an establishment that is not licensed by the city to operate a sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-834. - Fees. 
The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses shall be as follows: $100.00 for the initial fee for a sexually oriented business license, and $50.00 for annual renewal; $50.00 for the initial sexually oriented business employee license and $25.00 for annual renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-835. - Inspection. 
Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall permit the city clerk and his or her agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this article, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-836. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this article. When a renewal license is issued, it shall become effective the day after the previous license expires and shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from its effective date unless otherwise suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least 90 days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made less than 90 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current license will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-837. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly or recklessly violated this article or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this article. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business employee license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the employee licensee has knowingly or recklessly violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-838. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly or recklessly violates this article or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this article and a suspension of the licensee's license has become effective within the previous 12-month period. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the sexually oriented business license or the sexually oriented business employee license; 
(2)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(4)  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; 
(5)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity or specified criminal activity to occur in or on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(6)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(7)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a semi-nude condition or in a state of nudity on the premises of the sexually oriented business; or 
(8)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed three or more violations of this article within a 12-month period. 
(c)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this article, the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-839. - Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal. 
(a)  When the city clerk issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the city clerk shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the city clerk for the respondent. The notice shall also set forth the following: The respondent shall have ten days after the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office of the city clerk, a written request for a hearing. If the respondent does not request a hearing within said ten days, the city clerk's written notice shall become a final denial, suspension, or revocation, as the case may be, on the 30 th day after it is issued. 
(1)  If the respondent does make a written request for a hearing within said ten days, then the city clerk shall, within ten days after the submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after the date that the hearing notice is issued. The city shall provide for the hearing to be transcribed. 
(2)  At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all relevant arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the city clerk's witnesses. The city clerk shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a final written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. 
(3)  If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall advise the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction, and the decision shall not become effective until the 30 th day after it is rendered. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the city clerk to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the city clerk shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(b)  If any court action challenging a licensing decision is initiated, the city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating as a sexually oriented business, or any sexually oriented business employee that is lawfully employed as a sexually oriented business employee, on the date on which the completed business or employee application, as applicable, is filed with the city clerk: Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of any denial, suspension, or revocation of a temporary license or annual license, the city clerk shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. While a provisional license is in effect, the provisional licensee shall comply with the regulations set forth in sections 11-835, 11-841, 11-842, 11-843, and 11-845, and any violations thereof shall be subject to the provisions of section 11-844. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-840. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-841. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-842. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films on premises. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult arcade or adult motion picture theater shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no specified sexual activity occurs in or on the premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 100 square feet is limited to one person. 
b.  That specified sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
e.  That violations of these regulations are unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in subsections (5)a. through d. of this section. 
(7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from an operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the premises has two or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that no porous materials are used for any wall, floor, or seat in any booth or viewing room. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(8) to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(c)  No patron shall knowingly or recklessly enter or remain in a viewing room less than 100 square feet in area that is occupied by any other patron. 
(d)  No patron shall knowingly or recklessly be or remain within one foot of any other patron while in a viewing room that is 100 square feet or larger in area. 
(e)  No person shall knowingly or recklessly make any hole or opening between viewing rooms. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-843. - Loitering, exterior lighting and monitoring, and interior lighting requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to: 
(1)  Ensure that at least two conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on the premises are posted on the premises; 
(2)  Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on the premises by visually inspecting the premises at least once every 90 minutes or inspecting the premises by use of video cameras and monitors; and 
(3)  Provide lighting to the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. Said lighting shall be of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot candle as measured at the floor level. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to ensure that the interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot candles as measured at the floor level and the illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer is present in or on the premises. 
(c)  No sexually oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or similar barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment from being visible from a public right-of-way. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-844. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. For violations of this article that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. For violations of this article that are not continuous with respect to time, each violation is a separate offense. 
(b)  Any premises, building, dwelling, or other structure in which a sexually oriented business is repeatedly operated or maintained in violation of this article shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to civil abatement proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  The city's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this article to enjoin, prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings shall be brought in the name of the city, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this article, or any of the laws in force in the city or to exempt anyone violating this code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-845. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No patron, employee, or any other person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or engage in a specified sexual activity. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, remains at least six feet from all patrons and on a stage at least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 600 square feet. 
(c)  No employee who appears semi-nude in a sexually oriented business shall knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of a sexually oriented business. No customer shall knowingly or intentionally touch such an employee or the clothing of such an employee on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(d)  No person shall possess, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(e)  No person shall knowingly or recklessly allow a person under the age of 18 years to be or remain on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(f)  No operator of a sexually oriented business shall knowingly or recklessly allow a room in the sexually oriented business to be simultaneously occupied by any patron and any other employee who is semi-nude or who appears semi-nude on the premises of the sexually oriented business, unless an operator of the sexually oriented business is present in the same room. 
(g)  No operator or licensee of a sexually oriented business shall violate the regulations in this section or knowingly or recklessly allow an employee or any other person to violate the regulations in this section. 
(h)  A sign in a form to be prescribed by the city clerk, and summarizing the provisions of subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) of this section, shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. No person shall cover, obstruct, or obscure said sign. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-846. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
This article does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this article, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this article, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-847. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the City of Rome that is: 
(1)  Within 750 feet of any parcel upon which a house of worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, or children's day care facility is located; or 
(2)  Within 300 feet of any parcel upon which an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises is located. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line from the closest part of any structure occupied by the sexually oriented business to the closest property line of uses outlined in subsection (a), above. 
(c)  Amortization. 
(1)  As used in this section, "prior lawful sexually oriented business" means a sexually oriented business that was lawful and valid when established, as evidenced by (i) a certificate of occupancy that shows that the establishment was authorized to be an adult establishment, adult entertainment establishment, or a sexually oriented business at its inception, and (ii) a license issued by the governing jurisdiction authorizing the operation of such an establishment at the location at the establishment's inception. 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia, a prior lawful sexually oriented business that was lawfully operating in all respects prior to the adoption of this section that does not conform to the location standards for sexually oriented businesses shall terminate its nonconformity and comply with those standards not later than January 1, 2021. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-848. - Severability. 
This article and each section and provision of said article hereunder, are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this article be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 11-849. - Conflicting code provisions repealed. 
Any provisions in this Code specifically in conflict with any provision in this article [are] hereby deemed inoperative and repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-2, § I, 2-19-19) 
Chapter 12 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— City divisions and departments, § 2-2; certain boards designated, § 2-78; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; animals, ch. 4; moving structures on public streets, § 5-4; cemeteries, ch. 6; motor vehicles in cemeteries, § 6-54; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; riding on fire vehicles, § 9-39; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 11; sound trucks, § 11-89; prohibited signs, § 11-123; illumination of signs, § 11-133; political signs, § 11-134; vehicles for hire, § 11-376; use of vehicles in picketing or demonstrating, § 11-510; parades, § 11-531 et seq.; noise created by motor vehicle, § 14-7; disturbance by motor vehicle, § 14-8 et seq.; litter falling from vehicle, § 19-55; purposes of zoning chapter, § 23-3; offstreet automobile parking and storage, § 23-64; driveway regulations, § 23-66; procedures for approval of private subdivision developments, § 23-104. 
State Law reference— Motor Vehicles and Traffic, O.C.G.A. tit. 40; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; powers of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Short title. 
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Traffic Ordinance." 
(Code 1959, § 30-1; Code 1981, § 10-1001) 
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Central business district means all streets and portions of streets within the area designated as the C-2 central business district on the official zoning map of the city. 
Traffic engineer, with respect to powers and duties, but not with respect to the individual appointed to be the traffic engineer, shall be interchangeable with the term "traffic commission," as established in section 12-31. 
(Code 1959, § 30-13.1; Code 1981, §§ 10-1005, 10-1010) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; zoning, ch. 23. 
Sec. 12-3. - State rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to the Georgia Uniform Rules of the Road, as amended, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-181 through 40-6-183 and O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-370 through 40-6-376, and O.C.G.A. §§ 40-14-1 through 40-14-6 where applicable, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 79-2, 4-2-79; Ord. No. 85-3-13, § 1, 3-4-85; Ord. No. 87-11-3, § 1, 11-16-87; Code 1981, § 10-2001; Ord. No. 92-3-2, § I, 3-2-92) 
Sec. 12-4. - Bus or other vehicle—Boarding or alighting from. 
No person shall board or alight from any bus or other vehicle while such bus or other vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1959, § 30-78; Code 1981, § 10-2014) 
Sec. 12-5. - Same—Unlawful riding. 
No person shall ride on any bus or other vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1959, § 30-79; Code 1981, § 10-2015) 
Secs. 12-6—12-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-31. - Traffic commission—Establishment, composition, appointment, chairman. 
There is hereby established a traffic commission to serve without compensation, consisting of the traffic engineer, the chief of police, the chairman of the public safety committee of the city commission, the city attorney and such number of other city officers and representatives of unofficial bodies as may be determined and appointed by the city commission. The chairman of the traffic commission shall be appointed by the city commission and may be removed by it. 
(Code 1959, § 30-15; Code 1981, § 10-1006) 
Sec. 12-32. - Same—Duties generally. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic commission, and to this end it shall have the authority within the limits of the funds at its disposal, to coordinate traffic activities, to supervise the preparation and publication of traffic reports, to receive complaints having to do with traffic matters and to recommend to the city commission and to the traffic engineer, the chief of police and other city officials ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 30-16; Code 1981, § 10-1007) 
Sec. 12-33. - Same—Additional duties; power to exercise duties of traffic engineer. 
In addition to the duties prescribed in section 12-32, it shall be the general duty of the traffic commission to perform the duties designated to the traffic engineer in section 12-35. The traffic commission is vested with all powers of the traffic engineer and is authorized to perform all the duties and functions of the traffic engineer, as set out elsewhere in this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 30-16.1; Code 1981, § 10-1008) 
Sec. 12-34. - Traffic department. 
A traffic department is hereby established in and for the city. The traffic department shall be composed of the department director and any other employees that may be necessary. 
Sec. 12-35. - Traffic engineer. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint a traffic engineer. 
(b)  The traffic engineer shall, insofar as practicable: 
(1)  Operate and maintain all traffic control signs, signals and devices and parking meters within the city. 
(2)  Conduct engineering and traffic studies within the city to determine the city's traffic control needs. 
(3)  Conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures. 
(4)  Cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him by this code and any other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1004) 
Sec. 12-36. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones; signs and traffic control devices; schedule. 
(a)  The traffic engineer, after engineering and traffic investigations and approval by the traffic commission (which approval shall be reported to the city commission), is authorized to designate and maintain with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)  One-way streets and alleys and other directional control devices. 
(2)  Speed zones. 
(3)  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs at streets intersecting with through streets. 
(4)  Parking and no parking zones and regulations thereon. 
(5)  Truck routes and streets to be designated to prohibit various classes of trucks. 
(6)  Stop signals and other traffic signals. 
(b)  The traffic engineer, upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigations, is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)  Play streets. 
(2)  Pedestrian crosswalks. 
(3)  Other safety zones for pedestrians. 
(4)  Traffic lanes. 
(5)  Courses to be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections. 
(6)  Signs to regulate or prohibit turning at intersections. 
(7)  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs upon streets other than through streets. 
(8)  Streets upon which angle parking shall be permitted. 
(9)  Passenger and freight curb loading zones and regulations. 
(10)  Bus stops, taxicab stands and other public carrier stands. 
(11)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary to provide for and maintain orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state department of transportation. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(e)  The traffic engineer, after approval by the chief of police and the city commission, is authorized to install and maintain traffic control signal monitoring devices. 
(f)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this chapter shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 87-11-13, § 2, 11-16-87; Code 1981, § 10-2002; Ord. No. 02-12-2, § I, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 06-6-3, § I, 6-19-06) 
State Law reference— Uniform regulations governing traffic control devices, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50. 
Sec. 12-37. - Testing traffic control devices. 
The traffic engineer may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 30-14; Code 1981, § 10-2003(b)) 
Sec. 12-38. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
The traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 30-65; Code 1981, § 10-2007) 
Sec. 12-39. - E-911 to have prior notification of emergency calls. 
No ambulance or similar emergency vehicle shall use the streets and highways of the city to answer emergency calls, whether the destination of the ambulance or emergency vehicle is within or without the city, unless prior notification of the destination and purpose of the trip is reported to E-911 by the person operating the ambulance or other emergency vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 30-148; Code 1981, § 10-2091) 
Secs. 12-40—12-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 17. 

Sec. 12-66. - Police responsibility. 
(a)  The chief of police and the police department shall be responsible for all matters pertaining to traffic and the administration thereof except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon such department by this chapter and any other ordinance provisions of this city. 
(Code 1959, §§ 30-4, 30-5; Code 1981, §§ 10-1002, 10-4001) 
Sec. 12-67. - Regulations; general, emergency and experimental. 
The chief of police by and with the approval of the traffic engineer is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(Code 1981, § 10-2003(a)) 
Sec. 12-68. - Authority of officials. 
(a)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(b)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1981, § 10-4002) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 9. 
Sec. 12-69. - Records of violations. 
(a)  The police department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of this city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. This record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. The record shall accumulate during at least a three-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent three-year period. 
(b)  All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)  All these records and reports shall be public records. 
(Code 1959, § 30-6; Code 1981, § 10-4003) 
Sec. 12-70. - Accidents—Police to investigate. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Code 1959, § 30-7; Code 1981, § 10-4004) 
Sec. 12-71. - Same—Studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police department shall cooperate with the traffic engineer in conducting studies of these accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Code 1959, § 30-8; Code 1981, § 10-4005) 
Sec. 12-72. - Same—Reports. 
(a)  The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. These reports shall be available for the use and information of the traffic engineer. 
(b)  The police department shall receive and properly file all accident reports made to it under state law or under this chapter or any ordinance of this city. All accident reports made by persons involved in accidents shall be for the confidential use of the police department and city traffic engineer, and no such report shall be admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding other than upon request of any person making the report or upon request of the court having jurisdiction to prove compliance with the laws requiring the making of any such report. 
(Code 1959, § 30-9; Code 1981, § 10-4006) 
Sec. 12-73. - Annual traffic safety report. 
The police department shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city commission. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data. 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police. 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the police department for future traffic safety activities. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1009) 
Secs. 12-74—12-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Municipal court, ch. 13. 

Sec. 12-101. - Establishment, powers. 
(a)  The chief of police shall establish a traffic violations bureau to assist the municipal court with the clerical work of traffic cases. The bureau shall be under the direction of such person or persons as the chief of police may designate and shall be open at such hours as the chief of police may designate. 
(b)  The chief of police shall designate the specified offenses under the traffic ordinances of this city and the state traffic laws in respect to which payments of fines may be accepted by the traffic violations bureau in satisfaction thereof, and shall specify by suitable schedules the amount of such fines for first, second and subsequent offenses, provided such fines are within the limits declared by law or ordinance, and shall further specify what number of such offenses shall require appearance before the judge. 
(Code 1959, § 30-151; Code 1981, § 10-4021) 
Sec. 12-102. - When person charged may elect to appear at bureau or before judge of municipal court. 
(a)  Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a fine may be made to the traffic violations bureau shall have the option of paying such fine within the time specified in the notice of arrest at the traffic violations bureau upon entering a plea of guilty and upon waiving appearance in court; or he may have the option of depositing required lawful bail and upon a plea of not guilty shall be entitled to a trial as authorized by law. 
(b)  The payment of a fine to the traffic violations bureau shall be deemed an acknowledgement of conviction of the alleged offense, and the bureau, upon accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging payment thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 30-152; Code 1981, § 10-4022) 
Sec. 12-103. - Duties. 
The following duties are hereby imposed upon the traffic violations bureau in reference to traffic offenses: 
(1)  It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts and represent in court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty, waive court appearance and give power of attorney. 
(2)  It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons who must or wish to be heard in court, entering the time of their appearance on the court docket, and shall notify the arresting officer and witnesses, if any, to be present. 
(3)  It shall keep an easily accessible record of all violations of which each person has been guilty during the preceding 12 months, whether such guilt was established in court or in the traffic violations bureau. 
(Code 1959, § 30-153; Code 1981, § 10-4023) 
Sec. 12-104. - Records. 
The traffic violations bureau shall keep records and submit summarized monthly reports to the chief of police of all notices issued and arrests made for violations of the traffic laws and ordinances in this city and of all fines collected by the traffic violations bureau or the court, and of the final disposition or present status of every case of violation of the provisions of the laws and ordinances. These records shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the totals of each. The records shall be public records. 
(Code 1959, § 30-154; Code 1981, § 10-4024) 
Sec. 12-105. - Procedure as prescribed or required. 
The traffic violations bureau shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by the traffic ordinances of this city or as may be required by any laws of this state. 
(Code 1959, § 30-155; Code 1981, § 10-4025) 
Secs. 12-106—12-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE ON ARREST[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 17. 

Sec. 12-126. - Forms and notices of arrest or appearance. 
The chief of police shall provide in triplicate suitable serially numbered forms for notifying violators to appear and answer to charges of moving traffic violations. The secretary shall provide parking violation envelopes. Such envelopes shall be issued to and receipted for by the chief of police or other person acting for him. 
(Code 1959, § 30-157; Code 1981, § 10-4032) 
Sec. 12-127. - Procedure upon arrest. 
Except when authorized or directed under state law to immediately take a person arrested for a violation of any traffic laws before a magistrate or judge, any police officer, upon making an arrest for violation of the traffic ordinances of this city, shall take the name, address and operator's license number of the alleged violator and the registration number of the motor vehicle involved and shall issue to him in writing on a form provided by the secretary a notice to answer the charges against him at a place and at a time at least five days after such arrest to be specified in the notice. The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the notice, shall release the person from custody, unless the circumstances require that the person be kept in custody pursuant to law. 
(Code 1959, § 30-158; Code 1981, § 10-4033) 
Sec. 12-128. - Failure to obey notice or summons. 
Any person who violates his promise to appear given to an officer upon an arrest for any traffic violation is guilty of violating this chapter, regardless of the disposition of the charge of which he was originally arrested, and shall be subject to punishment by the judge of the municipal court. 
(Code 1959, § 30-159; Code 1981, § 10-4034) 
Sec. 12-129. - Notice on illegally parked vehicle. 
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance of this city or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the secretary, for the driver to answer to the charge against him within five days during the hours and at a place specified in the notice. The officer shall send one copy of the notice to the traffic violations bureau. 
(Code 1959, § 30-160; Code 1981, § 10-4035) 
Sec. 12-130. - Failure to comply with notice attached to parked vehicle. 
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a notice affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five days, the traffic violations bureau shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the notice was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that if the letter is disregarded for a period of five days a complaint will be filed and a warrant of arrest issued. 
(Code 1959, § 30-161; Code 1981, § 10-4036) 
Sec. 12-131. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
(a)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall apply only when the procedure prescribed in sections 12-129 and 12-130 has been followed. 
(Code 1959, § 30-162; Code 1981, § 10-4037) 
Sec. 12-132. - Notice on violation of red traffic signal. 
Whenever any motor vehicle is found in violation of a circular red or red arrow traffic control signal as evidenced by a traffic control signal monitoring device, the chief of police, or his designee, shall notify the owner of such vehicle of the violation in conformance with the provisions of state law. 
(Ord. No. 02-12-2, § II, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 12-133. - Penalties and presumption in reference to violation of red traffic signal. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle found in violation of the circular red or red arrow traffic signal shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty as provided by state law, in accordance with the resolution adopted by the city commission as an amendment to the fee schedule book kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b)  In any prosecution charging the violation of the circular red or red arrow traffic signal, proof that the defendant was at the time of such violation the registered owner of the vehicle shall constitute a prima-facie presumption that such owner of the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. Such presumption may be rebutted as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 02-12-2, § II, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 12-134. - When complaint to be issued. 
If any person fails to comply with a notice under this division given to that person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons directing an appearance in the municipal court, or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted by ordinance, the traffic violations bureau shall forthwith have a complaint entered against that person and shall secure and issue a warrant for his arrest. 
(Code 1959, § 30-163; Code 1981, § 10-4038; Ord. No. 02-12-2, § II, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 12-135. - Authority to impound vehicle. 
(a)  Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department, or otherwise maintained by this city, under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, alley, bridge or sidewalk where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(3)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a sidewalk. 
(4)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(b)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, the officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to the owner of the fact of the removal and the reasons thereof and of the place to which the vehicle has been removed. If any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of the notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage. 
(c)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice required in this section to the owner, and if the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three days, the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of the removal by mail to the state department whose duty it is to register motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of the notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. This notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal and name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
(Code 1959, § 30-164; Code 1981, § 10-4039; Ord. No. 02-12-2, § II, 12-9-02) 
State Law reference— Registration and licensing of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 12-136. - Penalty for violations. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1959, § 30-156; Code 1981, § 10-4031; Ord. No. 02-12-2, § II, 12-9-02) 
Secs. 12-137—12-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 12-166. - Maximum speed on streets. 
(a)  Thirty miles per hour shall be the maximum speed of vehicles on streets, except as follows: 
(1)  On streets adjoining school property, during school days—15 mph. 
(2)  At railroad grade crossings for railroad trains—15 mph. 
(3)  On streets so designated and marked by the traffic engineer, such maximum speeds as are reasonable and proper, but not to exceed 55 miles per hour, and not less than five miles per hour, as determined by the traffic engineer upon the basis of engineering and traffic surveys, taking into consideration and having due regard that such speeds shall be a safe rate of speed but yet expedite the flow of traffic, and also considering the amount and type of traffic, surface contour, intersection and width of the street, and any other similar condition affecting traffic. A public record of such maximum speed designations, carefully indexed, shall be maintained at all times in the office of the traffic engineer, and his certification to such speed shall be deemed the maximum speed on such street. 
(b)  Should any of the exceptions in subsection (a) be finally adjudicated invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then in such instance, the maximum speed shall be 25 miles per hour. 
(Code 1959, § 30-61; Ord. No. 88-5-1, § 1, 5-2-88; Code 1981, § 10-2004) 
Sec. 12-167. - Slowly moving vehicles and truck lanes. 
(a)  Slowly moving or heavily laden vehicles shall not be driven upon the streets abreast, but one must follow behind the other and keep as near the right hand curb as possible. 
(b)  On streets so designated and marked by the city traffic engineer, vehicles or combinations of vehicles with three or more axles shall be restricted to the extreme right lane except when making a left turn. Such streets shall be referenced as having a "truck lane." A public record of lane restricted streets shall be maintained in the office of the city traffic engineer. 
(c)  Exceptions to subsection (b) shall be made for passenger vehicles pulling utility or recreational trailers with a gross weight of less than 2,000 pounds. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code and/or state law. 
(Code 1959, § 30-63; Code 1981, § 10-2005; Ord. No. 94-5-4, § I, 5-16-94) 
Sec. 12-168. - Driving past persons working on streets. 
The maximum rate of speed of vehicles shall be 15 miles per hour when approaching or driving past persons working in the street who are city employees, public utility employees or those granted permission of the city, provided such workers have erected a sign reading: "Slow—Men Working" and the sign is in accordance with the specifications of the traffic engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 30-64; Code 1981, § 10-2006) 
Sec. 12-169. - Limitations on turning around. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 30-70; Code 1981, § 10-2008) 
Sec. 12-170. - Vehicles on public school grounds; prohibited places; prohibited times. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motorized vehicle onto those areas of city school grounds not intended for such traffic use. Vegetation or absence of pavement or absence of signs and markings or the presence of physical objects or signs or markings indicating another intended use shall constitute prima facie evidence that such areas are not intended for traffic use. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to drive a motorized vehicle onto areas intended for traffic use at times when school or school related activities are not in progress. 
(Code 1959, § 30-60.1; Code 1981, § 10-2009) 
Sec. 12-171. - Driving across private property as short cut. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle from one public roadway to another public roadway by driving across private property as a short cut. Entry from a public roadway onto private property and reentry to another public roadway without stopping for at least 60 seconds shall constitute prima facie evidence of violation of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 30-60.2; Code 1981, § 10-2010) 
Sec. 12-172. - Laying drags on public or private property prohibited; punishment. 
(a)  No driver of any motor vehicle shall operate the vehicle upon the public streets, highways, public or private driveways or parking lots in such a manner as to create a danger to persons or property by intentionally and unnecessarily causing the vehicle to move directly toward any person or property, to move in a zigzag or circular course, or to gyrate or spin around, except to avoid a collision or injury or damage. 
(b)  The offense described in subsection (a) shall be sufficiently designated on any traffic ticket, warrant or complaint when referred to as "laying drags." 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (a) shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38.1; Code 1981, § 10-2011) 
Sec. 12-173. - Approaching sign indicating play street. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 30-35; Code 1981, § 10-2012) 
Sec. 12-174. - Use of television and radio sets. 
(a)  When any vehicle has a television or video set therein, it shall not be operated in view of the driver while the vehicle is in motion. 
(b)  When any vehicle has a radio set therein, such radio set shall not be operated at a volume great enough to prevent the driver of the vehicle from hearing horn signals of other vehicles or the warning of emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1959, § 30-52; Code 1981, § 10-2013) 
Sec. 12-175. - Funeral processions to be identified. 
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the police department. 
(Code 1959, § 30-43; Code 1981, § 10-2018) 
Sec. 12-176. - Driving through funeral or other procession. 
No driver of a bus or other vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This section shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signs or police officers. 
(Code 1959, § 30-41; Code 1981, § 10-2016) 
Sec. 12-177. - Drivers in a procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand edge of a roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Code 1959, § 30-42; Code 1981, § 10-2017) 
Cross reference— Parades, § 11-531 et seq. 
Sec. 12-178. - Following or parking near fire apparatus prohibited. 
No driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm or other emergency vehicle closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within 500 feet of any fire apparatus stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Ord. No. 81-12-8, § 1, 12-7-81; Code 1981, § 10-2019) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 9. 
Sec. 12-179. - Crossing fire hose prohibited. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected fire hose when laid down on any street, private road or driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Ord. No. 81-12-8, § 2, 12-7-81; Code 1981, § 10-2020) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 9. 
Sec. 12-180. - Speed detection devices. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Speed detection device has the meaning provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-14-1. 
(b)  The use of speed detection devices is desired and hereby approved. 
(c)  The city commission may, by resolution, name the street or road on which the speed detection device is to be used, and shall, consistent with section 12-166, specify the speed limits on such street or road for the approval by the division of traffic engineering and safety of the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 85-3-13, §§ 2, 3, 3-4-85; Code 1981, § 10-2021) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-181. - Driving on levees prohibited. 
Unless upon an officially dedicated public way, or unless specifically permitted by an official sign or by the direction of the chief of police, no person shall drive or operate any motorized vehicle on or over any levee within the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-9-10, § 1, 9-15-86; Code 1981, § 10-2022) 
Sec. 12-182. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-7-1, § II, approved July 7, 2003, repealed § 12-182 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to trespass by motor vehicle in privately owned parking lots as enacted by Code 1981, § 10-2023, as amended. 
Secs. 12-183—12-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCK ROUTES; SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD 

Sec. 12-211. - Definitions. 
In the construction of this article, words and phrases used in this article shall have their customary meanings, except for specific words and phrases which shall be defined in this section. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Deviating truck means a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling within the city limits. 
Prohibited street means a street over which truck traffic is prohibited by action of the traffic engineer, in accordance with section 12-36. 
Truck means any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, including raw materials, and whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight exceeds five tons. 
Truck route means a way over certain streets, as designated in this article, over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the city must operate. 
(Code 1981, § 10-2051) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-212. - Purpose. 
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to protect the safety of the public in their lives and property in the use of the streets of the city; to facilitate and expedite traffic within the city; and to protect the streets of the city from unusual wear and damage. 
(Code 1959, § 30-178; Code 1981, § 10-2052) 
Sec. 12-213. - Size. 
No vehicle operated upon any public street of the city exclusive of those public streets which are also a part of the state or federal highway system, except vehicles designed to carry passengers, shall exceed a total outside width, including load thereon, of 96 inches, not including mirrors and accessories attached thereto; no vehicle unladen or with load shall exceed a height of 13 feet six inches; no vehicle or combination of vehicles shall exceed a total length of 60 feet. 
(Code 1981, § 10-2053) 
State Law reference— Length of vehicles and loads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-24. 
Sec. 12-214. - Load. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Axle load means the total load on all wheels whose centers may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart. 
(b)  No wheel on any vehicle operated upon any public street of this city, equipped with high pressure, pneumatic, solid rubber or cushion tires shall carry a load which exceeds 8,000 pounds by more than 13 percent or an axle load which exceeds 16,000 pounds by more than 13 percent; no wheel equipped with low pressure pneumatic tires shall carry a load which exceeds 9,000 pounds by more than 13 percent or any axle load which exceeds 18,000 pounds by more than 13 percent. If any vehicle can be made to comply with the requirements of this section by shifting or equalizing the load on all wheels or axles and does so when requested by the proper authority the vehicle shall not be held to be operating in violation of this section; provided, however, that the maximum total gross weight, including tolerance, shall not exceed 73,280 pounds. 
(Code 1981, § 10-2054) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-215. - Permit for occasional movements at variance with article. 
(a)  Required. For occasional movements of materials or objects of dimensions or weights which exceed the limits provided in this article, a special permit shall be obtained as provided in subsection (c). 
(b)  Application. The application for any permit required by this article shall specifically describe the motor vehicle and load to be operated or moved and the particular route for which a permit to operate is requested. 
(c)  Issuance. The traffic engineer may, upon application, issue a special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a motor vehicle or combinations of vehicles upon the public streets, when the length, width, height or weight of the vehicles and load exceeds the maximum limit. 
(d)  Refusal; limitations. The traffic engineer may withhold permits for the movement of vehicles which exceed the maximum size and weight limits, if the movement of those vehicles would unduly interfere with the safety or the general welfare or the convenience of the general public. If the permit is issued, the traffic engineer may limit the number of trips, the time limits within which the vehicles may be operated, or otherwise prescribe the conditions of operation of those vehicles on the public streets. 
(e)  Carried; inspection. Every special permit issued under this article shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of the city. 
(Code 1981, §§ 10-2055—10-2059) 
Sec. 12-216. - Application of prohibited street regulation. 
(a)  No truck shall be operated over a prohibited street, unless in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Any truck may be deviated from a truck route and operated over a prohibited street where necessary to reach a destination point within the city for the conduct of business, provided streets upon which truck traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection of such prohibited street nearest such street on which truck traffic is permitted and leading to the destination. 
(c)  Any truck may be operated over a prohibited street where necessary to leave a point of origin within the city for the conduct of business, provided it leaves such prohibited street at the nearest intersection of a truck route to such point of origin. 
(d)  Any truck may be operated over a prohibited street listed in this article if owned or operated by the city, public utilities, or any contractor or materialman, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the city. 
(e)  An emergency vehicle may be operated on any street within the city. 
(f)  A truck may be operated on a prohibited street when required to do so by an officially established detour. 
(Code 1959, § 30-180; Code 1981, § 10-2060) 
Sec. 12-217. - Truck traffic in city. 
(a)  Outside origin. 
(1)  One inside destination point. All trucks entering the city for a destination point in the city shall proceed only over an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest possible route. 
(2)  Multiple inside destination points. All trucks entering the city for multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point a deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction and only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(b)  Inside origin. 
(1)  Outside destination point. All trucks, on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city, shall proceed by the shortest direction over streets on which such traffic is permitted to a truck route as established in this article. 
(2)  Inside destination points. All trucks, on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for destination points in the city, shall proceed only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. 
(Code 1959, § 30-182; Code 1981, § 10-2061) 
Secs. 12-218—12-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 12-241. - Application of article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(b)  The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1981, § 10-2031) 
Sec. 12-242. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police department or a city employee specially designated by the downtown development authority to enforce the provisions of this article, and the police department or the specially designated city employee may use tire markings and other devices and procedures to determine violations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, erase or alter any tire markings, chalk or otherwise, placed by the police department or a city employee specially designated by the downtown development authority to enforce the provisions of this article on any vehicle parked in the city with the intent to prevent the enforcement of any provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 30-114; Ord. No. 82-4-3, § 1, 4-17-82; Code 1981, §§ 10-2043, 10-2046; Ord. No. 00-3-3, § I, 3-20-00) 
Sec. 12-243. - Designation of parking spaces; parking within space required. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized and directed to mark off and maintain individual parking spaces. Such parking spaces shall be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curb or the surface of the street. 
(b)  At each space so marked it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in such a way that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of such space. 
(c)  Vehicles shall park in marked spaces in the Downtown Parking Zone as defined in section 12-244 in such a manner and direction that the license plate is clearly visible from the adjacent travel lane in the roadway or parking lot aisle. 
(Code 1981, § 10-2032; Ord. No. 2018-11-1, § I, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 12-244. - Parking time limits. 
(a)  The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
Downtown parking zone means: 
(1)  The public parking spaces, within and alongside the area bounded by First Avenue (from East First Street to West First Street), West First Street (from First Avenue to Tribune Street to Riverside Parkway), Tribune Street, Sixth Avenue (from Tribune Street to East First Street), and East First Street (from Sixth Avenue to First Avenue), including Second Avenue, Third Avenue, Fourth Avenue, Fifth Avenue, and Broad Street from First Avenue to Riverside Parkway; and 
(2)  The public parking spaces located in any parking lot managed by the downtown development authority. 
Special parking permit means any parking permit issued by the downtown development authority or the city police department for use in any downtown public parking space. 
(b)  No vehicle or motorcycle shall be parked on-street for more than two hours, whether consecutive or otherwise, in the downtown parking zone between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(c)  No vehicle or motorcycle shall be parked for more than 48 consecutive hours in the downtown parking zone. If any vehicle or motorcycle is so parked for more than 48 consecutive hours, the city police department shall have the authority to have the vehicle or motorcycle towed to a place designated by the city police department, with the owner or operator to bear all towing and storage costs. 
(d)  The penalty fines shall be adopted by resolution of the city commission as an amendment to the fee schedule book kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(e)  Special parking permits shall be available for issuance. Written guidelines for issuance of special parking permits shall be established by resolution of the city commission upon the recommendation of the board of the downtown development authority or the chief of police for the city. 
(f)  Designated off-street public parking time limits and/or restrictions shall be indicated by official signs. 
(Ord. No. 88-9-1, § 1, 9-6-88; Code 1981, § 10-2033; Ord. No. 93-12-5, § I, 12-20-93; Ord. No. 98-10-1, § I, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 02-1-1, § I, 1-7-02; Ord. No. 2009-6-2, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 2013-9-1, § I, 9-9-13; Ord. No. 2014-8-1, § I, 8-25-14; Ord. No. 2018-11-1, § II, 11-13-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-245. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-7-1, § I, adopted July 9, 2018, repealed former § 12-245 which pertained to all-night parking prohibited and derived from Code 1959, § 30-91; Code 1981, § 10-2034. 
Sec. 12-246. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, unless making repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1959, § 30-92; Code 1981, § 10-2035) 
Sec. 12-247. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, then outside the Downtown Parking Zone and residential zones no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway for any purpose including loading or unloading unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. 
(Code 1981, § 10-2036; Ord. No. 2018-7-1, § II, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 12-248. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within a business or residence district, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a street or highway outside of a business or residence district during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. 
(c)  Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Code 1959, § 30-87; Code 1981, § 10-2039) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-28. 
Sec. 12-249. - Parking of buses and taxicabs regulated. 
The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this section shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(Code 1959, § 30-103; Code 1981, § 10-2040) 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire, § 11-376 et seq. 
Sec. 12-250. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter such zone. 
(Code 1959, § 30-104; Code 1981, § 10-2041) 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire, § 11-376 et seq. 
Sec. 12-251. - Railroad trains and buses not to block streets. 
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train or bus to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any bus to stop such bus within an intersection or on a crosswalk for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. 
(Code 1959, § 30-80; Code 1981, § 10-2042) 
Sec. 12-252. - Handicapped parking—Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in section 12-253, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Handicapped parking place means any area on public or private property which has been designated as reserved for the use of handicapped persons by any sign or pavement marking bearing the word "handicapped," or a symbol representing a person in a wheelchair. 
Handicapped person means a person who by reason of illness, injury, age, congenital malfunction, or other incapacity or disability has a significant loss or impairment of mobility. 
(Ord. of 11-3-80; Code 1981, § 10-2044) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-221. 
Sec. 12-253. - Same—Parking prohibited in handicapped parking places without permit or license plate. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any vehicle in a handicapped parking place unless there is displayed on the dashboard or hung from the rearview mirror of the parked vehicle a valid unexpired handicapped parking permit or unless there is attached to the vehicle a specially designated license plate for disabled persons authorized under O.C.G.A. § 40-6-222(d). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any vehicle in a handicapped parking place except for the purpose of allowing a handicapped person to enter or get out of such vehicle while in such parking place. However, nothing in this subsection shall prevent an ambulance or emergency vehicle from stopping in a handicapped parking place. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or institution, other than the one to whom a handicapped parking permit or specially designated license plate for the disabled person is issued, to make use of a handicapped parking permit or specially designated license plate for a disabled person. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a handicapped parking permit for any institutional vehicle other than the vehicle for which the permit has been issued. 
(d)  No person shall park a vehicle so as to block any entrance or egress ramp used by handicapped persons on public or private property. 
(e)  Authorities of the city shall honor visitors' out-of-state handicapped license tags or similar special parking permits on the same basis as handicapped license tags or special parking permits issued within this state. 
(Ord. of 11-3-80; Code 1981, § 10-2045) 
Sec. 12-254. - Public loading zones. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within a designated loading zone except for the purpose of loading or unloading such vehicle. A delivery or pickup vehicle may park in a designated loading zone only during such time as materials or passengers are being loaded and/or unloaded from the vehicle, and in no case may such vehicle remain parked in a designated loading zone for longer than 20 minutes, unless a different time limit is indicated by sign or permitted by ordinance. A vehicle must be removed from a loading zone immediately upon completion of loading and/or unloading materials from such vehicle or the expiration of the time limit for that loading zone, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park for loading or unloading at an angle other than that marked for regular parking in that location or to leave the back gate of the vehicle lowered so as to extend beyond the marked space for the vehicle, or to park without doors opened flat against the body of the vehicle while loading or unloading. In the event spaces for regular parking are not marked in said location then the prohibition of obstruction of traffic in section 12-255 shall apply to any encroachment by gates, ramps or doors of the loading or unloading vehicle. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within a properly marked loading zone between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. if said loading zone is also marked as a no parking tow zone between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(d)  At the discretion of a police officer, the City of Rome, Georgia may tow and impound or otherwise move vehicles which are parked by their owners or operators in any loading zone in violation of the regulations, at the owner's or operator's expense. 
(e)  Broad Street additional regulations. The loading zones on the portion of Broad Street between its intersections with First Avenue and Sixth Avenue shall be unmarked center-lane loading zones and shall have the following regulations concerning permitted users of the loading zone in addition to the provisions of paragraphs (a) through (e) above: 
(1)  The exclusive permitted users shall be pickup or delivery vehicles at least 20 feet in length, including lifts or ramps, actively engaged in loading or unloading materials. 
(2)  All delivery vehicles are prohibited from loading or unloading in the center lane within: 
a.  Fifteen feet on either side of a mid-block crosswalk; 
b.  Fifty feet on the approach side of an intersection, except for Second Avenue which shall not be within 100 feet of the approach side to the intersection; or 
c.  Twenty-five feet on the departure side of an intersection, except for Second Avenue which shall not be within 70 feet of the departure side of the intersection. 
(3)  All delivery drivers are required to place safety cones behind their delivery vehicles and in the immediate area of the points of access to the vehicles from the street, or activate flashing hazard lights to alert motorists to the loading or unloading activity that is under way in the center lane. 
(4)  The center lane on Broad Street shall not be used for loading and unloading between the hours of 11:00 a.m.—1:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2018-7-1, § III, 7-9-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-7-1, § III, adopted July 9, 2018, in effect repealed former § 12-254 which pertained to parking of business vehicles prohibited in residential zones and derived from Ord. No. 2016-01-01, § I, 1-11-16. 
Sec. 12-255. - Obstruction of traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. Where an arterial or major and minor collector streets as established by the Rome-Floyd County Planning Department has a centerline, no person shall park a vehicle within 12 feet of such centerline. No person shall park a vehicle in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with the access of emergency vehicles through said street. 
(Ord. No. 2018-7-1, § IV, 7-9-18) 
Secs. 12-256—12-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BICYCLES; PLAY VEHICLES 

Sec. 12-276. - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 30-145; Code 1981, § 10-2071) 
Sec. 12-277. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk within a business district. 
(b)  No person shall ride a skateboard on a sidewalk within a C-2 zone. 
(c)  The chief of police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person and when those signs are in place no person shall disobey the signs. 
(d)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, that person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian. 
(Code 1959, § 30-146; Ord. No. 88-5-1, §§ 2, 3, 5-2-88; Code 1981, § 10-2072) 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 23. 
Sec. 12-278. - Coasters, roller skates, and similar devices; use restricted. 
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1959, § 30-20; Code 1981, § 10-2074) 
Secs. 12-279—12-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WRECKER AND TOWING SERVICES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 11. 
State Law reference— Removal of junked motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; flashing or revolving lights on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-92; local ordinances, etc., relating to wrecker services, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10.1. 

Sec. 12-301. - Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Tow means towing, hauling and removing vehicles by the use of a wrecker. 
Vehicle means, unless otherwise indicated, a vehicle to be towed shall be: 
(1)  A vehicle damaged to such an extent that it is unable to be moved safely under its own power; 
(2)  A vehicle abandoned by its owner, driver, or other person; 
(3)  A vehicle impounded or under the control of a city police officer or other lawfully empowered officer of the city or state; 
(4)  A vehicle, the owner or operator or person in possession of which is under arrest or in the custody of the city police or other lawfully empowered officer of the city or state; 
(5)  A vehicle, the owner or operator or person in possession of which is not in physical or mental condition to operate a vehicle. 
Wrecker means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles. The term "wrecker" also includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for the purpose of towing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles. This definition includes "rollback" or "slide back" wreckers. Passenger cars, light truck and similar vehicles means any vehicle weight up to 10,000 pounds of gross vehicle weight ("GVW"). 
Wrecker service means any entity, corporation, partnership, or individual person, either as principal, agent, or employee, in the business of removing, towing and/or storing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles by the use of a wrecker or other towing device within the city. 
Wrecker service company means any person furnishing wrecker service within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 30-171; Ord. No. 85-5-1, § 1, 5-6-85; Code 1981, § 10-2101; Ord. No. 93-12-3, § II, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 2010-8-3, § I, 8-16-10) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-302. - Conditions prerequisite to furnishing towing service at request of city. 
Unless the person needing wrecker services specifically requests that a wrecker service unauthorized under this article be called, all persons engaged in the wrecker service business within the city shall not be called upon by police officers or other authorized employees of the city to furnish the service of towing any vehicle upon the streets of the city, unless the person engaged in furnishing the wrecker service shall have complied with the following conditions: 
(1)  The wrecker service shall be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, to provide the service. 
(2)  The wrecker service shall have qualified licensed employees, skilled and knowledgeable in performing their duties, and available at all times to avoid delay. 
(3)  The wrecker service shall operate at least two wreckers (e.g. 8,000 pound dual cable wrecker or "rollback" wreckers with wheel lifts). The wreckers shall: 
a.  Be in good operating condition, meeting all requirements of state law, and be equipped with a flashing light mounted on top of the tow car, or on top of the crane or hoist, which light will be visible for a distance of 1,000 feet, and mounted in such a manner that it can be seen both by approaching and rear traffic. 
b.  Be equipped with sufficient red flares, lanterns or warning lights and reflectors to be able to mark the scene of a wreck on both sides of the same, so as to warn all traffic on the highway of the emergency existing while the wreckers are in operation. 
c.  Carry brooms, shovels, oil dry, sand, and fire extinguishers suitable for extinguishing fires in wrecked vehicles, and for cleaning up the debris, fluids and glass from the area where the wreck has occurred. The fire extinguisher shall be of a type capable of extinguishing a fire of flammable liquid. 
(4)  Wrecker services placed on call list to receive large wrecker call shall have available heavy duty wrecker(s) having a 26,001 pound minimum gross weight rating with a 20-ton winch, or an equivalent vehicle having the same minimum capabilities for moving vehicles, including large trucks, buses and loaded and unloaded tractor trailers. 
(5)  The wrecker service shall have attached and displayed in a conspicuous place, on both the right and left sides of the wrecker, the name of the towing service or company and their unit number. Magnetic or removable decals or signs do not satisfy the requirements of this paragraph. 
(6)  The wrecker service shall maintain in the wrecker service's name, at a minimum, the following insurance policies: 
a.  An automobile liability insurance police having a combined single limit of not less than $300,000.00; 
b.  A comprehensive general liability police providing bodily injury coverage limits of $100,000.00 per occurrence and property damage coverage limits of $100,000.00 per person and $100,000.00 annual aggregate; 
c.  Cargo and garage keepers' liability insurance with a limit of $100,000.00; and 
d.  Workers' compensation insurance meeting the minimum coverage required by Georgia law. 
Said insurance policies shall name the City of Rome as an additional insured under the policy, and shall provide for written notification at least 15 days prior to any modification, expiration, or cancellation of the policy. The wrecker service shall provide to the chief of police a full copy of the insurance policy no later than five days from execution of agreement or extension thereof or any modification or renewal of the policy. 
(7)  The wrecker service shall provide a storage area located within the city limits or within a six-mile radius from the intersection of Second Avenue and Broad Street for the storage and safekeeping of vehicles towed under this article. The area shall be enclosed with a solid wall, or a substantial wire fence as defined in sections 23-2 and 23-36 of the Rome City Code. Such fence shall not be less than eight feet in height, except that all wrecker services in operation as of November 15, 1993 may maintain a fence not less than six feet in height until such time as the service elects to construct a new or replacement fence. All fences must be visually screened, and have a capacity for a minimum of 30 cars. Wrecker storage lots will be inspected annually by an official from the City of Rome/Floyd Building Inspection Department or Police Department. Storage areas established before November 1993 found to be in need of repair are subject to the latest requirements of being not less than eight feet in height, and will be given notice of needed repairs. Upon notice, the wrecker service shall have 30 days to make repairs. 
(8)  The wrecker service shall employ operating personnel of wrecker units that shall be technically qualified and physically cable of responding immediately to all calls received. Operating personnel of wreckers must obtain a Rome Police Department ID, which must be worn at all times while responding to calls under this article. 
(9)  The wrecker service must maintain registration with the Georgia Public Service Commission and possess all state-required permits. 
(Code 1959, § 30-172; Code 1981, § 10-2102; Ord. No. 85-5-1, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 90-1-1, § I, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 93-12-3, § III, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 05-7-2, § I, 7-18-05; Ord. No. 2010-8-3, § II, 8-16-10) 
Sec. 12-303. - Responsibility of wrecker service companies. 
(a)  Wrecker service companies shall maintain a daily list of vehicles towed and/or stored for police-initiated towing and storage services. The list shall contain details as to the make, year, model, color, vehicle I.D. number, license plate number, name of owner, and the purpose of removing and/or storing vehicle. The records shall be retained for a period of 12 months and shall be made available to the police department upon request during normal business hours, Monday through Friday (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.). 
(b)  Wrecker service companies shall be responsible to the vehicle owner for all damages done during towing and storage of any vehicles entrusted to them under this article. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every driver of a wrecker service vehicle to tow vehicles in a professional manner and to deal with the public in a professional and courteous manner. 
(d)  Reasonable care shall be taken by wrecker service personnel to ensure no further damage will occur to the vehicle towed, either through carelessness or from natural elements, and the wrecker service shall use the proper equipment necessary (e.g. dollies, wheel lifts) to prevent further damage to the vehicles towed. 
(e)  Wrecker service companies shall cooperate with all duly authorized law enforcement officers in the protection of any evidence or in any investigation arising out of a wreck or seizure of a vehicle by any officials. 
(f)  Wrecker service companies shall have a response time of 30 minutes or less for at least 90 percent of all calls during every calendar year. Response time is the time elapsed from the time the 911 center dispatches the wrecker service until the time that the wrecker actually arrives at the location of the vehicle that is to be towed. 
(g)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-276, it shall be the responsibility of the wrecker service company, prior to leaving the scene of any collision, to clean the pavement and right of way of all debris of the collision, including the removal of all glass from paved roadways. In the event that engine fluids have spilled on the roadway, the wrecker service shall provide and spread only that amount of oil dry material on the affected area in order to render the roadway safe for vehicular traffic. 
(h)  A wrecker service company may release any vehicle to the registered owner, unless a hold has been placed on the vehicle by the arresting officer, or a court order prohibits the release. 
(i)  Wrecker service companies shall not go to any accident scene unless: 
(1)  Called by the police department; 
(2)  Called by the vehicle owner/operator; or 
(3)  There exists an extreme emergency immediately endangering life or property. 
(j)  Wrecker service companies shall provide information to the police department under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Whenever any wrecked or abandoned vehicle is removed without the request, direction or participation of the police department, the wrecker service performing the removal shall, if the owner is unknown and within 72 hours of such removal, furnish to the police department on a form approved by the police department the following information with respect to such vehicle: tag number and description, including year, model, make, color and vehicle identification number. 
(2)  Upon receipt of such information, the police department shall immediately take steps to ascertain the identity of the vehicle owner and notify them of the time and place of removal and of the present whereabouts of the vehicle. 
(3)  Nothing in this article shall relieve any wrecker service of any of the requirements imposed by virtue of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq., or by virtue of any other law with respect to the duties, among others, to make diligent inquiries as to the ownership of vehicles and notification to owners. 
(Ord. No. 85-5-1, § 1, 5-6-85; Code 1981, § 10-2103; Ord. No. 93-12-3, § IV, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 2010-8-3, § III, 8-16-10) 
Sec. 12-304. - Regulation of fees for services rendered. 
(a)  Fees for on-call services rendered under this article shall not exceed the schedule of fees for services rendered, on file in the clerk's office, which are hereby incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this article. 
(b)  The wrecker service shall post all towing fees, reflecting the prices to be charged to the public. Fees shall be posted in open view to the public in the wrecker service's lobby. In addition, the wrecker service shall deliver to each owner or representative of every towed vehicle present at the scene of the tow a pre-printed disclosure form approved by the City of Rome that clearly provides: 
(1)  The fees to be charged by the wrecker service; 
(2)  Location of storage lots; 
(3)  Times of vehicle release; and 
(4)  Phone number(s) of the wrecker service. 
(c)  The wrecker service shall furnish the person who pays for wrecker services a written receipt on a pre-printed form approved by the City of Rome which contains the same information as the disclosure form described in subsection 12-304(b), and which provides: 
(1)  An itemization of all charges; 
(2)  The name of the person on the scene who recovered the vehicle; and 
(3)  The telephone number of a representative of the City of Rome designated to receive comments about wrecker services. 
(d)  The schedule of fees for on-call services rendered may only be modified by the public safety committee of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 85-5-1, § 1, 5-6-85; Code 1981, § 10-2104; Ord. No. 93-12-3, § V, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 2010-8-3, § IV, 8-16-10) 
Sec. 12-305. - Procedures for city police officers and employees. 
(a)  A schedule shall be set up by the chief of police on a rotating basis for all qualified wrecker service companies which have qualified under this article, which wreckers service companies shall be used as hereinafter provided, except in extreme emergency, where persons are trapped or pinned in or under vehicles, or in burning vehicles, or in danger of drowning by submersion, or where traffic is blocked to prevent normal flow of vehicles, in which event, and only in which event, a police officer or other lawfully authorized officer shall be authorized to call the nearest, most qualified company to prevent serious injury or death. 
(b)  The police officer or other lawfully authorized officer shall first determine whether or not a wrecker is needed, and if a wrecker is needed, shall ascertain whether the owner or operator is in condition to make a preference known, what wrecker service company the owner or operator desires to be called, and shall then call the preferred company desired by the owner or operator of the vehicle if the wrecker service can respond within a reasonable time. Officers can advise the owner or operator that they may request an estimated cost of the towing service. 
(c)  In the event the owner or operator is unable, due to injury or due to a physical or mental impairment, to make a choice, or does not have any preference, then said police officer or other authorized officer shall call the wrecker service company on schedule for that week. 
(d)  If the wrecker service company on the schedule is not reached, the 911 dispatcher shall immediately notify the previous week's approved wrecker service on the list to provide service. 
(e)  If the wrecker service company on the schedule is reached, but is unable to furnish the service, then such wrecker service company shall inform the 911 dispatcher of the name of the qualified and on-call wrecker service company that will be responding to the call. Other substitutions are not allowed and must be done when 911 makes the initial call. Whether on-call or substitution, the fee schedule published by the city shall apply. 
(f)  Except in extreme emergencies, the police officer or other authorized officer shall await the arrival of the wrecker and shall in the meantime try to make the scene of the accident safe for other vehicles, using the road in the vicinity thereof, giving warnings and directing traffic. 
(g)  The police officer or other authorized officer shall make a tow-in report, which shall contain the information and details prescribed by the city (especially the name of the operator and owner), on a form made up for that purpose. The officer shall have the wrecker operator sign the tow-in report and provide a copy of it to the wrecker operator before leaving the scene. The officer shall retain the original for department records. 
(h)  A thorough inventory shall be made by the officer on the scene of personal articles and equipment in the vehicle to be towed, such inventory to be written upon a form provided by the police department. If the officer requests that a vehicle be towed to the police department, the wrecker operator shall have the watch commander sign the tow-in bill. At such time, the watch commander will assume the responsibility for said vehicle, and indicate where said vehicle is to be placed. The watch commander shall forward the tow bill and shall notify the person or persons responsible for follow-up regarding the vehicle. 
(i)  Officers are to insure that a copy of the tow-in report is mailed to the registered owner of an abandoned vehicle. 
(j)  Officers will give the 911 dispatch center as much information as possible about the size of the vehicle and the circumstances. This information will be passed on to the wrecker service, which will make the determination as to which equipment is necessary for the situation. 
(Code 1959, §§ 30-174, 30-175; Code 1981, § 10-2105; Ord. No. 85-5-1, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 93-12-3, § VI, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 05-7-2, § II, 7-18-05; Ord. No. 2010-8-3, § V, 8-16-10) 
Sec. 12-306. - Wreckers while in use designated authorized emergency vehicles. 
All wreckers used by wrecker service companies, when used in an emergency while carrying on the business of the wrecker service companies, are hereby declared to authorized emergency vehicles, under the purview of the applicable laws of the state. 
(Code 1959, § 30-176; Code 1981, § 10-2106; Ord. No. 85-5-1, § 1, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 93-12-3, § VII, 12-6-93) 
State Law reference— "Authorized emergency vehicle" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(3); regulations pertaining to authorized emergency vehicles, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-6, 40-6-74. 
Sec. 12-307. - Responsibility for payment. 
All charges and fees for towing and storage of the vehicle towed shall be at the expense of the owner of the vehicle, and against the vehicle itself, as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 85-5-1, § 1, 5-6-85; Code 1981, § 10-2107; Ord. No. 93-12-3, § VIII, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 2010-8-3, § VI, 8-16-10) 
Sec. 12-308. - Qualification of wrecker service companies. 
(a)  Any wrecker service company desiring to be qualified to be placed on the rotating schedule for use by the city, under the conditions set out herein, shall file an application before October 1 of the calendar year with the chief of police. 
(b)  After the creation of the official on-call schedule, all wrecker services seeking to be placed on the rotating schedule shall, if qualified, be placed on the next calendar year, following receipt of an acceptable application before the October 1 deadline. 
(c)  A continuing responsibility for eligibility shall include an adequate and reasonable response time to calls made to the scheduled wrecker service company to assure efficient service on a 24-hour basis, and compliance with all sections of chapter 12, article VII of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia. Companies failing to remain qualified will be notified of the problem, in writing by the chief of police, and shall be given a 15-day period to correct the condition. The wrecker service may be temporarily suspended from service and removed from the approved list during this period. If the company fails to correct the condition within the 15-day period, the company shall be removed from the wrecker service schedule. Appeals to decisions of the police chief may be filed in writing with the city manager. 
(d)  Wrecker service companies desiring to be qualified on the rotating schedule shall agree to waive all charges to the city in the cases of innocent arrests. 
(e)  Wrecker service companies desiring to be qualified on the rotating schedule shall agree that the fee schedule published by the city shall apply to all calls initiated by a police officer or other authorized official to which the wrecker service responds while on call. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything in chapter 12, article VII of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia to the contrary, any wrecker service that has an owner or operator that has been convicted of a felony within five years will not be on the City of Rome's rotating schedule for police-initiated tows. All wrecker services desiring to be placed on or to remain on said rotating schedule agree to provide the Rome Police Department, at the time of seeking qualification under this article and thereafter, annually, with a release executed by all owners of each wrecker service and all operators for each wrecker service, which authorizes the Rome Police Department to conduct a criminal records search of said individuals. All wrecker services desiring to qualify or to remain qualified shall also provide a release to the Rome Police Department with respect to all new owners or operators of the wrecker service. 
(g)  The fee schedule which is made a part of this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the qualified wrecker service company's place of business, and each wrecker vehicle of the company shall carry a copy of the schedule, for the purpose of furnishing the same for vehicle owners or operators. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-3, § IX, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 2010-8-3, § VII, 8-16-10) 
Sec. 12-309. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in Section 1-9 of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia, and may be brought on citation in municipal court with or without a prosecutor. 
(b)  The violation of the provisions of this article by any wrecker service may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the governing authority of the city. 
(c)  Violations of provisions of this article by any wrecker service shall be due cause for revocation of any city business license, after notice and hearing before the Rome City Commission Public Safety Committee. 
(d)  Violations of provisions of this article by any wrecker service shall be due cause for removal of the wrecker service from the approved wrecker service list, after notice and hearing before the Rome City Commission Public Safety Committee. 
(e)  The remedies set forth in subsections (a) through (d) of this section are cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 2010-8-3, § VIII, 8-16-10) 
Sec. 12-310. - Fee schedule and operating fees procedures. 
(a)  Basic tow for any vehicles up to 10,000 lbs. within City of Rome, day or night ..... $100.00 
(b)  Additional per hour charge after first hour of service of light duty wrecker ..... 50.00 
(c)  Large wrecker service (GVW over 26,001 lbs.), (per hour after first hour) ..... 250.00 
(d)  Medium wrecker tow of vehicles (GVW over 10,001 lbs.), (first hour) ..... 250.00 
Per hour after first hour ..... 125.00 
(e)  Supplies used at scene (sand, oil dry, etc.), up to ..... 50.00 
(f)  Use of dollies (if needed) ..... 30.00 
(g)  Daily storage for vehicle towed (commencing 24 hours after pick-up) ..... 18.00 
(h)  Winching recovery fee for vehicles (off of road right-of-way) ..... 50.00 
(i)  After business hours vehicle release fee if wrecker service has to return to storage lot (not required) ..... 50.00 
Vehicle can be picked up Monday through Saturday 8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. without charge. 
(Ord. No. 2010-8-3, § IX, 8-16-10) 
Secs. 12-311—12-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RAILROADS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Railroad grade crossings, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-190 et seq.; railroad companies, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-331. - Bridge or trestle—Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in section 12-332, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Railroad bridge or trestle means any bridge or trestle upon which railroad tracks are laid for the exclusive purpose of train traffic and not defined as a bridge or trestle maintained by any railroad company for the general public's use and for the exclusive purpose of providing for pedestrian and motor vehicle traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 26-1; Code 1981, § 10-2081) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-332. - Same—Walking or trespassing upon prohibited; application of provisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to walk upon or otherwise trespass upon any railroad trestle or bridge within the city limits, except that trestle running from the area of Broad Street and West First Street to Heritage Park, which has been specifically converted to pedestrian usage. 
(b)  This section shall have no application to persons employed by the owners of the railroad bridges or trestles when those persons are engaged in the scope of their employment or to any person riding as a passenger on any train being operated over and upon the railroad bridges and trestles. 
(Code 1959, § 26-2; Code 1981, § 10-2082) 
Sec. 12-333. - Speed limit; warning. 
(a)  The running speed of trains and vehicles on all railroad tracks within the corporate limits of the city shall not at any time be at a rate greater than 40 miles per hour. 
(b)  The train crew shall give ample warning to all persons of the approach of the train by ringing bells and sounding horns and whistles, so as to afford all reasonable opportunity to avoid collisions. 
(Code 1959, § 26-4; Ord. No. 78-10, § 1, 12-19-77; Code 1981, § 10-2084) 
Sec. 12-334. - Warning devices at specified crossings. 
The Southern Railway Company shall install and maintain automatically controlled warning gates at the crossing of East Second Avenue and the Southern Railway Company's main line, and at the crossing of East 12th Street and the Southern Railway Company's main line. 
(Ord. No. 78-10, § 2, 12-19-77; Code 1981, § 10-2085) 
Secs. 12-335—12-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TRANSIT DEPARTMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 12-361. - Created; named. 
A department of the city to be known as the Rome Transit Department is hereby created. 
(Code 1959, § 30A-1; Code 1981, § 10-3001) 
Sec. 12-362. - Transit committee; membership and authority. 
(a)  The standing committee of the city commission known as the transit committee shall consist of at least three members of the city commission. 
(b)  The transit committee shall have full authority to make such rules and regulations for the operation of the transit department as the committee deems advisable. 
(c)  No increase or decrease of transportation services to the areas served by the transit department or fares shall be made without the approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1959, § 30A-2; Code 1981, § 10-3002) 
Sec. 12-363. - Superintendent. 
A department director of the transit department shall be appointed by the city manager with the concurrence of a majority of the city commission. The department director may be discharged by the city manager, with or without cause, as provided in the Charter of the city. The department director shall be known as the superintendent of the transit department. 
(Code 1959, § 30A-3; Code 1981, § 10-3003) 
Sec. 12-364. - Personnel; physical examination required of drivers. 
(a)  The transit department director, assisted by the personnel department, is authorized to hire such personnel as shall be necessary to operate the department. 
(b)  Every employee of the transit department who is a driver must undergo and pass a physical examination at least once each year to determine physical fitness to drive. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, no employee of the transit department shall be employed by the city after attaining the age of 65 years. 
(Code 1959, § 30A-4; Code 1981, § 10-3004) 
Sec. 12-365. - Funds; accounts; reports. 
A separate account shall be set up at a banking depository as designated by the city commission for the safekeeping of the monies of the transit department. Separate records showing the operation of the department shall be maintained by the transit department under the direction of the finance director. Daily reports of the receipts of the department shall be furnished to the secretary. 
(Code 1959, § 30A-5; Code 1981, § 10-3005) 
Sec. 12-366. - Employees handling monies to be bonded. 
All employees of the transit department who handle monies of the department shall furnish the city a bond in an amount to be set by the finance director to insure the faithful performance of their duties. Such bond shall be paid for out of transit department funds. 
(Code 1959, § 30A-6; Code 1981, § 10-3006) 
Sec. 12-367. - Liability insurance to be carried. 
Liability insurance in an amount to be determined by the transit committee of the city commission shall be carried on all vehicles operated or connected with the transit department. 
(Code 1959, § 30A-7; Code 1981, § 10-3007) 
ARTICLE X. - FIRE LANES 

Sec. 12-368. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in a given section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire lane means any area on public or private property which has been designated as a fire lane or prohibited zone by any sign or pavement markings bearing "Fire Lane" or "Prohibited Zone," and shall apply at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2011-2-1, § II, 2-7-11) 
Sec. 12-369. - Application. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all vehicles operated at shopping centers or parking lots or similar areas customarily used by the public. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle within any fire lane or prohibited area which would prohibit access to the structure by any fire truck or fire apparatus, police, ambulance or other emergency equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2011-2-1, § II, 2-7-11) 
Sec. 12-370. - Exceptions. 
Any vehicle designated as an emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency or fire alarm may park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-2-1, § III, 2-7-11) 
Sec. 12-371. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the police department and/or the fire marshal, or his designee, to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-2-1, § IV, 2-7-11) 
Sec. 12-372. - Penalty for violations. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision under this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 2011-2-1, § IV, 2-7-11) 
Secs. 12.373—12.379. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PERSONAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES 

Sec. 12-380. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article: 
Authorized street means a public roadway of the city by whatever name (e.g. road, alley, avenue, street, boulevard, etc.) that: 
(1)  Has a posted speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less; 
(2)  Is not designated as part of either the state or federal highway system; 
(3)  Has not been designated as an unauthorized street by ordinance or resolution by the the city commission. 
Driver means the person driving and having physical control over a personal transportation vehicle. 
Owner means the person holding title to the PTV who has a majority ownership interest in the PTV. 
Parking area means those areas accessible to the public by motor vehicular traffic and which are designated for the temporary parking of motor vehicles, usually in places referred to as parking lots. 
Personal transportation vehicle (PTV) means any motor vehicle: 
(1)  With a minimum of four wheels; 
(2)  Capabable of a maximum level ground speed of less than 20 miles per hour; 
(3)  With a maximum gross vehicle weight, unladed or empty weight, of 1,375 pounds; and 
(4)  Capable of transporting not more than eight persons. 
The term does not include any mobility aids, including power wheelchairs and scooters, which can be used indoors and outdoors for the express purpose of enabling mobility for a person with a disability. The term also does not include any all-terrain vehicle, which means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three or more low pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator with handlebars for steering control. 
Unauthorized street means a public roadway of the city by whatever name (e.g. road, alley, avenue, highway, route, boulevard, etc.) that has been designated by the city commission by ordinance or resolution as an unauthorized street. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § I, 3-14-2016) 
Sec. 12-381. - Registration permit. 
Before any PTV may be operated over an authorized street or parking area of the city it shall be registered and permitted by the police department. If the PTV is compliant with local and state law, then a decal shall be issued from that department signifying its registration. The registration requirements include the following specifics: 
(1)  Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a PTV; 
(2)  The person registering the PTV must be the owner of the PTV; 
(3)  The registration permit received from the police department shall be maintained in the PTV at all times and shall be produced for inspection upon request. 
(4)  The registration application shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of owner. 
b.  Model, make, name and PTV identification number. 
c.  Current driver's license number of owner. 
d.  Such other information as the city may require. 
(5)  The registration application shall be accompanied by a fee of $15.00. 
(6)  The registration application shall be accompanied by evidence of personal liability insurance coverage consistent with the minimum requriements of state law for operational motor vehicles. 
(7)  The registration shall be effective until such time that it may be revoked or the PTV is transferred to a new owner. If the registered owner transfers ownership of the PTV, the registration permit must be returned to the police department. 
(8)  It shall be the PTV owner's responsibility to ensure that the information on the application remains current and accurate. 
The city commission may, at its discretion, waive registration requirements for city sponsored special events of a limited duration. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § I, 3-14-2016) 
Sec. 12-382. - Revocation. 
The registration permit may be revoked if: 
(1)  The permit holder no longer has a valid driver's license. 
(2)  The owner or driver of a PTV fails to abide by the rules an regulations of this article. 
(3)  The owner or driver of a PTV fails to abide by the traffic laws in use for a PTV on an authorized street or parking area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § I, 3-14-2016) 
Sec. 12-383. - Transfer. 
Upon transfer of ownership of the PTV to a person who intends to operate it over the authorized streets and parking areas, the new owner must register the PTV as outlined herein above. Such registration by the new owner must occur within ten days of the transfer of ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § I, 3-14-2016) 
Sec. 12-384. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a PTV on any street within the city that is not an authorized street. 
(b)  Only those persons who hold a valid motor vehicle driver's license and who are 18 years of age or older may drive a PTV on the authorized streets and parking areas of the city. 
(c)  All drivers of PTVs shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the authorized streets and parking areas of the city. 
(d)  Current proof of liability insurance coverage shall be maintained in the PTV when operated and available for inspection upon request. 
(e)  A PTV shall not be operated to transport more than eight persons. 
(f)  A PTV shall not be operated on the sidewalks at any time. 
(g)  Every driver of a PTV shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the rules of the road and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle. 
(h)  All PTVs are entitled to the full use of a lane on the authorized streets and parking areas of the city and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any PTV of the full use of a lane. 
(i)  The driver of a PTV shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken. 
(j)  The driver of a PTV operating on an authorized street may cross a state or federal route only at intersections that have been designated for such purposes by the state department of transportation. 
(k)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city shall also apply to drivers and occupants of PTVs. 
(l)  All drivers and passengers must remain seated at all times during the operation of the PTV. No person may sit on the driver's lap during the operation of the PTV. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § I, 3-14-2016) 
Sec. 12-385. - Vehicle standards and equipment. 
Each PTV shall meet the following design standards and shall be equipped with the following operational equipment: 
(1)  A minimum of four wheels; 
(2)  Capable of a maximum level ground speed of no more than 20 mph; 
(3)  A maximum gross vehicle weight, empty and unladen, of 1,375 pounds; 
(4)  A maximum transport capacity of eight persons; 
(5)  A braking system sufficient for the weight and passenger capacity of the vehicle including a parking brake; 
(6)  A reverse warning device functional at all times when the directional control is in the reverse position; 
(7)  A main power switch. When the switch is in the "off" position or the key or other device that activates the switched is removed, the motive power circuit shall be inoperative. If the switch uses a key, it shall be removable only in the "off" position; 
(8)  Head lamps; 
(9)  Reflex reflectors; 
(10)  Tail lamps; 
(11)  Front and rear turn signals; 
(12)  A horn; 
(13)  A rearview mirror; 
(14)  Safety warning labels; and 
(15)  Hip restraints and hand holds or a combination thereof. 
Each PTV shall be maintained in working order and kept in good condition and shall be subject to inspection by city officials and/or the city police department at reasonable times and intervals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § I, 3-14-2016) 
Sec. 12-386. - Liability. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the city for any injuries to persons or property which may result from the operation of a PTV or by the failure of the city to revoke said permit. Adoption of this article is not to be relied upon as a determination by the city that operation of a PTV on public roads is safe or advisable if done in accordance with this article. By regulating such operation the city is merely addressing safety issues. All persons who operate or ride in PTVs on public roads do so with their own judgment and at their own risk, and must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § I, 3-14-2016) 
Sec. 12-387. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be punished as follows: 
In addition to whatever violations of the driver of a PTV may be subject to pursuant to Georgia law and or Code of Municipal Ordinances, the registered owner of the PTV shall be subject to the following civil penalties: 
(1)  For the first offense a fine of not less than $50.00; and if not timely paid, revocation of the permit. 
(2)  For the second offense, a fine of not less than $100.00; and if not timely paid, revocation of the permit. 
(3)  For the third offense, the registration for the PTV shall be revoked. In the event the registration is revoked under this section, the PTV cannot thereafter be re-registered by the same owner or any family member for a period of two years. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03-01, § I, 3-14-2016) 
Secs. 12-388—12-399. - Reserved. 
Chapter 13 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, art. XV. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; city divisions and departments, § 2-2; traffic violations bureau, § 12-101 et seq.; police, ch. 17. 
State Constitution reference— Municipal courts authorized, art. VI, § I, par. I; continuation of municipal courts, art. VI, § X, par. I. 
State Law reference— Magistrate court serving as municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-150 et seq.; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; jurisdiction to impose punishments for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Judge. 
(a)  The judge of the municipal court shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, shall be at least 21 years of age and shall have practiced law for at least three years. 
(b)  The city manager shall have authority to appoint standby associate judges to serve from time to time in the judge's absence. Any standby associate judge shall possess the qualifications set forth in subsection (a) for the judge of the municipal court. 
(Code 1981, § 2-5001) 
Sec. 13-2. - Sessions. 
(a)  A regular session of the municipal court shall be held at least once each week at a fixed hour of a fixed day as may be determined by the judge; provided, that any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court or no cases are ready for trial. 
(b)  The municipal court may hold special sessions of court when, in the judge's opinion, it is necessary or there is urgent cause for the trial of accused persons before the next regularly scheduled session of the court. 
(Code 1981, § 2-5002) 
Sec. 13-3. - Clerk. 
(a)  There shall be a clerk of court who shall be appointed or removed by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  The clerk of court shall: 
(1)  Prepare all subpoenas and warrants and maintain a docket thereof that will show the name of the person for whom the subpoena or warrant was issued, its date, at whose instance it was issued and to whom it was delivered. 
(2)  Be the custodian of the seal of the court and have authority to certify copies of all official records of the court and to maintain the proper books of accounts, including receipts and disbursements, which the court may maintain. 
(3)  Perform such other duties as may be imposed by the judge. 
(Code 1981, § 2-5003) 
Sec. 13-4. - Rules. 
The municipal court shall be controlled by the rules of the superior courts, as far as they are applicable to municipal courts, and a sound construction of the Constitutions of the state and of the United States and the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-2; Code 1981, § 2-5004) 
Sec. 13-5. - Practice. 
The city shall have the opening and conclusion of each case, unless the defendant introduces no evidence; then the defendant shall be entitled to the conclusion. The city shall announce first whether it is ready for trial, and if not ready shall be held to as strict a showing for a continuance as the defendant. The rules of evidence shall be the same as in the superior court, as far as applicable to the case on trial. 
(Code 1959, § 12-3; Code 1981, § 2-5005) 
Sec. 13-6. - Persons charged with offense; summons; trial. 
Any person who is charged with an offense against any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinances of the city shall be informed by summons in writing served on him of the nature and cause of the accusation; shall have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his behalf; shall have a speedy trial; shall be confronted with the witnesses against him; and shall have the privilege of cross examination as in the superior courts of the state. The same rules as to examination of witnesses and the evidence adduced as obtained in such courts, as far as they are applicable to examining courts, shall be applicable to cases before the municipal court. The person accused shall have the privilege of defending himself, by counsel or by himself, or both, whichever shall seem proper to him. No one shall be condemned, fined or punished without a chance of being heard in his defense. 
(Code 1959, § 12-5; Code 1981, § 2-5006) 
Sec. 13-7. - Form and execution of summons. 
It shall be the duty of the clerk of court in all cases where complaint is made or information given of any violation of the laws or ordinances of the city, whether the accused is confined in jail or not, to issue a summons directed to the accused requiring him to appear in the municipal court to answer such charge, which summons shall set forth the offense and the time and place of trial, bear test in the name of the judge of the municipal court, be signed officially by the clerk and directed to the chief of police or any police officer of the city to be executed, which police officer shall execute the same by serving a copy on the accused or leaving it at his place of residence. 
(Code 1959, § 12-6; Code 1981, § 2-5007) 
Sec. 13-8. - Witness—Subpoena. 
Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any fact, the clerk of court shall issue a subpoena, directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, and bearing test in the name of the judge of the municipal court, which subpoena shall be served as other summons by any police officer. 
(Code 1959, § 12-7; Code 1981, § 2-5008) 
Sec. 13-9. - Same—Defaulting. 
If any person, summoned as a witness under this chapter, shall fail, neglect or refuse to attend a trial or render at the time a sufficient excuse in the judgement of the court, the defaulting witness shall be liable to a penalty in accordance with section 1-9. If the case shall be continued on account of the witness' absence, the court may issue an attachment against such witness, requiring him to show cause on the day appointed for trial, why he should not be further dealt with for contempt. Any police officer, by virtue of such attachment, shall arrest and confine the person, so as to have him before the court at such time as may be appointed for further hearing of the original complaint. 
(Code 1959, § 12-8; Code 1981, § 2-5009) 
Sec. 13-10. - Continuances. 
Where the ends of justice require it, cases may be continued. All continuances shall be addressed to the sound legal discretion of the court under the rules governing the superior courts of this state. 
(Code 1959, § 12-9; Code 1981, § 2-5010) 
Sec. 13-11. - Plea of guilty in absence of defendant. 
Any person against whom any complaint is lodged or information given in the municipal court may file a plea of guilty under such regulations and upon such terms as the court may prescribe. If such person cannot attend the trial, the court may pass such order or sentence in the case as if the person were personally present. 
(Code 1959, § 12-10; Code 1981, § 2-5011) 
Sec. 13-12. - Persons implicated to be tried. 
If on the trial of any case before the municipal court, it appears that any other person besides the one on trial has violated a provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, he may then and there be tried, if present, unless the case is continued for legal cause. 
(Code 1959, § 12-11; Code 1981, § 2-5012) 
Sec. 13-13. - Contempt of court. 
Any person who, during a sitting of the municipal court, shall be guilty of contempt of court, or refuse to abide by any sentence or order of such court, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Code 1959, § 12-12; Code 1981, § 2-5013) 
Charter reference— Punishment for contempt of court, § 15-1. 
Sec. 13-14. - Docket. 
A docket shall be kept in the office of clerk of court on which shall appear the name of every defendant charged with a violation of this Code or any city ordinances, or of any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction. At the trial of all cases in the municipal court, the judge of the municipal court shall record opposite the statement of the case the punishment inflicted and the date; and the clerk of court shall enter, under the judge of the municipal court's sentence, the final disposition of the case, that is, whether the fine, if any, was collected and the date of such collection and when and to whom such amounts were turned over by the clerk of court. 
(Code 1959, § 12-13; Ord. No. 84-5-4, § 1, 5-7-84; Code 1981, § 2-5014) 
Sec. 13-15. - Enforcement of penalties against corporations. 
Whenever a corporation shall violate any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, a warrant shall issue against such corporation for violating such provision, and the clerk of court shall issue a copy of such warrant, which shall be served by the chief of police or any police officer of the city upon any officer of the corporation to be found in the city, or upon the agent, superintendent or person in charge of the business of the corporation in the city. The police officer serving such copy shall at the time notify the person upon whom such service is made of the time and place of trial; and shall make an entry of such service upon the warrant, showing the time of service and upon whom the service was made; and return the same to the municipal court, and docket the case, which case shall stand for trial in the order in which other cases against individuals for violation of ordinances of the city are tried. If, on the trial, the defendant corporation fails to appear, or appearing fails to plead, the judge of the municipal court shall cause to be entered a plea of not guilty, and trial shall proceed as though the defendant had appeared and pleaded. Upon conviction of any corporation, there shall be rendered judgment against it for the fine imposed by the judge of the municipal court, together with all costs of prosecution, upon which judgment the clerk of court shall issue an execution against the defendant, which shall be levied and collected by the chief of police as tax executions in favor of the city are levied and collected. 
(Code 1981, § 2-5015) 
Sec. 13-16. - Weapons not allowed in municipal courtroom and adjacent facilities. 
Firearms or other weapons, including, without limitation, any knife, razor, razor blade, ice pick or similar device having a sharp point, bat, baton, stun or tazer gun, any device capable of discharging harmful projectiles, pepper spray, and all similar items, shall not be worn or brought into the courtrooms of the municipal court or into the buildings in which they are located, except with the specific authorization of the court or the chief of police. 
The following persons or groups are exempted from this prohibition: 
(1)  Law enforcement officers employed by the State of Georgia; 
(2)  Local law enforcement officers employed by the City of Rome and Floyd County, including sheriff's deputies; 
(3)  District attorneys, assistant district attorneys, and the Attorney General of the State of Georgia; 
(4)  Law enforcement officers of the United States of America, including federal probation officers who are authorized by law or by federal court to wear or carry firearms; 
(5)  Any person appointed by the municipal court judge as a bailiff, provided such person is licensed to carry firearms or otherwise permitted to carry a firearm under state law; 
(6)  Any person otherwise authorized by law to carry firearms or weapons within a superior courtroom of the State of Georgia." 
Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of the Rome City Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-7-3, § II, 7-18-05) 
Sec. 13-17. - Conduct in municipal courtroom. 
(a)  No person shall, while present within the courtrooms of the municipal court or in the buildings in which they are located, engage in any conduct which may reasonably disturb or interfere with any session of the municipal court or interfere with the business of any municipal court employee, including, without limitation, engaging in actions which disturb or endanger the public peace or decency by any disorderly conduct, such as the use profane or obscene language, being noisy, boisterous, or engaging in any riotous conduct, engaging in, promoting, aiding, or abetting any fight, riot, or disorderly proceeding, acting in a violent or tumultuous manner, using opprobrious or abusive words of another person in such other person's presence which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, or recklessly or knowingly committing any act which may reasonably be expected to interfere with or disrupt proceedings before municipal court or interfere with its employees. 
(b)  The municipal court judge shall have the authority to preserve and enforce order in his or her immediate presence and, as near thereto as is necessary, to prevent interruption, disturbance, or hindrance to municipal court proceedings. In addition to the penalties which may be imposed pursuant to paragraph (d) below, any person who fails to comply with an order of the judge of municipal court as to such person's conduct while within the courtrooms of the municipal court or the buildings in which they are located shall be guilty of contempt and shall be subject to the appropriate disciplinary action. 
(c)  The municipal court judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the peaceful, efficient and successful administration of the business of said court, including the power to delegate authority to law enforcement personnel to achieve such purpose. 
(d)  Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of the Rome City Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-7-3, § III, 7-18-05) 
Secs. 13-18—13-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPEARANCE BOND 

Sec. 13-51. - Security; maximum amount. 
Any person authorized to do so pursuant to law may take bond, with security or without security, at discretion, in a sum not exceeding $2,500.00 per violation or offense for the appearance of any person accused or suspected of being guilty of a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, or any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, to stand to and abide by his trial before the municipal court; and also of witnesses to testify in any case pending or about to be commenced in such court. 
(Code 1959, § 12-15; Ord. No. 84-5-4, § 2, 5-7-84; Ord. No. 84-6-10, § 1, 6-4-84; Code 1981, § 2-5016) 
State Law reference— Bonds and recognizances, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-1 et seq. 
Sec. 13-52. - Failure or refusal to give; subsequent confinement or guard. 
If the accused or a witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security as required under this article, the person so failing or refusing may be confined or kept under a guard, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify as the case may be. 
(Code 1959, § 12-16; Code 1981, § 2-5017) 
Sec. 13-53. - Forfeiture for failure to appear; service of rule. 
All bail taken under this chapter shall be special bail and the power of the security over the principal shall be the same as in special bail. Upon the failure to appear of any principal, in any bond or recognizance given by a person charged with a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, or of any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, or by a witness to appear and testify, the judge of the municipal court shall pass a rule requiring the principal and sureties on such bond to show cause on any day therein named, not to be less than ten days from the passage of such rule, why they should not be required to pay the amount of such bond. A copy of such rule shall be served upon the principal and the sureties, by any officer or member of the police force, if found in the city, at least five days before the time therein set for hearing the same. 
(Code 1959, § 12-17; Ord. No. 84-5-4, § 3, 5-7-84; Code 1981, § 2-5018) 
Sec. 13-54. - Judgment. 
If no sufficient cause is shown, the judge of the municipal court shall proceed to enter judgment against such principal and sureties for the amount of the bond forfeited as provided in section 13-53. The secretary shall issue execution for the amount of such judgment and place the same in the hands of the chief of police, who shall proceed to collect the same by levy and sale as in case of tax executions. 
(Code 1959, § 12-18; Code 1981, § 2-5019) 
Sec. 13-55. - Surrender of principal. 
Any surety upon a bail bond of any person charged with a violation of a provision of this Code or a city ordinance, or of any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, may surrender his principal at any time to the chief of police, who shall confine such principal, until discharged by order of the judge of the municipal court, or other proper officer, or by giving other and good security. The delivery of the principal as provided in this section shall discharge the sureties of all further liability upon such bond; provided, that delivery shall be before any judgment of forfeiture upon the bond shall have been entered. 
(Code 1959, § 12-19; Ord. No. 84-5-4, § 4, 5-7-84; Code 1981, § 2-5020) 
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Protection of peace, good order and security, § 2-10. 
State Constitution reference— Limitations on special legislation, art. III, § VI, par. IV. 
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, O.C.G.A. tit. 16; adoption of ordinances, etc., generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas, streets or parks. 
(Code 1981, § 11-1001(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— "Public place" defined for purposes of Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-3(15). 
Sec. 14-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, or nuisance, or if his conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder, or nuisance, he wilfully does any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby that other is placed in danger of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  Interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of violence or by threats of violence; 
(5)  Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a law enforcement officer, when known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity and the public health and safety are imminently threatened; 
(6)  Is in a public place under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or drug in such a condition as to be unable to exercise care for his own safety or the safety of others; 
(7)  Addresses abusive language or threats to any law enforcement officer, any other authorized official of the city who is engaged in the lawful performance of his duties, or any other person when whose words have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence; 
(8)  Damages or befouls public or private property or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition; 
(9)  Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other person nearby, or near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or building, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed, or the traveling public annoyed; 
(10)  Makes, or causes to be made, any improper diversion against the peace, morals, dignity or good order of the city; and/or 
(11)  Uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking or other lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1981, § 11-1001(b)—(d)) 
Cross reference— Parks, recreation and cultural affairs, ch. 15; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Offenses against public order, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-30 et seq. 
Sec. 14-3. - Drunkenness; drinking in public place or building. 
It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To be drunk in any street, avenue, alley or in any public place or building in the city; 
(2)  To be drunk in any private place in the city when he is disturbing others; and/or 
(3)  To be drinking any intoxicating beverage while that person is in any street, avenue, alley or in any public place or building in the city, except: 
a.  The ECO River Education Center, Riverside Parkway; 
b.  The Civic Center; 
c.  City tour boats; 
d.  The southern portion of Ridge Ferry Park which is defined as: 
All of the southern portion of Ridge Ferry Park being bordered on the north by the southern right-of-way of the Southern Railroad, on the west by the east side of the walking path on the east bank of the Oostanaula River, on the south by the northern bank of Burwell Creek, and on the east by the western right-of-way of Riverside Parkway. 
Provided, that consumption of alcohol in said area shall only be allowed when: 
1.  The entire southern portion of the park has been duly rented; 
2.  The function during which consumption occurs has been duly registered by copy of application from the recreation department in the office of the city clerk; and 
3.  Use of glass containers is not permitted. 
e.  Stonebridge Golf Course; 
f.  Floyd County Forum/Civic Center; 
g.  Rome Senior Citizens Center, 406 Riverside Parkway; 
h.  Rome Braves Club Stadium and the designated parking lot as shown on the plat filed of record in the city clerk's office and available for public inspection; 
i.  The Carnegie Building and gardens; 
j.  Bridge Point Plaza—The 1.13 acres of publicly owned property located at Bridge Point Plaza which is bordered by West First Street to the south, the Oostanaula River to the north, West Second Avenue to the east and the walkway approach to the Robert Redden Footbridge to the west. 
k.  The southeast portion of Heritage Park which is defined as: 
The area bordered by the Coosa River, the Robert Redden Foot Bridge, the J. B. Dodd Boat Ramp and the roadway along the top of the levee. This area is also shown on the plat filed in the City Clerk's office and available for public inspection. 
Provided that consumption of alcohol in said area shall only be allowed when: 
1.  This area of Heritage Park has been duly rented. 
2.  The function during which consumption occurs has been duly registered by copy of application from the recreation department in the office of the city clerk; and 
3.  The use of glass containers is not permitted. 
l.  The city trolley. 
m.  Rome Tennis Center at Berry College; 
n.  The Downtown Tennis Center which is located next to Barron Stadium; and 
o.  Rome City Auditorium, 601 Broad Street 
p.  Any area approved by the Alcohol Control Commission through a temporary consumption permit granted under section 3-33(10) of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 4-58; Ord. No. 91-12-1, § I, 12-23-91; Code 1981, § 11-1002; Ord. No. 94-9-2, § I, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 94-10-2, § I, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 97-4-4, § I, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 98-9-1, § I, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 03-2-1, § 1, 2-17-03; Ord. No. 03-5-1, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 05-9-20, § I, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 20007-3-2, § II, 3-19-07; Ord. No. 2008-6-3, § I, 6-16-08; Ord. No. 2010-4-3, § I, 4-19-10; Ord. No. 2016-05-01, § I, 5-23-16; Ord. No. 2017-8-1, § I, 8-28-17) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 14-4. - Fortunetelling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to carry on within the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of the city 
the business of telling fortunes or carrying on the trade, business or profession of phrenology, clairvoyance, palmistry or other business of like kind or nature in which the future of any person is foretold or attempted to be foretold. 
(b)  Any advertising, by any means, of a business described in subsection (a) shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of such subsection. 
(Code 1959, § 20-15; Code 1981, § 11-1003) 
Sec. 14-5. - Noises generally; garbage dumpsters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any unreasonable, loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise in the city. It shall also be unlawful for any person to permit any such noise to be made in or upon any house or premises owned or possessed by him or under his management or control. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the loading, unloading, opening, closing, lifting or otherwise handling of dumpsters or other garbage containers between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., when the sound therefrom disturbs the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any house, apartment, hotel or other type of property used for human habitation. 
(Code 1959, § 20-20; Code 1981, § 11-1004; Ord. No. 06-11-8, § I, 11-2-06) 
Cross reference— Noisy animals, § 4-3. 
Sec. 14-6. - Sound systems disturbing neighbors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any phonograph, television set, music box, radio, or other sound-receiving or transmitting system in such a manner as to disturb the neighbors. 
(Code 1959, § 20-22; Code 1981, § 11-1005) 
Sec. 14-7. - Noise created by motor vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, create and produce any excessive or unusual noise with the exhaust of a motor vehicle or any other noisemaking device on a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 30-123; Code 1981, § 11-1006) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12. 
Sec. 14-8. - Operation of vehicle in manner so as to disturb persons in residences within 250 feet of vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the engine of the vehicle he is driving to remain in operation on any public street or public or private property so that the noise, fumes, vibrations or other effects of the engine operation disturb any person occupying a residence within 250 feet of the vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 30-123.1; Code 1981, § 11-1007) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12. 
Sec. 14-9. - Noisemaking device—Possessing vehicle with, prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have a motor vehicle with a whistle, steamboat whistle, bells, musical horns, smitty muffler, hollow muffler or any other muffler or noisemaking device that is not a standard item of equipment of the motor vehicle provided by the original manufacturer of the motor vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 30-124; Code 1981, § 11-1008) 
Sec. 14-10. - Same—Installing or operating prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to equip, install, place upon or operate a motor vehicle with a noisemaking device that is not a standard item of equipment of the original manufacturer of the motor vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 30-125; Code 1981, § 11-1009) 
Sec. 14-11. - Property—Injury or destruction; public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to deface, write upon or mutilate any public building or injure any signboards, sidewalks, benches, trees, shrubs, flowers or any other public property in the streets, parkways, parks or public grounds of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-27; Code 1981, § 11-1014) 
State Law reference— Damage to and intrusion upon property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-12. - Same—Plantings, beautification projects; damage or theft from; schemes, promotions encouraging or resulting in damage. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by city authorities to damage, disrupt, rearrange or otherwise tamper with beautification projects, plantings and arrangements on any public grounds within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to encourage or cause, by means of any advertising or promotional program or scheme or otherwise, persons to go upon public or private grounds and damage, disrupt, rearrange or otherwise tamper with the grounds or the plantings and arrangements thereon. 
(Code 1959, § 20-27.1; Code 1981, § 11-1015) 
Sec. 14-13. - Same—Damaging generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to deface, write upon or mutilate any private buildings, fences or signboards placed on private property without the consent of the owner, or any other structure without the consent of the owner, or by the use of any filthy substance defile any house, signboard, fence or other structure, or to wantonly injure or destroy any property. 
(Code 1959, § 20-28; Code 1981, § 11-1016) 
Sec. 14-14. - Selling or solicitation in public streets or on public property prohibited. 
No selling or solicitation shall be carried on by persons within the traveled portion or median of public streets or on public property, without the prior approval of the city clerk; provided any duly licensed peddler (as defined in section 11-196 of the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia, as amended) of fruits and vegetables only may continue to operate from a motor vehicle in accordance with the Code of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
(Code 1959, § 22-4; Code 1981, § 11-1017; Ord. No. 2018-12-1, § I, 12-17-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-12-1, § I, adopted Dec. 17, 2018, amended § 14-14 and in so doing changed the title, as set out herein. 
State Law reference— Pedestrian seeking employment, business or contribution from occupant of vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-98. 
Sec. 14-15. - Firearms; shooting prohibited. 
No person shall shoot any firearm in the city, except in a licensed shooting gallery or by permission of the chief of police. 
(Code 1959, § 20-31; Code 1981, § 11-1018) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearms, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103 et seq. 
Sec. 14-16. - Slingshots and air rifles; use prohibited. 
It shall not be lawful for any person within the limits of this city to use any Alabama slings or other sling or instrument for throwing projectiles; nor to throw any stone or other missile from the sling or instrument or by the hand in the city, nor shall it be lawful for any person to use or shoot an airgun or other gun of like character in the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-32; Code 1981, § 11-1019) 
Sec. 14-17. - Utility apparatus; diversion of services. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without authority, to destroy, damage or tamper with any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus owned by the city or by any company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without authority, to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the city, or of a company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service, or intentionally to divert any of the services of the City of Rome or such company, or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or caused to be used, without the consent of the city or such company, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the city or such company. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly receive the benefit of acts of diversion of or tampering with electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service without the proper charge. 
(d)  Proof that any act specified in this section was done on premises in possession of an accused, or that the accused received the benefit of any such act, shall be prima facie evidence that the accused committed such act or aided and abetted in the commission thereof. 
(Ord. No. 82-4-2, § 1, 4-17-82; Code 1981, § 11-1021) 
Cross reference— Franchises, § 11-601 et seq.; utilities, ch. 22. 
Sec. 14-18. - Injuring, destroying or interfering with E-911 system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, destroy or in any manner interfere with the E-911 system of the city or with the apparatus or appurtenances thereof or used in connection therewith. 
(Code 1959, § 14-13; Code 1981, § 4-2012) 
Sec. 14-19. - Privately owned fire, burglary and/or robbery alarm systems. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
False alarm means a fire alarm signal or police signal from a privately owned fire or police signal device or system that is caused or created by anything other than an actual fire or burglary/robbery, respectively, in the premises where the device or system is located. 
Provided, however, that a false alarm shall not be construed to mean alarm signals caused by no fault of the user and caused by no apparent malfunction and also excluding an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature, such as, but not limited to, lightning, tornadoes, or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business or alarm user. 
False alarm penalty means an administrative fee imposed by the city to defray the needless expense to the city for responding to false alarms. The amount of the fee shall be as set out in the fee schedule book as provided in section 8-36. 
Fire alarm signal means a signal indicating an emergency requiring immediate action of the fire department, including, but not limited to, an alarm from a manually operated fire alarm box, a water flow alarm, or an alarm from an automatic fire/smoke detection system or device. 
Fire equipment trouble alarm means an alarm indicating some form of malfunction or trouble with the fire protection or fire detecting system or device being monitored. Such trouble alarm does not indicate the need for emergency fire department response to the site, but only that the person responsible for maintenance of the system being monitored is to be notified of the trouble alarm signal. 
Police signal means a signal from a manually operated or automatic device which indicates an emergency requiring immediate response by the police department. 
(b)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish requirements for the monitoring and/or receiving of fire and burglar alarm signals, and fire equipment trouble alarms at the E-911 center. 
(c)  Connections. No emergency signal other than a fire alarm, burglary and robbery or intrusion alarm, and no trouble alarm other than a fire equipment trouble alarm shall be connected to any alarm signal receiving equipment in the E-911 center. 
(d)  Automatic dialers. It shall be unlawful for any person to key automatic dialer fire or burglar alarms to the city's emergency numbers or to the E-911 center. These types of alarms shall be keyed to a private service that can then notify the E-911 center. 
(e)  Automatic cutoff system. All audible alarms, sirens, bells or horns shall have an automatic cutoff system so that the alarms shall not operate for more than 30 continuous minutes. 
(f)  Transmission of false alarms. The transmission of false alarms to the E-911 center in excess of the allowable alarms as contained in the fee schedule book shall authorize the imposition of a false alarm penalty as provided in the fee schedule of the city. 
(g)  Accounting of false alarms. The E-911 center shall maintain an accounting of false alarms on a monthly and quarterly basis. Each calendar year shall constitute a new accounting period for determining the imposition of false alarm penalties as established in this section. 
(h)  Termination of services. Services under this section shall be terminated as provided in the fee schedule of the city. Service shall be reinstated only after appropriate action has been taken to correct user deficiencies and the user receives approval from the appropriate chief. 
(i)  Registration. 
(1)  All alarm systems must be registered within 30 days of installation. 
(2)  The initial registration fee is $15.00 for newly installed alarm systems. 
(3)  Registration is not transferable. New owners must register and pay $15.00 fee. 
(4)  There will be no registration fee for medical alarms. 
(5)  All alarm companies must be re-registered annually between January 1st and January 31st by submitting a list of all customers in Rome and Floyd County to E911. The list should include the name of the customer, the customer's address and customer's phone number. 
(6)  Failure to register/re-register an alarm system within the allotted time will result in a fee as shown in the fee schedule*. 
(7)  Any response to an alarm that has not been registered/re-registered will result in a fee shown in the accepted fee schedule. 
(8)  Alarm installation companies will be provided with and required to present a copy of the city/county alarms ordinance to each customer at the time of alarm installation. 
(9)  Failure of the alarm installation company to notify the customer or the central monitoring center of these requirements will result in a fee as shown in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1981, § 4-2013; Ord. No. 85-10-1, § 1, 10-8-85; Ord. No. 86-8-2, § 1, 8-4-86; Ord. No. 88-10-2, § 1, 10-17-88; Ord. No. 88-12-2, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 00-8-1, §§ I, II, 8-7-00) 
Editor's note— The fee schedule referred to in § 14-19 is not included herein but is available for public inspection in the office of the secretary, as per § 8-36. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9. 
Sec. 14-20. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 (Michi 2003), as amended, pertaining to criminal trespass are hereby by referenced and incorporated in this Code as if set forth in full in this section. 
(b)  The provisions of this Code section shall be applicable without regard to whether a person commits the prohibited acts set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 (Michi 2003), as amended, while on foot or while within in a motor vehicle, watercraft or other mode of transportation. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 03-7-1, § I, 7-7-03; Ord. No. 2009-8-1, § I, 8-17-09) 
Sec. 14-21. - Products used in the preparation of methamphetamine. 
(a)  Definitions. 
"Products used in the preparation of methamphetamine" means any compound, mixture, preparation or drug product containing a dosage of 25 mg. or more, in tablet or caplet form, of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine, or any of their salts, isomers or salts of isomers, alone or in a mixture. This definition shall not include products otherwise qualifying as "product used in the preparation of methamphetamine" but which is manufactured in time release form or in the form of gel caps, gel tabs, liquid tabs, capsules, liquids, elixirs, syrups, nasal spray or popsicles. 
(b)  Display of products prohibited. Products used in the preparation of methamphetamine may not be openly displayed for sale in the City of Rome, but must be maintained behind the counter, maintained in a locked cabinet or maintained in a location from which it may be distributed for sale only by the pharmacist, pharmacy technician, sales clerk or other retail distributor employee. 
(c)  Requirements for purchase of products. Products used in the preparation of methamphetamine may not be dispensed, sold or distributed in the City of Rome without requiring the individual purchasing, receiving or otherwise acquiring such compound, mixture, preparation or drug product to produce a valid photo identification showing his or her date of birth and to sign a written log or receipt showing the signature and printed name, the date of the transaction, the type and amount of product purchased. 
The log or receipt must be maintained by the retailer or other person dispensing, selling or distributing the drug used in preparation of methamphetamine for a period of one year, and must be made available to the City of Rome, a representative thereof or any other entity designated with the power to enforce this ordinance. 
(d)  Violations and enforcement. 
(1)  Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of the Rome City Code. 
(2)  The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Rome Police Department, the Rome/Floyd County Drug Task Force, and any other party lawfully designated by the Rome City Commission, the city manager or the Police Chief of the Rome Police Department. 
(3)  This section shall become effective on April 1, 2005. 
(e)  Validity and severability. Should any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this section be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 05-2-5, § II, 2-21-05) 
Sec. 14-22. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Purposes. The mayor and commission for the city have determined that there has been an increase in juvenile violence and crime by persons under the age of 17 in Rome resulting in juveniles being involved in a wide range of unacceptable behavior by juveniles; that persons under the age of 17 are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful activity and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime; that there has been a significant breakdown in the supervision and guidance normally provided by parents for juveniles resulting in an increase in the crimes, substance abuse, school dropout rates, juvenile pregnancy, and other illicit behavior. The city has an obligation to provide for the protection of juveniles from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control over and responsibility for children, for the protection of the general public, and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities that are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances. The mayor and commission have determined that a curfew for those under the age of 17 will be in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare and will help to attain the foregoing objectives and to diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens of the city and will promote the public good, safety, and welfare. Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of children is the accepted norm and legal sanction to enforce such responsibility have had demonstrated effectiveness in many cities. The mayor and commission have determined that a curfew ordinance will increase parental responsibility for juveniles within their control and decrease juvenile delinquency. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Adult means any person 21 years of age or older. 
Emergency errand means a mission that results from an unforeseen combination of circumstances that call for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Juvenile means any unemancipated person under the age of 17. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 17, unless said person is actively supervised by an adult, to be present at, in, or upon the public streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, alleys, parks, school grounds, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, malls, cemeteries, public or privately owned places of amusement, eating places, parking lots, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a juvenile is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person 21 years of age, or older having the lawful care and custody of the juvenile; 
(2)  When the juvenile is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent, or guardian or other adult person 21 years of age, or older having the lawful care and custody of such juvenile; 
(3)  When the juvenile is returning directly home from a school activity or entertainment, school-sponsored or school-related sports event, recreational activity, or school-sanctioned extra-curricular activities, organized and sanctioned non-school sports, volunteer work or church affiliated activities; 
(4)  When the juvenile is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the proscribed period of time; 
(5)  When the juvenile is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; or 
(6)  When the juvenile is engaged in interstate and intrastate vehicular travel through the city with parental consent. 
Any acts made unlawful by the provisions of this section shall be subject to the juvenile code of this state. Upon violation of this section for the first time, a juvenile shall be given a warning citation. Upon further violations and conviction, a juvenile shall be subject to such punishment as the juvenile court may impose. See, e.g., O.C.G.A. § 15-11-2(11)(A) (child in need of services). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child under the age of 17 to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places listed in subsection (c) of this section within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, except in circumstances set out in subsection (c). Upon violation of this section for the first time, a person shall be given a warning citation. Upon further violations and conviction, a person shall be subject to such punishment as the municipal court may impose, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  The chief of police shall be required to submit a quarterly report for up to one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives to the city commission to monitor the continuing need and effectiveness of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-8-4, § I, 8-13-18) 
Secs. 14-23—14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Nuisances, § 2-11. 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 14-51. - Conditions constituting nuisances. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances when any one of them endangers the health, welfare or good order of the community: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises. 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter; weeds; vegetation; or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewerage system which would be damaging thereto. 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl. 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit. 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limiting the foregoing, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas. 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property. 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent such activities. 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed. 
(11)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(12)  Abandoned vehicles, which are defined as vehicles which are not road worthy, inoperable, do not have current license plates and are not located completely within a fully enclosed, standing and permanent structure. 
(Code 1981, § 11-2001; Ord. No. 04-7-2, § II, 7-19-04) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4; buildings, ch. 5; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 11; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; water supply and distribution, § 22-36 et seq. 
Sec. 14-52. - Jurisdiction to try and abate. 
The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in section 1-9. 
(Code 1959, § 18-1; Code 1981, § 11-2002) 
Sec. 14-53. - Complaint. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the police department, which shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal court, after five days' notice to the person involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding that a nuisance does exist shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control, or tenant in possession of the property, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)  Animal control officers and building and license inspectors of the city may receive complaints of nuisances, investigate the same and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
(Code 1981, § 11-2003) 
Sec. 14-54. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the judge, that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police, in such case, shall keep a record of the expenses and costs of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances under this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 11-2004) 
Sec. 14-55. - Nuisance per se; exception; summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city manager from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health or safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Code 1981, § 11-2005) 
Sec. 14-56. - Offense; continued nuisance. 
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant of any property to maintain a nuisance. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 11-2006) 
State Law reference— Erection or continuance of nuisance after notice to abate, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6. 
Secs. 14-57—14-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-6-1, § I, adopted June 7, 2004, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

Sec. 14-61. - Findings. 
The city commission does hereby find that: 
(1)  Numerous scientific studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution; 
(2)  Tobacco smoking has long been recognized as a leading cause of death in the United States: it is responsible for almost half a million deaths each year, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Tobacco smoking causes cancer in the lungs, larynx, and throat. Additionally, smoking can cause respiratory illnesses and places smokers at greater risk for developing heart disease. As the evidence is overwhelming that smoking causes cancer, there is also concern that nonsmokers exposed to others' tobacco smoke may also be at risk. The smoke that filters into these environments has been labeled as passive smoke or secondhand smoke. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency estimates that secondhand smoke is deadly. It causes 3,000 lung cancer deaths and 35,000 heart disease deaths in nonsmokers each year; 
(3)  The technical term for passive or secondhand smoke is environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), which has been labeled one of the most widespread and harmful of all indoor pollutants by the EPA in its June 1989 publication Indoor Air Facts No. 5: Environmental Tobacco Smoke. ETS is contrasted with mainstream smoke (MS) which is the smoke that is inhaled by the smoker through the mouthpiece, filter, or end of a lit tobacco product. MS and ETS possess the same chemical makeup and potential toxicity, although MS is the more direct means of inhaling the carcinogenic and toxic agents found in tobacco products. ETS is defined by the EPA to include both the secondhand smoke which is exhaled by smokers and the side stream smoke which is emitted from the burning end of cigarettes, cigars and pipes. The EPA estimates that one-half of the smoke emitted from a burning tobacco product is side stream smoke. The same carcinogens and toxins exist in both ETS and MS, regardless of the type of tobacco product being smoked; 
(4)  The public health service's national toxicology program (NTP) has listed secondhand smoke as a known carcinogen; 
(5)  Reliable scientific studies, including studies by the Surgeon General of the United States and studies commissioned and assessed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, have shown that breathing side stream or secondhand smoke is a significant health hazard to nonsmokers; particularly to children, older persons, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease; [Environmental Health Information Service (EHIS), "Environmental tobacco smoke: first listed in the Ninth Report on Carcinogens," U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Public Health Service, NTP, 2000; reaffirmed by the NTP in subsequent reports on carcinogens, 2003, 2005.] 
(6)  Health hazards induced by exposure to environmental tobacco smoke include lung and other forms of cancer, respiratory infection, decreased respiratory function, decreased exercise tolerance, broncho-constriction and broncho-spasm, and that the most common cause of premature death from environmental tobacco smoke is heart disease; 
(7)  Reliable scientific studies assessed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency have found that side stream and secondhand tobacco smoke is a leading cause of premature death and disability among nonsmokers; 
(8)  Air pollution caused by smoking is an offensive annoyance and irritant. Smoking results in serious and significant physical discomfort of nonsmokers in public places and work places; 
(9)  Electronic smoking devices, commonly referred to as electronic cigarettes, or "e-cigarettes," closely resemble and purposefully mimic the act of smoking by having users inhale vaporized liquid that typically contains nicotine, heated through an electronic ignition system. ESD emissions are made up of a high concentration of ultrafine particles, and the particle concentration is higher than in conventional tobacco cigarette smoke. The January 2018 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine publication states that there is conclusive evidence that in addition to nicotine, most ESDs contain and emit numerous potentially toxic substances and increase airborne concentrations of particulate matter and nicotine in indoor environments. Studies show that people exposed to ESD aerosol absorb nicotine (measured as cotinine) at levels comparable to passive smokers. Many of the elements identified in the aerosol are known to cause respiratory distress and disease. ESD exposure damages lung tissues. Human lung cells that are exposed to ESD aerosol and flavorings—especially cinnamon—show increased oxidative stress and inflammatory responses. Their use in workplaces and public places where smoking of traditional tobacco products is prohibited creates concern and confusion and leads to difficulties in enforcing the smoking prohibitions. The World Health Organization (WHO), the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), and the American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA) recommend that ESDs not be used in smoke-free environments, in order to minimize the risk to bystanders of breathing in the aerosol emitted by the devices and to avoid undermining the enforcement of smoke-free laws. [World Health Organization (WHO), "Electronic nicotine delivery systems," World Health Organization (WHO), 2014.] 
(10)  Given the fact that there is no safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke, the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) bases its ventilation standards on totally smoke-free environments. ASHRAE has determined that there is currently no air filtration or other ventilation technology that can completely eliminate all the carcinogenic components in secondhand smoke and the health risks caused by secondhand smoke exposure, and recommends that indoor environments be smoke-free in their entirety. In 2015, ASHRAE amended its ventilation standard for acceptable indoor air quality (62.1) to include an environment that is completely free from marijuana smoke and emissions from electronic smoking devices. 
(11)  The city commission finds that it is within its basic police powers to implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-6-1, § I, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 2019-2-1, § I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 14-62. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate smoking in the open public parks, public areas, the Broad Street District as defined, enclosed public places, places of employment, and public places. This article is intended to protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in certain public places and places of employment; and to protect the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air in certain designated areas, and to recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air is preferred over the desire to smoke. This article is not intended to cause undue financial strain on any business, including restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 04-6-1, § I, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 2019-2-1, § I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 14-63. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Broad Street District means the publicly owned outdoor areas of Broad Street between East 1st Avenue and East 8th Avenue, including the side streets and alleyways for one block off of Broad Street between East 1st Avenue and East 8th Avenue, as depicted on the attached map rendering. 
Business means any corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership, professional corporation, enterprise, franchise, association, trust, joint venture, or other entity, whether for profit or nonprofit. 
Electronic smoking device means any product containing or delivering nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person in any manner for the purpose of inhaling vapor or aerosol from the product. The term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, vape pen, JUUL, or under any other product name or descriptor. 
Employee means an individual who is employed by a business in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Employer means an individual or a business that employs one or more individuals. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded on at least two sides by walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent and whether or not containing openings of any kind. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, homes for the chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, psychologists, psychiatrists, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
Hookah means a water pipe and any associated products and devices which are used to produce fumes, smoke, and/or vapor from the burning of material including, but not limited to, tobacco, shisha, or other plant matter. 
Infiltrate means to permeate an enclosed area by passing through its walls, ceilings, floors, windows, or ventilation systems to the extent that an individual can smell secondhand smoke. 
Local governing authority means a county or municipal corporation of the state. 
Place of employment means an enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer that employees utilize during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, and hallways. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a licensed child care, adult day-care, or health care facility. This term shall not include vehicles used in the course of employment. 
Playground means any park or recreational area designed in part to be used by children that has play or sports equipment installed or that has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar facility located on public or private school grounds or on local governing authority grounds. 
Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
Public event means an event which is open to and may be attended by the general public, including but not limited to, such events as concerts, fairs, farmers' markets, festivals, parades, performances, and other exhibitions, regardless of any fee or age requirement. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a licensed child care, adult day-care, or health care facility. 
Recreational area means any public or private area open to the public for recreational purposes, whether or not any fee for admission is charged, including but not limited to, amusement parks, athletic fields, beaches, riverbanks, fairgrounds, gardens, golf courses, parks, plazas, skate parks, swimming pools, trails, and zoos. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term shall include a bar area within any restaurant. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Retail electronic smoking device store means a store where 90 percent or higher of sales are electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS) and related vaping products, and consumption of vaping products are allowed on the premises. 
Service line means an indoor or outdoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money, including but not limited to, ATM lines, concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event lines. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, hookah, JUUL, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, including marijuana, whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. "Smoking" includes the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this article. 
Smoking area means a separately designated enclosed room which need not be entered by an employee in order to conduct business that is designated as a smoking area and, when so designated as a smoking area, shall not be construed as to deprive employees of a nonsmoking lounge, waiting area, or break room. 
Sports arena means enclosed stadiums and enclosed sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
(Ord. No. 04-6-1, § I, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 04-6-11, § I, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 2019-2-1, § I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 14-64. - Regulation of smoking—Prohibited generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in the Broad Street District, the Town Green park, all downtown parking decks managed by the Downtown Development Authority of Rome within the Broad Street District, the public area of Bridgepoint Plaza, and in all enclosed areas within places of employment, including, but not limited to, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, and all other enclosed facilities within the city. 
Additionally, smoking shall be prohibited within 25 feet from a public entrance to a public place or place of employment. Provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent property owners from prohibiting smoking on private property. 
(Ord. No. 04-6-1, § I, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 04-6-11, § I, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 2019-2-1, § I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 14-65. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the following areas shall be exempt from the smoking prohibition set forth in section 14-64: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care, adult day-care, or health care facility; 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than 20 percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated; 
(3)  Retail tobacco stores, provided that secondhand smoke from such stores does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Long-term care facilities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-8-81(3); 
(5)  Outdoor areas of places of employment; 
(6)  All workplaces of any manufacturer, importer, or wholesaler of tobacco products, of any tobacco leaf dealer or processor, all tobacco storage facilities, and any other entity set forth in O.C.G.A. § 10-13A-2; 
(7)  Bars and restaurants to which access is denied to any person under the age of 18 and that do not employ any individual under the age of 18. 
(8)  Smoking areas designated by an employer which shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The smoking area shall be located in a non-work area where no employee, as part of his or her work responsibilities, shall be required to enter, except such work responsibilities shall not include custodial or maintenance work carried out in the smoking area when it is unoccupied; 
b.  Air handling systems from the smoking area shall be independent from the main air handling system that serves all other areas of the building and all air within the smoking area shall be exhausted directly to the outside by an exhaust fan of sufficient size and capacity for the smoking area and no air from the smoking area shall be recirculated through or infiltrate other parts of the building; and 
c.  The smoking area shall be for the use of employees only. 
The exemption provided for in this paragraph shall not apply to restaurants and bars; 
(9)  Common work areas, conference and meeting rooms, and private offices in private places of employment, other than medical facilities, that are open to the general public by appointment only; except that smoking shall be prohibited in any public reception area of such place of employment; and 
(10)  Private clubs, military officer clubs, and noncommissioned officer clubs. 
(11)  Existing retail tobacco stores in the Broad Street District, provided that secondhand smoke from such stores does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(12)  Existing retail electronic smoking device/vape stores in the Broad Street District, provided that secondhand vapor from such stores does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(13)  Public places and place of employment declared to be smoking environments by displaying appropriate signage as outlined in section 14-66 of this article. 
(b)  In order to qualify for exempt status under subsection (a) of this Code section, any area described in subsection (a) of this Code section, except for areas described in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this Code section, shall post conspicuously at every entrance a sign indicating that smoking is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 04-6-1, § I, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 2019-2-1, § I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 14-66. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection (b) below is posted. 
(b)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it may be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article. 
(c)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of the area, unless such ashtray is permanently affixed to an existing structure. 
(d)  All signs required in section 14-66(a) and (b) above shall have dimensions of no less than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches. Such signs shall contain white lettering on a red background. All signs shall be posted at a minimum of 48 inches in height. The city clerk shall prepare acceptable examples of all such signs, including font sizing and spacing requirements. Such examples of approved signs shall be maintained with the city clerk's office and with the chief building official. Public entrances to facilities with total smoking environments and the entryways into the smoking sections within establishments that offer both smoking and nonsmoking areas shall utilize signs containing the following text: 
WARNING  SMOKING ENVIRONMENT 
This facility allows smoking. Smoking and second hand smoke is harmful to your health. According to the Surgeon General, smoking causes Lung Cancer, Heart Disease, Emphysema, and May Complicate Pregnancy. Health officials recommend that children not be exposed to smoking environments. 
(Ord. No. 04-6-1, § I, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 2019-2-1, § I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 14-67. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The chief building official or his designated representative, the fire marshal or his designated representative, city manager or his designated representative, city clerk or his designated representative and any police officer of the city may take appropriate action to enforce this article. 
(b)  Any owner, operator or manager of any establishment, regulated by this article shall inform persons located in their business (including a sidewalk café) who are violating this article of the applicable provisions of this article. In the event persons violating this article refuse to cease smoking after being informed by such owner, operator or manager, the person smoking, not the owner, operator or manager, shall be subject to an action for violation of the article. 
(c)  For violations specified in section 14-69, any police officer of the city shall be the designated enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 04-6-1, § I, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 2019-2-1, § I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 14-68. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted or prohibited by other applicable laws, regulations or policies. 
(Ord. No. 04-6-1, § I, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 2019-2-1, § I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 14-69. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided below: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this article to fail to comply with any of its provisions. Any person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense, punishable by a fine not exceeding: 
A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
A fine not exceeding $250.00 for a second violation within one year. 
A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding: 
a.  $50.00 for a first violation. 
b.  $100.00 for a second violation of this article within one year. 
c.  $250.00 for each additional violation of this article within one year. 
(3)  In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. However, if said person has made every effort to discourage and prevent any patron of said establishment from smoking, and has notified the designated authority identified in section 14-67 of an infraction, no penalty will be levied against said establishment. 
(4)  Violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the any designated authority identified in section 14-67 by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the City of Rome may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(5)  Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 04-6-1, § I, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 2019-2-1, § I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 14-70. - Liberal construction. 
This article shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-1, § I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 14-71. - Severability. 
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-1, § I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 14-72. - Effective date. 
This article shall be effective April 1, 2019. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2-1, § I, 2-11-19) 
Chapter 15 - PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— On March 1, 1986, the city leased the Rome-Floyd County Library to the county until certain bonds have been paid in full, but not for more than 50 years. The library is operated by the Sara Hightower Regional Library Board. 
Charter reference— Purchase of land outside corporate limits, § 17-2. 
Cross reference— Certain boards designated, § 2-78; cemeteries, ch. 6; ad valorem tax, § 8-1; parades, § 11-531 et seq.; disorderly conduct, § 14-2; planning and development, ch. 16; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 18; subdivisions, ch. 21; zoning, ch. 23; development standards for historic districts, § 23-184. 
State Law reference— Parks, historic areas, memorials, etc., and recreation, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; local recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 15-1—15-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 15-31—15-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ROME-FLOYD COUNTY PARKS AND RECREATION AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 15-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
The authority means the Rome-Floyd County Parks and Recreation Authority. 
The city means the City of Rome, Georgia. 
The county means Floyd County, Georgia. 
Director means the appointed person selected by the city and county managers as the executive of the authority. 
(Code 1959, § 21-1; Code 1981, § 7-1001; Ord. No. 98-6-5, § I, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 2015-04-06, § I, 4-27-15) 
Sec. 15-52. - Creation. 
The Rome-Floyd County Parks and Recreation Authority is hereby created and established by and between the city and the county, as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. The authority shall be organized and empowered as set out in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 21-1; Code 1981, § 7-1001; Ord. No. 98-6-5, § I, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 2015-04-06, § I, 4-27-15) 
Sec. 15-53. - Appointment of members; terms; vacancy; removal. 
(a)  The authority shall consist of seven appointed voting members. Others may serve on the authority as ex-officio, non-voting members. The appointed voting members terms shall begin July 1, 2015. Except for the initial appointees, all terms will be for five years. 
(b)  The city shall appoint three voting members and the county shall appoint four voting members. The Cave Spring City Council, the Rome City schools and Floyd County schools shall each have one appointment to serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member. Each governmental entity may use its own selection and appointing methodology. In addition to the Floyd County and Rome City Managers, the county and the city may each appoint one of their respective commissioners to each serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member to the authority board. 
(c)  In order that the terms of the members shall be staggered, the initial appointment by the city shall be one person for a five-year term, one person for a four-year term and one person for two-year term; the initial appointment by the county shall be two persons for three-year terms, one person for a five-year term, and one person for one-year term. The members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Members of the authority may serve up to two consecutive five-year terms. 
(d)  All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(e)  Members of the authority may be involuntarily removed by the appointing body which originally appointed such member only for failure to abide by meeting attendance requirements, malfeasance in office, indictment for a crime involving moral turpitude, or unanimous recommendation of the other members of the authority. 
(f)  Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing body whose appointee vacates the position. 
(g)  The absence of any member for three consecutive regular meetings without leave, except when such absence is made necessary by sickness or other similar causes, will declare vacant the seat of such member, in which the vacancy thus created shall be filled by the appropriate appointing governing body. 
(h)  All authority members are expected to attend an orientation session upon joining the authority. Additionally, it is expected that all members be present for at least 75 percent of regularly scheduled meetings each calendar year. 
(Code 1959, § 21-2; Code 1981, § 7-1002; Ord. No. 98-6-5, § I, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 2015-04-06, § I, 4-27-15) 
Sec. 15-54. - Purpose and responsibility. 
The purpose of the authority is to serve as a citizen board to advise the Floyd County Commission and Rome City Commission, the Floyd County and Rome City Managers, and the director of the authority, on various matters pertaining to the operation of park facilities and recreation programs within Rome and Floyd County, to make policy recommendations to Floyd County and the City of Rome, and to carry out duties as may be assigned to them by the respective county and city commissions. This purpose is to assist in the developing, maintaining and operating a comprehensive parks and recreation service system for the city and the county without duplication of services and expense, and with fairness and equity to both political subdivisions. Facilities shall be open to all citizens of the city and of the county. The goal of the authority shall be to assure that operation and maintenance of all facilities, whether titled in the city or county, will continue at a level equal to, or better than, in prior years. 
(Code 1959, § 21-3; Code 1981, § 7-1003; Ord. No. 98-6-5, § I, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 2015-04-06, § I, 4-27-15) 
Sec. 15-55. - Organization; rules. 
(a)  The authority shall elect its chairperson and vice chairman from among its appointed voting members, provided one shall be a county appointee and the other a city appointee. The terms of the chairperson and such other officers shall be one year, or until their successors are duly elected and qualified. No elected official or city and/or county manager may serve as chairperson. 
(b)  In the event of the resignation of any officer, the members shall elect a successor in accordance with subsection (a) above. The department shall designate staff members to serve in the capacity of secretary. The secretary is responsible for distributing meeting agendas, minutes and other relevant information to authority members. The parks and recreation director is the primary point of contact in the department for the authority officers and members. 
(c)  The authority shall make its own rules of procedure, consistent with the law of the state and with the authority granted it by this article, the resolution of the county and the agreement between the city and the county referred to in this article. Any amendments or modifications to this article must be approved by the city and the county. 
(Code 1959, § 21-4; Code 1981, § 7-1004; Ord. No. 98-6-5, § I, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 2015-04-06, § I, 4-27-15) 
Sec. 15-56. - Powers and duties; budget; fees. 
(a)  The chairperson of the authority shall preside at all meetings of the authority and shall perform such other duties as may be determined by the authority. 
(b)  The vice chairperson shall assume the duties of the chairperson in his or her absence. 
(c)  The director of parks and recreation is responsible for the general administration of the department and for carrying out the policies recommended by the authority when approved by the appropriate governing body. In conjunction with the county and city managers, the parks and recreation director shall be the agent of the Rome Floyd Parks and Recreation Authority and to that end shall supervise the operation of all the department's activities. The director shall submit a detailed report of activities and administration of the programs of the parks and recreation department to the city and county managers and to the authority at each regular meeting for the month prior to the meeting. 
(d)  The board secretary is responsible for notifying authority members and the public of all meetings. The secretary is responsible for keeping minutes of each meeting and for distributing meeting agendas, minutes and other relevant information to authority members, department staff and the public. 
(e)  The authority shall make recommendations affecting recreation policies, programs, finances, developing or closing a park facility and land acquisition related to the department's programs and policies. Such recommendations shall be forwarded to and approved by the appropriate governing body. The authority's recommendations are advisory in nature. The authority shall be responsive to the concerns and needs of the community and shall support the department to ensure that the community's needs are met. The authority shall study, review and formulate solutions to alleviate problems concerning recreational activities. They shall enlist the cooperation of community, religious, professional, civic, labor and business organizations and other identifiable groups (i.e., YMCA, Boys and Girls Club, among others) within the county in programs and campaigns devoted to the improvement of recreational opportunities. Formal recommendations of the authority shall be communicated with city and county commissions by and through the parks and recreation director. 
(f)  The authority shall work with the director each calendar year to establish an operating budget to be approved by the Floyd County Commission and accompanying capital budgets to be approved by the appropriate governing body. The authority shall advise the director who shall annually establish program participation and facility rental fees that seek to meet the overall objectives of the county and the city as well as furthering the overall mission of the authority. Within the annual budget, the authority shall endeavor to establish and manage a comprehensive scholarship program that serves to increase youth participation in all sports. 
(g)  The authority shall periodically report to the governing bodies the condition of the respective lands and capital improvements thereof and shall immediately notify such bodies of any damage thereto or condition requiring repair and make recommendations concerning such condition and/or required repairs. 
(h)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the authority from contracting with the city for the city to perform work in the recreation areas, but performance by the city shall be the subject of separate charges. 
(i)  The authority is empowered to solicit corporate financial assistance and create public foundations and friends groups to further develop parks and recreation services. All such foundations and/or other groups must be fully disclosed to and approved by the city and county before formally established by the authority board. The foundations and/or fund-raising groups shall be created and operated as required by Georgia law. 
(j)  Meetings. 
(1)  Regular monthly meetings of the Rome-Floyd Parks and Recreation Authority shall be held at a time and place agreed upon by the majority of the membership and shall not conflict with city or county meeting schedules. 
(2)  Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or upon written request from a majority of the body with a minimum 48-hour public notice, but such meetings may not conflict with city or county commission meeting schedules. 
(3)  A majority (four of the seven voting members) of the members constitute a quorum. 
(4)  In case of an expected absence from a meeting, the authority member should notify the secretary and director. 
(5)  The process for conducting meetings will adhere to Roberts Rules of Order. The authority chairperson and the director shall endeavor to create a meeting agenda and distribute it in advance to all authority members, at least 24-hours prior to the meeting. Requests for changes or additions to the agenda should be submitted to the chairperson and/or the director. 
(6)  All meetings are open to the public. 
(7)  A joint meeting with both governing authorities shall be held no less than once annually. 
(k)  Committees. 
(1)  The chairperson may appoint such committees, standing or special, as may be authorized by the authority. 
(2)  The chairperson and the director of parks and recreation shall be ex-officio members of all committees and, as such, shall be notified of all meetings. 
(3)  An executive committee consisting of the chairperson, vice chairperson, and one other authority member appointed by the members, shall meet with the department director and other staff as needed to manage logistics, responsibilities and general activities of the authority. 
(Code 1959, § 21-5; Code 1981, § 7-1005; Ord. No. 98-6-5, § I, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 2015-04-06, § I, 4-27-15) 
Sec. 15-57. - Parks and recreation director and other employees; duties. 
(a)  The city and county managers shall appoint the parks and recreation director, but the salary thereof shall be within and consistent with the budget established and approved. 
(b)  The duties of the director shall be to plan, organize, direct and control a county wide parks and recreation program, pursuant to the policy established by this agreement and the authority and within the budget submitted to and approved by the governing bodies of the city and county. The director shall prepare and present to the county and city a suggested budget showing anticipated revenues and required expenditures. 
(c)  The director is prohibited from serving as a voting member of any citizen foundation or fund-raising group, but may serve as staff support and administrative secretary to such groups. 
(Code 1959, § 21-6; Code 1981, § 7-1006; Ord. No. 98-6-5, § I, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 2015-04-06, § I, 4-27-15) 
Sec. 15-58. - Financial participation, retention of title to land and capital improvements; diminishing yearly contribution by city. 
(a)  The city and county shall, and do, respectively retain title to all their respective lands, and capital improvements connected with, and used in and by, the parks and recreation system, and the authority shall protect and maintain said properties. The recreation buildings and park lands will be owned by the city and county either independently or jointly. Further capital improvements on real property will remain the responsibility of the respective land owner/owners. 
(b)  Since the year 1983 and for all succeeding years, the county shall finance the operating budget, and the city shall not be required to contribute. No matter which governmental entity is responsible for operation or maintenance of a particular facility, in no event shall the rights of the city or the county and their residents be abridged in any manner in the operation of the recreation program. 
(c)  Certain future projects such as CDBG projects may be procured and administered by the city or the county, in consultation with the authority. 
(d)  The authority will seek and administer grants and private assistance for capital projects. Any such capital improvement will inure to the benefit of the owner of that facility. 
(e)  Prior to the city's adding any new recreation facilities or parks which will be operated and maintained by the authority, the city shall consult with the authority and the county regarding the construction of such facility and concurrence must be granted by same in order for the project to be included in the authority's capital improvement plan. The city may add facilities unilaterally so long as the city pays the entire operating and maintenance cost of the unilaterally added facility. 
(Code 1959, § 21-7; Code 1981, § 7-1007; Ord. No. 98-6-5, § I, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 2015-04-06, § I, 4-27-15) 
Sec. 15-59. - Contract. 
The chairman and secretary of the city commission are authorized to enter into and sign on behalf of the city a contract with the county to cooperate in the establishment of the authority and a county wide recreation program; to provide for the financial participation of the city in such program; to provide for a term; to provide for termination and arbitration; to provide for assurance that the integrity of the recreation system shall be maintained; and to contain such other terms as may be necessary to carry out the intentions of the parties. 
(Code 1959, § 21-8; Code 1981, § 7-1008; Ord. No. 98-6-5, § I, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 2015-04-06, § I, 4-27-15) 
Editor's note— By contract executed on January 1, 1973, the city, the county and the "Rome-Floyd County Recreation Authority" agreed that the authority would implement and maintain a county-wide recreation program. The term of the contract is 25 years, unless it is terminated sooner. 
Secs. 15-60—15-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NATURE PARK AND WILDLIFE SANCTUARY 

Sec. 15-81. - Property designated. 
There is hereby designated a nature park and wildlife sanctuary within the city to be known as the nature park and wildlife sanctuary, which shall include the following described property: All that tract or parcel of land situated, lying and being in the first ward of the city and being that tract of land designated as the Rome Nature Park and Wildlife Sanctuary as per plat of such property recorded in the plat book on file in the office of the city manager at page 41 thereof. Specific reference is made to such plat for a more specific description of such property. 
(Code 1959, § 21-16; Code 1981, § 7-1021) 
Sec. 15-82. - Cutting trees, brush, and other flora. 
No trees, brush, or other flora shall be cut by any person upon the nature park and wildlife sanctuary without the written consent and under the direction of the public works committee of the city commission. 
(Code 1959, § 21-18; Code 1981, § 7-1023) 
Sec. 15-83. - Weapons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry upon the nature park and wildlife sanctuary land and property any firearm, air rifle or pistol or other weapon commonly used to propel any projectile or object that would cause injury to any bird or animal. 
(Code 1959, § 21-19; Code 1981, § 7-1024) 
Sec. 15-84. - Molesting flora and fauna prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to molest any of the flora or fauna located in the nature park and wildlife sanctuary. 
(Code 1959, § 21-20; Code 1981, § 7-1025) 
Secs. 15-85—15-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY AUDITORIUM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5. 

Sec. 15-111. - Responsibility for condition; liability for damage. 
Any person engaging the use of the city auditorium shall be responsible for the good condition of the auditorium, and in case of any personal or property damage, the city shall not be liable. 
(Code 1959, § 7-1; Code 1981, § 7-2001) 
Sec. 15-112. - Rental; payment in advance; forfeiture of advance payment when not used. 
When any person engages the use of the city auditorium, before the management reserves the date, one-third of the amount of the total rent shall be paid to the manager at the time it is reserved. The remaining amount shall be paid before the auditorium is turned over to him for occupancy. The amount advanced shall be forfeited if not used. 
(Code 1959, § 7-3; Code 1981, § 7-2002) 
Sec. 15-113. - Facilities included; stage help; agreement by user; fees. 
(a)  The use of the city auditorium includes furnishing of air conditioning, heat, water, lights and janitorial service. All stage help shall be hired or furnished by those using the auditorium. 
(b)  Persons engaging the use of the auditorium shall abide by the rules and regulations pertaining to its use and shall execute such agreement as may be required by the city manager or his designated agent. 
(c)  The classification of uses and prices therefor shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1981, § 7-2003) 
Secs. 15-114—15-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONDUCT IN PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 93-7-1, §§ II—XXVI, adopted July 6, 1993, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. IV, §§ 15-131—15-155, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 15-131. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide rules and regulations for the use of, and conduct in, the public parks and recreation areas ("recreation facilities" or "recreation facility") of the city. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § II, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 94-4-1, § I, 4-4-94) 
Sec. 15-132. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply in all recreation facilities within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § III, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-133. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by any authorized law enforcement officer of the city or by recreation facilities employees. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § IV, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-134. - Compliance with rules and regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any rules or regulations relating to the use of recreation facilities where such rules and regulations have been approved and adopted. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or attempt to use any of the property or equipment within a recreation facility except during the hours and in accordance with the rules and regulations governing same. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § V, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-135. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter on the grounds, streets, sidewalks, fountains, ponds, lakes, swimming pools, streams or other bodies of water in any recreation facility, except within public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of a recreation facility. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be removed from the park by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § VI, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-136. - Weapons. 
Except for the possession of firearms as may be allowed by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person to bring into, or have in such person's possession in, any recreation facility any weapon; or to shoot, use, carry or employ any weapon or similar device in a recreation facility. Official starters, at authorized track and field events, are excepted from this restriction. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § VII, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 2007-10-8, § I, 10-15-07) 
Sec. 15-137. - Explosives and fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in such person's possession, or set off, any fireworks. Permission may be given for conducting properly supervised fireworks at designated park areas provided such person first obtains a permit from the city and complies with all applicable state laws. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § VIII, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-138. - Throwing objects. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or propel any stone or missile at any person or at any public or private building or equipment in a recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § IX, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-139. - Annoying noise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to whistle, hiss or holler at another person in a boisterous unbecoming or erring manner or make any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of other persons in a recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § X, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-140. - Profanity; disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use profanity or profane language, engage in threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace in a recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XI, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-141. - Fires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build a fire in a recreation facility except in designated areas which are clearly marked. Any fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent person from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. No person shall allow the flame(s) of a fire to exceed five feet in height from the ground. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XII, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-142. - Damaging vegetation. 
It shall be unlawful for person to cut trees, tree limbs, shrubbery, flowers or other vegetation or dig up or damage trees, flowers, shrubbery or other vegetation in a recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XIII, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-143. - Damaging structures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mark, deface, disfigure, damage, displace or remove any building, tables, benches, grills, water lines, signs, markers, equipment or other property whatsoever in a recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XIV, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-144. - Alcoholic beverages and controlled dangerous substances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or drink alcoholic beverages in any recreation facility, except in accordance with section 14-3(3) of this Code. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any controlled dangerous substance, or use the same at any time, or be under the influence of any controlled dangerous substance at any recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XV, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-145. - Vehicle use—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in a recreation facility except on roadways or paths constructed, designated and maintained for vehicular traffic. It shall also be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in areas designated as "restricted." Recreation facility employees whose duties require them to drive maintenance vehicles and equipment shall be exempt from the limitations set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XVI, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-146. - Same—Bicycles. 
In a recreational facility, it shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle in densely occupied public areas or without reasonable regard to the safety of others. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XVII, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-147. - Same—Parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in a recreation facility except in those areas designated by appropriate signs as vehicle parking areas. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park in a recreation area if the owner of the vehicle is not utilizing the recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XVIII, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-148. - Same—Hours restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle in or on a recreation facility or park or attempt to park a vehicle on any of the streets, avenues or parking areas or at any location within a recreation facility between dusk and dawn unless specifically authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XIX, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 94-4-1, § II, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 2008-7-2, § I, 7-7-08) 
Sec. 15-149. - Hours open to public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, unless attending or participating in organized and permitted activities, to enter or be within a recreation facility (except the Barron Stadium Complex and the boat ramps at Heritage Park) between dusk and dawn. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XX, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 94-4-1, § III, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 2008-7-2, § I, 7-7-08) 
Sec. 15-150. - Commercial activity restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any merchandise or operate or attempt to operate a concession or engage in any commercial activity in a recreation facility without written authorization. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XXI, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-151. - Picnics. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to hold a picnic in a recreation facility except in areas set aside or specifically designated as picnic areas. A permit must be secured for any picnic with more than 20 participants. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XXII, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-152. - Swimming regulated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person not to leave a swimming area when so directed by a lifeguard on duty or not to cease any activity which would be hazardous to others when so directed by a lifeguard or other official. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity within a swimming area that could cause injury to any person in or near the swimming facility. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XXIII, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-153. - Interference with use. 
(a)  The public parks and recreation areas of the city are public forums generally open for assembly, communication, and debate. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person using a park during a permitted outdoor festival, a permitted assembly, a special event, or during normal park use to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  Disrupt or intentionally interfere with the operation of a festival, an assembly, special event, or normal park use. 
(2)  Block the ingress or egress to the designated area of a festival, an assembly, a special event, or block ingress or egress to or from a park. 
(3)  Unreasonably block the view of attendees of a festival, an assembly, a special event, or normal park use. 
(4)  Engage in any activity within a public park or recreation facility that could reasonably cause injury or violence to other persons. 
(c)  The expression of public opinion, as well as assembly, communication, and debate for that purpose, not in contravention with other laws, shall not be deemed to interfere with the use of the recreation facility by other persons. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XXIV, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 03-7-2, § I, 7-7-03; Ord. No. 05-6-1, § I, 6-6-05) 
Sec. 15-154. - Ejection from recreation facility of persons causing disturbances [who] are violating the law. 
Any person causing a disturbance or engaging in any activity which shall unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of the recreation facility by citizens or any person violating any ordinance of the city or law of the state shall leave the recreation facility upon notification by any authorized recreation employee or law enforcement officer, and shall not return to such recreation area for a period of at least 24 hours, or as directed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XXV, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 15-155. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-9, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)  If a person does all of the following, the penalties for the underlying violation may be increased by the municipal court to the limits of the jurisdiction thereof: 
(1)  Violates a provision hereof relating to "weapons," "explosives and fireworks," "throwing objects," "annoying noise," "profanity, disorderly conduct," or "interference with use." 
(2)  Intentionally selects the person against whom the violation under subsection (1) is committed or selects the property which is damaged or otherwise affected by the violation under subsection (1) because of the race, religion, color, disability, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry of that person or the owner or occupant of that property. 
(3)  This section provides for the enhancement of the penalties applicable for the underlying violation, and the court must specifically make a finding as to all the issues specified in subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 93-7-1, § XXVI, 7-6-93) 
Chapter 16 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; standing committees of city commission, § 2-51; certain boards designated, § 2-78; buildings, ch. 5; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; parks, recreation and cultural affairs, ch. 15; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; subdivisions, ch. 21; utilities, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 23. 
Related law references— Rome-Floyd County Development Authority, art. I; Rome-Floyd County Industrial Development Authority, art. II. 
State Constitution reference— Planning and zoning, art. IX, § II, par. IV; development authorities, art. IX, § VI, par. III. 
State Law reference— Urban redevelopment, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; department of community affairs, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-7-2, § III, adopted July 16, 2001, repealed §§ 16-31—16-35 in their entirety. Formerly said sections pertained to definitions; created; composition, terms of members, appointment of successors, filling of vacancies, removal, service without compensation; organization, rules, staff, finances and the powers and duties, respectively, as related to the Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission. The user of this Code is directed to appendix B for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 16-31—16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COOSA VALLEY REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT CENTER[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 16-51—16-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD 

Sec. 16-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board means the board of the Coosa Valley Regional Development Center. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-62. - Membership. 
Membership on the board of the Coosa Valley Regional Development Center shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 50-8-34. 
(Code 1959, § 2-7; Code 1981, § 8-1011(a)) 
Sec. 16-63. - Organization; rules; staff; finances. 
The board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from among its appointive members. The term of office of the chairman and vice-chairman shall be for one year or until reelected or their successors are elected. The board shall appoint a secretary who may be an employee of the board. The board shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the chairman or board may determine, shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. The board may appoint employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work. In the performance of its duties, the board may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state or local public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations, may spend these funds, and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. It may make expenditures for the purchase of required equipment and supplies. The expenditures of the board, exclusive of gifts to the board and contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the participating governing authorities. 
(Code 1959, § 2-7; Code 1981, § 8-1011(c)) 
Sec. 16-64. - Powers and duties. 
The board shall have the powers and duties described in O.C.G.A. § 50-8-35. 
(Code 1959, § 2-7; Code 1981, § 8-1011(d)) 
Sec. 16-65. - Terms of office. 
The term of office for all members of the board shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 50-8-34. A vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the persons making the appointment which has become vacant. The appointing authority shall also have the power to remove any member it may appoint for cause, on written charges, after public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1959, § 2-7; Code 1981, § 8-1011(b)) 
Secs. 16-66—16-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - APPLICATION OF BUILDING AND FIRE SAFETY CODES TO EXISTING BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5; fire prevention code generally, § 9-101. 

Sec. 16-86. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building system means any utility, mechanical, electrical, structural, egress or fire protection/safety system. 
Enforcement authorities means the building inspector and the fire marshal. 
Existing building or structure means any completed building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9003) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-87. - Purposes; intent. 
(a)  General purposes. It is a purpose of this article to influence the upgrading of and the continuing productive use of existing buildings throughout the city and to provide guidance to code enforcement authorities and the citizens of the city as to techniques of acceptable practices which may be used to assess the acceptability of various methods of meeting the purposes and intents of any local ordinance, rule, regulation, code or standard applicable to existing buildings in the city. It is a further purpose of this article to establish the recommended minimum levels of compliance for existing buildings deemed to be reasonable, realistic and practical to secure the safety, health and welfare of the public. 
(b)  General intent. It is the intent of this article to permit the repair, alteration, expansion of or the change of use or occupancy of existing buildings without requiring the entire building or structure to be brought into total compliance with requirements for new construction, where such can be accomplished while providing reasonable, realistic, and practical public health, safety, and general welfare regulations in the judgment of the fire marshal relative to fire protection and life safety from fire consideration and in the judgment of the building inspector relative to other provisions of codes and standards relative to building safety. 
(c)  New construction regulations inapplicable. The provisions of this article shall not be construed as applying to the requirements of any state law or local ordinance, or any state or local rule, regulation, code, or standard, that applies solely to new construction. 
(d)  Historic preservation; revitalization. It is a further purpose of this article to encourage the revitalization of existing buildings throughout the city and to encourage the restoration and preservation of buildings and structures deemed or classified to be historic in total or in part; provided, however, such revitalization, restoration, and preservation efforts shall provide for the upgrading of the safety features of the building or structure to provide a reasonable, realistic and practical level of safety of public and surrounding property. 
(e)  Compliance alternatives. It is recognized by this article that various model rules, regulations, codes and standards adopted or enacted by state or local governing bodies may contain vague and/or very restrictive or impractical provisions relating to existing buildings and structures. It is recognized that such rules, regulations, codes and standards generally authorize code enforcement authorities to modify various provisions of such rules, regulations, codes or standards when alternative safeguards deemed acceptable to such authorities are provided. It is a primary purpose of this article to provide more specific guidance regarding acceptable alternative solutions or compliance alternatives which may be approved by code enforcement authorities of the city so as to reduce the burden on such authorities in determining what an acceptable alternative to a given requirement could be in a given situation. It is intended that this article should encourage enforcement authorities to utilize the compliance alternative concepts set forth by this article wherever practical, reasonable and realistic so as to permit the safe continued use of existing buildings and structures without overly restrictive burdens on building owners and/or occupants. 
(f)  Analysis and compliance techniques. It is an intent of this article to demonstrate techniques of analysis and compliance with state or local rules, regulations, codes and standards applicable to the repair, alteration, addition or change of use or occupancy of existing buildings. 
(g)  Provisions not mandatory. It is not mandatory or binding on code enforcement authorities of the city to utilize any or all of the provisions of this article relative to compliance alternatives; however, such authorities are authorized to apply the applicable provisions of this article to any existing building whenever it is determined there is the need to apply compliance alternatives to the provisions of the rules, regulations, codes or standards they are empowered to interpret, apply and/or enforce under authority of any local ordinance. This article is intended as a tool for the use of local code enforcement authorities as they deem appropriate in attempting to resolve problems encountered in attempting to enforce codes and standards with regards to existing buildings and structures. 
(h)  Consulting board of adjustments and appeals. The fire marshal and/or the building inspector are authorized to approve compliance alternatives to the provisions of rules, regulations, codes or standards they are authorized to enforce without the review of and approval of the board of adjustments and appeals as established by the adopted building code; provided, however, such board may be consulted regarding the reasonableness of a compliance alternative under consideration by an enforcement authority. Should a person not agree with the decision of the enforcement authority regarding a compliance alternative, the person may appeal the decision to the board of adjustments and appeals as provided by the specific code being applied. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9001) 
Sec. 16-88. - Statement of concept. 
The provisions of this article authorize the local code enforcement authorities to approve the repair, alteration, addition or change of use or occupancy of existing buildings without total compliance with local rules, regulations, codes or standards for new construction under the following general conditions: 
(1)  All noted conditions hazardous to life should be eliminated in a reasonable, realistic and practical manner. 
(2)  The existing building would become the minimum performance standard from which to work. 
(3)  The degree of compliance of the building after changes must not be below that before the changes. Nothing in this article shall prohibit compliance with requirements more stringent than those provided in this article or with other rules, regulations, codes or standards. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9002) 
Sec. 16-89. - Implementation. 
(a)  Framework. Implementation of this article in accordance with sections 16-87 and 16-88 indicates the need for a framework to be established for evaluating the condition of a building; determining the potential for modification; and establishing the acceptability of required or proposed changes. 
(b)  Evaluation of existing buildings. Evaluation of existing conditions in a structure is needed to determine the existence of any hazardous conditions which must be eliminated and to provide a basis for evaluating the impact of the proposed changes on the performance of the building. Subsections (c) through (h) of this section may be used for determining the condition of the structure; however, the provisions of subsections (c) through (h) are not necessarily all inclusive and the use of other methods or procedures are not precluded by this chapter. 
(c)  Available documentation of an existing building. Prime sources of design information for existing buildings are the architectural and engineering drawings and specifications used in the construction of the building. Although the passing of time often obscures the identities of depositories of such documents, the following are probable prospects in attempting to locate such information: 
(1)  If the building is in use, an individual responsible for its management may have retained drawings and specifications to facilitate maintenance. A building manager, resident manager, resident engineer, superintendent, plant engineer, or similar person may be the most direct contact at the building site. 
(2)  Other potential sources (especially if the building is not in use) include the original designer, architects, engineers, contractor or subcontractors. 
(3)  The building inspection department which issued the permit for construction may have documentation. 
(4)  In the case of large corporations or government agencies, a separate contracting officer may have developed a technical file on the erection of the building. 
(5)  In some cases, individual consultants are contracted to serve as clerk-of-the-works and pursue the inspection of a building project from start to finish with the keeping of a file. 
(6)  Insurance companies sometimes maintain drawings or records of their insured buildings. 
(7)  Historical or archaeological societies may have considered a building to be important enough to develop a file of documentation. 
(d)  Field surveys. Documentation may be augmented by onsite data acquired through a field survey. A detailed visual examination of the structure shall be used to confirm and/or alter documentation or other previously available information pertaining to the building. 
(e)  Testing. Testing may be used in evaluating the condition of a building or structure or parts thereof when other methods of evaluation will not suffice. Testing may be initiated voluntarily on the part of a permit applicant or may be required by the enforcement authority as deemed necessary. The costs of all such tests shall be borne by the permit applicant or building owner and should therefore be required by the enforcement authority only when other methods of evaluation prove inadequate or insufficient. Such testing should be conducted by an approved testing agency under the supervision of a Georgia registered architect or engineer. The report of the tests shall be submitted to the enforcement authority and shall include the details of test procedures, references to any accepted test standards used, the results of the tests and any conclusions drawn from the test results. 
(f)  Field tests. Both nondestructive and destructive test procedures can be applied to evaluate the condition of a building. 
(g)  Nondestructive testing. Nondestructive tests involve and include techniques where the structural integrity of the building is not affected, such as the following: 
(1)  Analyzing various portions of the building to determine dimensions, types and conditions of materials, etc. 
(2)  Portable apparatus for impact testing. 
(3)  Load application short of failure to determine capacity of materials and components. 
(4)  Magnetic methods for detecting flaws in ferrous metals. 
(5)  Proximity magnetometers (locating rebars in concrete, concealed ferrous fasteners, etc.). 
(6)  Electronic means for measuring the sonic modulus of elasticity of concrete and masonry in assessing its soundness. 
(7)  Ultrasonic transmission or reflective methods in detecting flaws in various materials. 
(8)  X-ray or infrared-ray photographic techniques used to evaluate portions of elements whose integrity is questionable. 
(h)  Destructive testing. Destructive tests involve the destructive testing of a sample of the building removed for testing (e.g., concrete core), or components of the building could be reconstructed and tested in the laboratory. 
(i)  Laboratory analysis. Various tests may be performed in the laboratory. Such tests might include the following: 
(1)  Chemical or metallurgical tests; 
(2)  Optical or electronic microscopic examinations which can help identify and evaluate the soundness of materials where decay or other molecular degradation is involved; 
(3)  Conventional laboratory tests for determining physical properties (strength, ductility, absorption, solubility, permeability, stiffness, etc.); and/or 
(4)  Testing of a scale model of the building (computer model, wind tunnel model, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9004) 
Sec. 16-90. - Evaluation of change in performance level. 
It is necessary to determine if the level of performance of the building after alteration is below that which existed before the change (refer to section 16-88). The hazard level could be increased for attributes (such as floor loads) for a given alteration. The evaluation of the change in hazard levels of each attribute can be accomplished using various tools or methods singularly or in combination as follows: 
(1)  Performance data on architectural and structural systems encountered in existing buildings can be compared to the proposed altered systems to determine if the performance is being adversely affected; 
(2)  Compliance alternatives to code noncompliance problems as set forth in various provisions of this chapter may be accepted. The alternate solutions provided in this article are not all inclusive and should not preclude consideration of other alternatives; 
(3)  Analytical methods based on good engineering practice may be used to determine changes in performance levels; and/or 
(4)  Professional judgment of the enforcement authorities based on previous experience with similar buildings, conditions or circumstances shall be used to the fullest extent possible. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9005) 
Sec. 16-91. - Compliance alternatives. 
(a)  When used. Subsections (b) through (f) of this section contain generally acceptable compliance alternatives which may be approved by enforcement authorities in the city. The alternatives are incorporated in this article for the purpose of illustrating principles which can be applied to the solution of code noncompliance problems and are not necessarily acceptable under all circumstances. It is recognized for purposes of this article that all building systems interact with each other; therefore, any consideration of compliance alternatives must take into account all existing and proposed conditions to determine their acceptability. The principles applied may be used for the solution of similar compliance problems in other buildings and occupancy classifications. The compliance alternatives are not all-inclusive and do not preclude consideration and approval of other alternatives by an enforcement authority. 
(b)  Exits generally. Compliance alternatives for an inadequate number of exits include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Provide connecting fire exit balconies acceptable to the enforcement authority between buildings; 
(2)  Provide alternate exit or egress facilities leading to safety outside the building or to a place of safe refuge in the building or an adjoining building, as acceptable to the enforcement authority; 
(3)  Provide an exterior fire escape(s) as acceptable to the enforcement authority where the providing of enclosed interior or enclosed exterior stairs is not practical, realistic or reasonable. Such may need to be provided with a swinging stair section to ground due to the need to discharge in an alley, parking lot or sidewalk; or 
(4)  Install early fire warning system and provide a second means of egress to discharge on the ground floor near an exit directly to the outside. 
(c)  Distance to exit. Compliance alternatives for excessive travel distances to an approved exit include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Install an approved smoke detection system throughout the building; 
(2)  Install an approved complete automatic sprinkler system; 
(3)  Subdivide the exit travel route with smoke stop doors acceptable to the enforcement authority; 
(4)  Increase the fire resistance rating of corridor walls and door; or 
(5)  Provide additional approved means of escape. 
(d)  Exit stairways, etc. Compliance alternatives for unenclosed or improperly enclosed exit stairways and/or vertical shafts include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Upgrade the protective enclosure with fire rated construction and firedoors; or 
(2)  Install an approved complete fire suppression system and an approved complete smoke detection alarm system. The system shall be electrically interconnected so the activation of the sprinkler system will cause the sounding of the fire alarm system. 
(e)  Fire partitions or walls. Compliance alternatives for inadequate or a total lack of fire partitions or fire separation walls may be as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Exterior openings. Compliance alternatives for a lack of required protection of openings in exterior walls where a fire exposure is a risk include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Remove existing openings and protect them with fire rated windows or doors as appropriate; 
(2)  Seal the openings with fire rated construction as approved by the enforcement authority; 
(3)  Install an approved automatic sprinkler system; or 
(4)  Provide a combination of subsections (1) and (3). 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9006) 
Sec. 16-92. - Documentation. 
Whenever action is taken on any existing building to repair, make alterations or change the use or occupancy of an existing structure and when such action proposes the use of compliance alternatives, the enforcement authority shall ensure that at least one copy of the accepted compliance alternatives approved including applicable plans, test data, or other data submitted for evaluation shall be maintained on file in the office of the local enforcement authority. If the structure also falls under the jurisdiction of a state level enforcement authority, at least one copy of the data shall be provided for that authority. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9007) 
Sec. 16-93. - Jurisdiction. 
Where an existing building or structure falls within the jurisdiction of both state and local enforcement authorities, the final authority for approval of any compliance alternatives shall rest with the state authority; provided, however, the local fire and building authorities must agree in writing with any compliance alternative even though such may be approved by the state authority. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9008) 
Sec. 16-94. - Additions. 
Additions to an existing building shall comply with the applicable requirements of state and/or local laws, rules, regulations, codes and standards for new construction. Where it is practical, reasonable and realistic, the existing portion of the building shall also be brought into compliance with such requirements; however, where such compliance for new construction in the existing portion is not practical, reasonable or realistic, the new addition shall be separated from the existing portion by at least a two-hour fire wall with openings therein properly protected or the existing building and the new addition shall be protected completely by an approved automatic sprinkler system, or the existing portion shall be made as safe as practical, reasonable and realistic through the elimination of hazardous conditions and the appropriate application of compliance alternatives as set forth in other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9009) 
Sec. 16-95. - Hazards to life. 
For the purpose of this article the conditions or defects described in this section found to exist in any existing building wherever located shall be deemed hazardous and shall be ordered to be corrected by the appropriate enforcement authority. 
(1)  Structural. Any building or structure or portion thereof which is in imminent danger of collapse because of, but not limited to, the following factors: 
a.  Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; 
b.  Faulty structural design and/or construction; 
c.  The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; and/or 
d.  The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of the foundation. 
(2)  Number of exits. Less than two approved independent, remote, and properly protected exitways serving every story of a building, except where a single exitway is permitted by the applicable state or local fire or building code or life safety code. 
(3)  Capacity of exits. Any required door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other required means of egress which is not of sufficient capacity to provide for the population of the portions of the building served and which is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of egress to a place of safety. 
(4)  Exit identification. The lack of adequate identification of exits and routes to reach exits which are not obvious. 
(5)  Means of egress lighting. The lack of minimal realistic illumination of exits and routes to reach exits. This includes the lack of emergency lighting which would be required for the building use by applicable state or local regulations, codes, or standards. 
(6)  Fire alarm systems. The lack of an approved fire alerting system for the building which would be required for the building use by applicable state or local regulations, codes, or standards. 
(7)  Enclosure of stairways. The existence of open or improperly protected stairways or other vertical openings not permitted by applicable state or local regulations, codes, or standards. 
(8)  Protection of exit corridors. The lack of proper protection of corridors from use areas where such corridors must be used to reach exits and such protection is required by state or local regulations, codes, or standards. 
(9)  Protection of hazardous areas. The lack of separation of hazardous locations within a building from exits and other use areas, or the lack of alternative protection for such hazardous areas as provided for in state or local regulations, codes, or standards. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9010) 
Sec. 16-96. - Minor alterations; conformance of new buildings to applicable codes. 
Minor alterations or repairs to an existing building which do not adversely affect the performance or safety of the building may be made with the same or like materials. Any new building system installed in an existing building shall conform to applicable codes for new construction to the fullest extent reasonably and realistically physically practical as approved by the enforcement authorities. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9011) 
Sec. 16-97. - Continuation of existing use or occupancy. 
The legal use and occupancy of any building or structure may be continued without change, except as may be provided otherwise by this article or as may be legally provided for by any applicable state law or local ordinance, rule, regulation, code, or standard. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9012) 
Sec. 16-98. - Total change in building use or occupancy. 
A total change in the use or occupancy of an existing building shall not be made unless such building is made to comply with the requirements of the applicable state and local rules, regulations, codes, and standards for the new use or occupancy; provided, however, the compliance alternative provisions of this article may be utilized where total or strict compliance with applicable state or local rules, regulations, codes, or standards is not realistic, reasonable or practical and where permitted by the state authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9013) 
Sec. 16-99. - Partial change in building use or occupancy. 
(a)  If a portion of a building is changed to a new use or occupancy, and that portion is separated from the remainder of the building with vertical and/or horizontal fire separations complying with applicable state or local rules, regulations, codes, or standards, or with approval compliance alternatives, then the portion changed shall be made to comply to the applicable requirements for the new use or occupancy to the extent noted in section 16-97. 
(b)  If a portion of the building is changed to a new use or occupancy, and that portion is not separated from the remainder of the building as noted in subsection (a), then the provisions of the applicable state and local rules, regulations, codes, and standards applying to each use or occupancy of the building shall apply to the entire building to the extent noted in section 16-97; provided, however, if there are conflicting provisions in requirements for the various uses or occupancies, the requirements securing the greater public safety shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9014) 
Sec. 16-100. - Increase in floor load. 
Any proposed change in the use or occupancy of an existing building or portion thereof which could increase the floor loading shall be investigated by a Georgia registered structural engineer when deemed necessary by the building inspector to determine the adequacy of the existing floor system to support the increased loads. If the existing floor system is found to be inadequate, it shall be modified to support the increased loads, or the proposed allowable floor loading shall be reduced by and posted by the appropriate enforcement authority. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9015) 
Sec. 16-101. - Public education. 
The bureau of fire prevention and community emergency education shall incorporate the provisions of this article into public education programs for local citizens or others with an interest in building revitalization, restoration or general fire safety improvements. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9016) 
Sec. 16-102. - Immunity from liability. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to constitute a waiver of the immunity of the city in the carrying out of the provisions of this article. No action shall be maintained against an elected officer or an employee of the city for damages sustained as a result of any fire or hazard covered by this article by reason of inspection or other action taken or not taken pursuant to this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any property owner or lessee or person in charge thereof from any legal duty, obligation, or liability incident to the ownership, maintenance or use of such property. 
(Ord. No. 83-4-5, § 1, 4-19-83; Code 1981, § 8-9017) 
Secs. 16-103—16-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANTS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Street trees in subdivisions, § 21-136. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11002, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11002) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-132. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the rights-of-way of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11001, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11001) 
Sec. 16-133. - Street tree species to be planted. 
The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the city. It is a suggested list only and is not to be considered all inclusive. 

 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11007, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11007 
Sec. 16-134. - Spacing. 
The spacing of street trees shall be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 16-133, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect or the tree board. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11008, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11008) 
Sec. 16-135. - Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
(a)  The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 16-133, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; large trees, four feet. 
(b)  No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet to any fireplug. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11009, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11009) 
Sec. 16-136. - Street tree spacing from utility lines. 
No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in section 16-133 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11010, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11010) 
Sec. 16-137. - Public tree care. 
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electrical power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners, providing the selection and location of such trees is in accordance with sections 16-133 through 16-139. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11011, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11011) 
Sec. 16-138. - Tree topping. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Topping means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this article at the determination of the tree board. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11012, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11012) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-139. - Pruning; corner clearance. 
(a)  Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city may prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Such owner shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or traffic sign. 
(b)  All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11013, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11013) 
Sec. 16-140. - Arborist's license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street trees or park trees within the city without first obtaining a city business license. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11015, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11015) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 11. 
Sec. 16-141. - Penalty. 
Any violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11017, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11017) 
Secs. 16-142—16-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 16-166. - Established. 
There is hereby created and established a city tree board within the city. This board shall consist of five members appointed by the city commission, three members of which shall be members of the community development and services committee of the city commission. The board shall operate under the auspices of the community development and services committee. All members of this board shall be residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11003, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11003) 
Sec. 16-167. - Term of office. 
The term of office of the five persons to be appointed by the city commission under this division shall be for four years. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11004, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11004) 
Sec. 16-168. - Compensation. 
Members of the tree board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11005, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11005) 
Sec. 16-169. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the tree board to study, investigate, counsel, develop, and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the city commission and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city. The tree board, when requested by the city commission, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
(b)  The tree board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11006, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11006) 
Sec. 16-170. - Interference with board. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11014, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11014) 
Sec. 16-171. - Review by city commission. 
The city commission shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the tree board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the tree board to the city commission, which may hear the matter and make the final decision. 
(Ord. No. 90-5-4, § 8-11016, 5-21-90; Code 1981, § 8-11016) 
Secs. 16-172—16-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-7-2, § III, adopted July 16, 2001, repealed §§ 16-201—16-205, 16-226—16-229, 16-251—16-254, 16-276—16-278 in their entirety. Formerly said sections pertained to definitions; purpose; conflicting ordinances; applicability, exemptions; variance and waiver procedure; review and approval authority; stormwater management plan—Minimum requirements; same—Completed plan; minimum design criteria; performance bond; inspection; enforcement; maintenance responsibility; bond forfeitures; prosecution by the city and violations, respectively, as they pertained to stormwater management. The user of this Code is directed to appendix B for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 16-201—16-278. - Reserved. 
Chapter 17 - POLICE[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; city divisions and departments, § 2-2; standing committees of city commission, § 2-51; entertainment at pouring outlets, § 3-278; permit for wild animal, § 4-63; emergency management, ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; regulation of peddlers, § 11-198; regulation of itinerant vendors, § 11-262; dispersing persons obstructing streets, § 11-509; standards for issuance of parade permit, § 11-563; duties of police department with respect to traffic, § 12-66 et seq.; arrest for motor vehicle violations, § 12-126 et seq.; municipal court, ch. 13; enforcement of solid waste chapter, § 19-2; purposes of zoning chapter, § 23-3. 
State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering of law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; arrest, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-1 et seq.; law enforcement officers and agencies, O.C.G.A. tit. 35. 

Sec. 17-1. - Police department. 
The police department shall be composed of the chief of police and any police officers or other employees as may be necessary. The supervision and control of the department is vested in the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 4-1001) 
Sec. 17-2. - Chief of police. 
The chief of police, or police department personnel under the chief's direction, shall: 
(1)  Maintain the peace, good order and tranquility of the city by arrest and prosecution for the violation of any city ordinance or state or federal law. 
(2)  Enforce all regulations of the police department and administrative directives of the city manager. 
(3)  Enforce all laws and regulations pertaining to traffic as set out in section 12-66. 
(4)  Protect the rights of persons and property. 
(5)  Guard the public health. 
(6)  Provide police assistance at fires in the city and protect city firefighters thereat under the supervision of the fire chief or other proper officer of the fire department. 
(7)  Issue and serve summons for violation of any laws or ordinances and serve all processes, executions, attachments and the like of the chief of police, the secretary, the municipal court, or the city commission. 
(8)  Maintain records of the name, date of arrest, offense, and name of the arresting officer or other arresting person of each person arrested and taken into custody. 
(9)  Maintain records of the name, assignments, residence, telephone number, date of appointment, and general conduct record of each police officer. 
(10)  Assume the fiscal responsibility for the police department. 
(11)  Administer the Oath of Office to sworn law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1981, § 4-1002; Ord. No. 2008-6-2, § I, 6-16-08) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 9. 
Chapter 18 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-9-10, §§ I(Exh. A) and 2, adopted Sept. 20, 2004, amended ch. 18 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said chapter pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Code 1981, §§ 8-3001—8-3009, as amended. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of repeal and inclusion. 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention, ch. 10; parks, recreation and cultural affairs, ch. 15; planning and development, ch. 16; purpose of stormwater management regulations, § 16-202; development plans for subdivisions, § 21-57; procedures for approval of private subdivision developments, § 23-104. 
State Law reference— Control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as "the City of Rome Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2010-9-1, § I, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" ("Manual") published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, at a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requires in subsection 18-4(c) of this chapter. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenway: An area along the course of certain locally designated state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, or which may contain limited minor land disturbances such as trails and picnic areas. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 18-3(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Major river corridors: The portions of the Coosa, Etowah and Oostanaula Rivers, flowing through the City of Rome and Floyd County. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (a) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (b) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharge into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or Phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contains in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" ("Manual") published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Qualified personnel: Any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
River tributary corridors: All portions of Horseleg Creek, Silver Creek, Armuchee Creek, Dry Creek, Big Cedar Creek, Johns Creek, and Dykes Creek flowing through the City of Rome and Floyd County. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating, or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are rip rap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Unified Land Development Code: An ordinance regulating the use of land, the location and use of buildings and other site improvements, and the construction of public facilities and private improvements related to the development of land, known as and may be cited as the "Unified Land Development Code of Floyd County and City of Rome, Georgia." 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-9-1, § II, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 2017-2-1, § I, 2-27-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 18-4 of this chapter and this paragraph. The applicant for such construction shall be required to complete a standard one- and two-family erosion control plan provided by the building inspection department. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 18-4 of this chapter and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 18-4(c)(15) and (16) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority. The local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2010-9-1, § III, 9-20-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
Sec. 18-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive oil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 18-4(b) and (c) of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections 18-4(b) and (c) of this chapter shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection (b) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (c)(16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinance, or resolution adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, at a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 19-4(b)(2) of this chapter; 
(15)  A greenway is hereby established to include all lands within 100 feet of each major river and 40 feet of each river tributary, inclusive any islands, as measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the river or tributary bank. No land may be used, and no vegetation shall be disturbed within the greenway by building construction, development activity, installation of septic tanks or septic drain fields, the handling of hazardous waste or for any other purposes except for the following permitted uses: 
a.  Land uses that existed prior to the adoption of the Rome/Floyd County Unified Land Development Code. 
b.  A single-family dwelling, provided that: 
1.  Each dwelling shall be located on a lot having an area of at least two acres, not including any area that lies between the banks of the protected area. 
2.  Only one dwelling is located on the lot. 
3.  No septic tank drainfield may be located within the River Corridor Greenway. 
(16)  Except as provided in paragraphs (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed ; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The Director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
c.  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code Section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code Section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
d.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
e.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
f.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the Division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 18-4(b) and (c) of this chapter. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-9-1, § IV, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 2017-2-1, § I, 2-27-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-9-1, § IV, adopted Sept. 20, 2010, amended § 18-4 title to read as herein set out. Former § 18-4 title pertained to minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6. 
Sec. 18-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planner and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Rome without first obtaining a permit from the Environmental Compliance Section of the Rome/Floyd County Inspection Department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Rome/Floyd County Inspection Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 18-5(c) of this chapter. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 18-4(b) and (c) of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan, in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  A fee, as established by the City of Rome Commission, and which may be modified from time to time by their action, shall be collected prior to the issuance of the land development activity permit. 
(4)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 18-4(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 18-5(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(6)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, of this chapter section, or of the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not comply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 18-4(b) and (c) of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections of any land-disturbing activity shall meet the requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan. 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  Maintenance statement. "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." 
(3)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable, but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsections 18-4(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 18-5(b)(5)b. are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2010-9-1, § V, 9-20-10) 
State Law reference— Requirement of permit, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7; applications for permits, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-9. 
Sec. 18-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The Environmental Compliance Section of the Rome/Floyd County Inspection Department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The Rome/Floyd Inspection Department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission, or both, shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review in conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2010-9-1, § VI, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 18-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be served with a summons to appear in the Rome Municipal Environmental Court and may be subject to a monetary penalty of no less than $500.00 but not to exceed $2,500.00. Each day during which permit violations or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation of this chapter. Persons found in violation of any part of this chapter may be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the Director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. When violations occur involving the discharge of significant amounts of sediment or other pollutants as defined in the state general permit, a summons to appear in the Rome Municipal Environmental Court shall be served upon the operator/owner or person responsible for the site from which significant sediment or other pollutants were discharged. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 18-5(b)(5)b. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $500.00, but not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty of not less than $500.00, but not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations of no less than $500.00 and no more than $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-9-1, § VII, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 18-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection of any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement in the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiples sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2010-9-1, § VIII, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 18-9. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment, and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit a hearing before the Rome City Commission within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Floyd County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2010-9-1, § IX, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 18-10. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the 9th day of September, 2004. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not effect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2010-9-1, § X, 9-20-10) 
Chapter 19 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Purchase of land outside city limits, § 17-2. 
Cross reference— City divisions and departments, § 2-2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 11; utilities, ch. 22; mobile home park permit, § 23-136; standards for mobile home parks, § 23-139. 
State Law reference— Placing waste materials in cave or sinkhole, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-145; waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-1 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; securing loads on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cart means a wheeled container provided by the City of Rome to store and transport solid waste to the street for collection. 
Commercial hauler means any person who collects and/or transports solid waste for a fee, as a business, or as an adjunct to a business. 
Commercial wastes means all waste byproducts of manufacturing or commercial establishments, cinders and ashes from commercial boilers, and cardboard and wooden boxes, crates and barrels. 
Construction and demolition debris means waste consisting of building materials, including but not limited to brick, lumber, glass, roofing material, flooring or concrete, which resulted from a construction, remodeling, or demolition project. 
Director of the solid waste collections department means the director of the solid waste collections department of the city or his authorized representative. 
Director of the solid waste processing and disposal department means the director of the solid waste processing and disposal department of the city or his authorized representative. 
Garbage means domestic wastes composed of meat, vegetable, and fruit scraps, cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, rags, ashes, and other such waste matter normally to be disposed of from residences, churches, schools, small business establishments, and similar places. Animal, fowl, and fish entrails, bones, and carcasses, whether in whole or in part, from business establishments such as slaughterhouses and meat and fish markets shall not be considered as "garbage" but as other wastes. 
Litter means garbage, trash, commercial wastes, and other wastes as defined in this section which are scattered about or accumulated in an untidy manner. "Litter" also means any act which constitutes a violation of section 19-51. 
Other wastes means animal, fowl, and fish excrement, entrails, bones, carcasses, in whole or in part, and dead animals. 
Recyclable materials means items authorized by the solid waste collections department director for collection at the curb by the city, such as #1 and #2 plastics, paperboard, cardboard, junk mail, magazines, newspaper, books, aluminum and steel cans. 
Scavenger means any person who salvages or collects for resale or use, any garbage, paper, cardboard, boxes, crates or other wastes which are being or are to be disposed of from any residence or establishment where people reside, congregate, or are employed. 
Solid waste means garbage, trash, litter, stumps, tires, yard waste, recyclable materials or other non-liquid waste, or a combination thereof. 
Stump means the lower portion of the trunk of a tree or shrub eight inches in diameter, or larger, and including portions of the root system. 
Tire means any tire or tire carcass that has not been shredded, or cut into portions less than half its original size. 
Trash means junk, discarded belongings and goods, old boards, and similar items, except yard waste and garbage. 
Yard trimmings means yard waste resulting from normal yard maintenance, such as weeds, grass and hedge trimmings, leaves, brush, pine straw, tree limbs, and similar items. 
Yard waste means debris resulting from normal yard maintenance, and trimmings such as weeds, grass and hedge trimmings, leaves, brush, pine straw, tree limbs, and similar vegetative debris. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 82-11-1, § 1, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 85-5-15, § 1, 5-30-85; Code 1981, § 5-2001; Ord. No. 96-9-1, § I, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 00-4-1, §§ I, II, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § I, 8-2-10) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; animals, ch. 4. 
Sec. 19-2. - Enforcement. 
The solid waste collections department shall be the responsible enforcement agency for gaining compliance with this chapter, including the coordination of warnings or notices of violations. Notices of violations may be issued by the heads or the designated employees of other departments, including the solid waste processing and disposal department, building inspection department, bureau of fire prevention, police department, and streets and drainage department. Notices issued by any department shall be promptly turned over to the solid waste collection department for follow-up and coordination. The notice issued shall be followed up by the solid waste collections department, and evidence of noncompliance will result in enforcement action by the solid waste collections department and/or the police department. Notices issued shall specify no less than one week for compliance. Nothing in this section shall preclude immediate enforcement by a police officer on compliant of any person or upon witnessing any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2004; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § II, 8-2-10) 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; police, ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20. 
Sec. 19-3. - Director of department—Appointment. 
The city commission hereby provides for the appointment of directors of the solid waste collections department and the solid waste processing and disposal department. These directors shall be appointed by the city manager, and such appointment shall be approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2002; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 19-4. - Same—Duties. 
(a)  The duties of the solid waste collections director shall be: to supervise the collection of all solid waste as provided in this article; to supervise solid waste collection personnel; to establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this article to the satisfaction of the city manager or his duly authorized representative; and to otherwise enforce the terms of this article. 
(b)  The duties of the solid waste processing and disposal director shall be: to supervise the operation of the municipal solid waste, inert waste, and construction and demolition waste landfills; to monitor and maintain closed landfills; to operate yard waste disposal sites; and to supervise landfill personnel to the satisfaction of the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2003; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § III, 8-2-10) 
Sec. 19-5. - Solid waste containers—Required; capacity; construction. 
Every residence or establishment where people reside, congregate or are employed shall provide sufficient solid waste containers to accommodate the accumulation of all solid wastes that will occur between normally scheduled collection events, except as allowed under section 19-10. Such containers shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Solid waste containers shall be those provided by the solid waste collection department, unless otherwise authorized by the solid waste collections director. Containers provided by the city for garbage and trash collection shall be carts with a minimum capacity of 65 gallons. Containers provided by the city for the collection of recyclable materials shall be carts with a minimum capacity of 65 gallons. Containers provided by the city for yard waste collection shall be carts with a minimum of 95 gallons. The solid waste collections director may authorize containers or bags with a capacity of 20 gallons or less for garbage and trash collection only. 
(2)  Any person placing garbage, trash or yard waste out for collection which cannot be accommodated in a single container as described in subsection 19-5(1) shall be required to obtain an additional cart or carts to increase their total container capacity to meet the sufficiency requirements of this section. No bags or unauthorized containers shall be placed on the ground or on top of the cart. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the cart from the property or location for which the city has designated its use. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface or destroy any cart or container used for the collection of solid waste. 
(5)  Establishments requiring containers with a larger capacity than those specified in subsection (1) or (2) may use metal containers, or dumpsters, specifically designed for such service as described in section 19-12. The container shall have a capacity of either four, six or eight cubic yards and shall be provided with a hinged top, receiving channels for truck lifting arms, and may be equipped with a drain hole at the bottom of the floor. Container dimensions and other specifications shall be subject to the approval of the solid waste collection director. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 90-4-4, § 1, 4-16-90; Code 1981, § 5-2005; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § IV, 8-2-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § IV, adopted Aug. 2, 2010, amended § 19-5 title to read as herein set out. Former § 19-5 title pertained to garbage containers—required; capacity; construction; sticker identification. 
Sec. 19-6. - Same—Approval by director of solid waste collections. 
The location, construction, and operation of garbage containers shall meet the approval of the solid waste collections director. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2006; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00) 
Sec. 19-7. - Disposition of garbage and trash; offense. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place garbage, trash or yard waste at the curb for collection unless it is contained in a city-provided container which meets the requirements of section 19-5, except as provided in subsection 19-10(h) for unusually large items. Subject to subsection 19-10(h), any garbage, yard waste or other waste defined in this chapter left at the curb shall be deemed waste material and shall, subject to the limitations of this chapter, be picked up by the city at a charge to the property owner. Those owners exceeding the amount or type of garbage and/or waste allowed shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to those penalties described in section 19-21. 
(b)  The solid waste collection director is authorized to furnish any person who fails to provide containers with sufficient capacity as required in section 19-5 with such additional containers as may be required to satisfy the capacity requirements. Monthly rates and/or penalties shall be applied in accordance with section 19-21. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit stacks or piles of commercial waste to obstruct drains, sidewalks, alleys, or streets. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit to spill, or to permit to remain spilled, any solid waste upon any street, sidewalk, or yard in the city. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes, trash, garbage, litter, or other solid waste that can be blown away by the wind or blown or carried away by any other force, except when in a container provided by the city which would control and prevent the blowing of such materials. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place garbage, trash, litter, or other solid waste for collection in a container owned by, or provided by the city to, another person or household without the express consent or authorization of the owner. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place at the curb for collection any construction material or debris. Disposal shall be made at the city landfill or as otherwise authorized by the solid waste processing and disposal director. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place garbage containers, trash, or yard waste, which are not intended for collection by the city, on public streets, rights-of-way, or alleys, unless otherwise authorized by the solid waste collections director. 
(i)  A fee will be applied to a customer's utility bill for noncompliance with this section as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 85-12-11, § 1, 12-16-85; Code 1981, § 5-2007; Ord. No. 00-3-1, § I, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § V, 8-2-10) 
Sec. 19-8. - Placing of containers for collection; removal after collection. 
Garbage containers shall be placed at the property front or side or any suitable location authorized by the solid waste collections director. Containers shall be placed by 7:00 a.m. unless otherwise directed and on such days as the solid waste collections director shall prescribe. When emptied by the garbage collectors, containers shall be removed from the streets and walkways to the inside or rear of the establishment or residence. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 90-4-4, § 1, 4-16-90; Code 1981, § 5-2008; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00) 
Sec. 19-9. - Garbage collection schedules. 
The solid waste collections director shall notify all persons in writing or otherwise as to changes in garbage collection schedules, and the director's office shall be prepared to furnish information, at any time during normal business hours, regarding such schedules. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 90-4-4, § 1, 4-16-90; Code 1981, § 5-2009; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00) 
Sec. 19-10. - Trash and yard waste collection. 
(a)  Trash and yard waste collections shall be at a time and in a manner prescribed by the director, provided that at no time shall trash and/or yard waste be placed in such a manner as to obstruct utters, drains, walkways, or streets. 
(b)  Yard waste shall not be placed or mixed in with municipal solid waste or other trash. Yard waste shall be sorted and stored separately for collection from any other municipal solid waste or other trash. Yard waste shall be placed for collection in containers supplied by the city solid waste collections department. All yard waste, and grass clippings in particular, that can fit into the city-provided cart(s) described in section 19-5 without exceeding its rated capacity shall be placed in the cart. 
(c)  Trash shall be placed for collection immediately adjacent to the curb on curbed streets and immediately adjacent to the roadway on uncurbed streets. Any trash that can fit into the city-provided cart(s) described in section 19-5 without exceeding its rated capacity shall be placed in the cart designated for garbage and trash collection. In no event shall trash be placed in the gutters or drainage ditches. 
(d)  Tree limbs, trunks, branches, or cuttings that cannot fit into the cart shall not exceed eight feet in length or 200 pounds in weight in the units to be handled and shall be stacked separately with the butt ends in the same direction. 
(e)  Any residence or business that places out for collection at one time more than four cubic yards or 500 pounds of trash and/or yard waste shall be charged a collection fee as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city, as provided in section 8-36. 
(f)  All yard waste sorted and stockpiled, or chipped, composted, used as mulch, or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled must be disposed in a clipping, composting, or inert landfill. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or to allow to be scattered any trash and/or yard waste placed by the street for collection. 
(h)  Property owners, business owners, and other persons shall make special arrangements with the solid waste collections department for unusually large pickups. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 82-11-1, § 1, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 90-4-4, § 1, 4-16-90; Code 1981, § 5-2010; Ord. No. 96-9-1, § II, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 00-3-2, § I, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § VI, 8-2-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § VI, adopted Aug. 2, 2010, amended § 19-10 title to read as herein set out. Former § 19-10 title pertained to trash and yard trimming collection. 
Sec. 19-11. - Disposition of garbage, trash or property by landlords. 
(a)  Garbage, trash or other solid waste originating from the property of a landlord shall be disposed in a manner consistent and in accordance with the provisions of sections 19-7 and 19-10. 
(b)  Any property, trash, belongings, or other items left on the street for more than 24 hours following an eviction shall be subject to collection for a fee. The landlord, or property owner, shall be responsible for the payment of said collection fees, which shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Ord. No. 00-9-2, § II, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 19-12. - Commercial wastes; disposition. 
(a)  Commercial wastes which cannot be placed in garbage containers as specified in subsections 19-5(1) and (2), and which amount to more than four such containers at one time, once per week, shall not be collected for disposal through the normal route service provided by the city, but shall be disposed of by persons in charge of the establishment where such wastes are created or occur, provided that such disposal shall be in a manner satisfactory to the solid waste collections director. 
(b)  Commercial wastes placed in containers as specified in subsection 19-5(5) shall be collected by special route service upon application to the solid waste collections director by the person having such waste. 
(c)  At the discretion of the director of solid waste collections, such commercial wastes as cardboard or wooden boxes, crates and barrels may be collected by city garbage trucks for disposal if such wastes are flattened and stacked or knocked down and bundled, and such stacks and bundles shall not exceed four feet in length by three feet in width, nor weight more than 50 pounds, and not more than 250 pounds of such waste shall be placed for collection at any one time without express permission from the director. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2011; Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 90-4-4, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 00-9-2, § I, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § VII, 8-2-10) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 19-11. 
Sec. 19-13. - Other wastes; disposition. 
Other wastes, as defined in section 19-1, shall be disposed of by persons in charge of the residence or establishment where such wastes are created or occur. Disposal shall be at the city landfill or as otherwise authorized by the solid waste processing and disposal director. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2012; Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 00-9-2, § I, 9-5-00) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 19-12. 
Sec. 19-14. - Lint, bandages, refuse, etc., from hospitals, clinics or undertakers' shops; disposition of same; exemptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any soiled lint, cotton, or bandages, or waste or refuse of any character whatsoever, from any hospital, sanitarium, infirmary, clinic, or undertakers' shops, whether public or private, in any manner except in accordance with Georgia law as it pertains to biomedical waste under the Rules of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. Kitchen wastes from such establishments are expressly exempt from this section. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2013; Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 00-9-2, § I, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § VIII, 8-2-10) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 19-13. 
Sec. 19-15. - Disposal; location restricted. 
Every person who disposes of any garbage, trash, or commercial or other wastes, whether required to do so by this article or otherwise, shall make such disposal at the city landfill, or otherwise as specified by the solid waste processing and disposal director. The disposal of yard waste is banned at any municipal solid waste landfill or any construction and demolition landfill. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2014; Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 96-9-1, § III, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 00-9-2, § I, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § IX, 8-2-10) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 19-14. 
Sec. 19-16. - Scavengers. 
Every scavenger shall conduct his operations in such a manner as not to hinder or interfere with garbage and trash collection and disposal by city garbage trucks. Trash, wastes, and garbage shall not be scattered by the scavenger at the place of collection or upon any street, alley, or walkway in the city, nor shall such trash, wastes, or garbage be left by the scavenger in such a condition that it may be scattered by other persons, animals or natural causes, and all scavenger trucks shall have a cover approved by the solid waste collections director. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2017; Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 00-9-2, § I, 9-5-00) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 19-15. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 11. 
Sec. 19-17. - Old furniture and appliances. 
Old furniture and appliances may be placed out for collection, provided they are placed separately from other trash. Doors must be removed from refrigerators and freezers before placing out for collection. The solid waste collections department shall not collect old appliances if they have been replaced or removed by a contractor. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2018; Ord. No. 82-11-1, § 2, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 00-9-2, § I, 9-5-00) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 19-16. 
Sec. 19-18. - Dead animals. 
Dead animals (excluding livestock) shall be collected by the solid waste collections department when placed by the streets separate from other trash. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2019; Ord. No. 82-11-1, § 2, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 00-9-2, § I, 9-5-00) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 19-17. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4. 
Sec. 19-19. - Rocks, dirt, etc. 
Rocks, dirt, concrete block, or bricks are not considered trash and shall not be collected by the solid waste collections department. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2020; Ord. No. 82-11-1, § 2, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 00-9-2, § I, 9-5-00) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 19-18. 
Sec. 19-20. - Landfill disposal fee. 
All persons shall be charged a landfill disposal fee as set forth in the fee-schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36 of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2021; Ord. No. 85-5-15, § 2, 5-30-85; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 00-9-2, § I, 9-5-00) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 19-19. 
Sec. 19-21. - Monthly collection rate and noncompliance penalties—Imposed. 
The monthly rate schedule for the collection of garbage, commercial waste, and trash within the city and penalties for noncompliance with this chapter of the Code shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36 of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2022; Ord. No. 85-12-11, § 2, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 00-9-2, § I, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § X, 8-2-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § X, adopted Aug. 2, 2010, amended § 19-21 title to read as herein set out. Former § 19-21 title pertained to monthly collection rate—imposed. 
Editor's note— Formerly § 19-20. 
Sec. 19-22. - Same—Penalty for late payment. 
A penalty shall be imposed on all accounts for garbage, commercial waste, and trash collection not paid within ten days of the date of the billing of such accounts in the percentage amount as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36 of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2023; Ord. No. 85-12-11, § 3, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 00-9-2, § I, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § XI, 8-2-10) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 19-20. 
Sec. 19-23. - Same—Water and sewer charges paid as one bill. 
Water, sewer and solid waste collection charges shall be paid as one bill. Failure to pay any such charge shall be subject to penalties and remedies as provided in section 22-328 of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2046; Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 93-10-1, § I, 10-4-93; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § III, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 00-9-2, § I, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2010-8-1, § XII, 8-2-10) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 19-22. 
Secs. 19-24—19-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CLEAN COMMUNITY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 19-51. - Depositing of litter prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent or employee, to cast, throw, sweep, sift, deposit in any manner, or permit to fall or be cast, in or upon any public way or other public place in the city or in any river, public water, drain, sewer, or receiving basin within the corporate limits of the city, any kind of garbage, trash, dirt, rubbish, litter, concrete, rocks, stagnant water, dead animals, waste article, thing, or substance whatsoever, whether liquid or solid. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent or employee, to cast, throw, sweep, sift, deposit in any manner, permit to fall, or be cast any kind of garbage, trash, dirt, rubbish, litter, waste article, thing, or substance whatsoever, whether liquid or solid, anywhere within the corporate limits of the city in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited in whole or in part by action of the sun, wind, rain, snow, water, animal, or any other such force into any public way or other public place in the city or into any river, public water, drain, sewer, or receiving basin. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to the deposit of material under a permit authorized by any ordinance of the city or to goods, wares, or merchandise deposited upon any public way or public place temporarily, in the necessary course of trade, and removed therefrom within two hours after being so deposited; or to articles or things deposited in or conducted into the city sewer system through lawful drains in accordance with the ordinances of the city relating thereto. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2031) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4. 
Sec. 19-52. - Streets and sidewalks; litter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to litter the public streets or sidewalks of the city or to keep or cause to be kept any bread boxes, returnable containers, or any similar containers on such public streets or sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 78-9, § 1, 12-5-77; Code 1981, § 5-2032) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 20. 
Sec. 19-53. - Objects in streets, alleys, sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or throw or to leave or abandon on any street, sidewalk, or alley in the city any glass bottle, or the fragments thereof, or any broken glass or crockery of any kind, nails, tacks, brickbats, or any article or object liable to injure the bare feet of children walking on the streets, sidewalks, or alleys, or to injure or puncture the tires of automobiles, motorcycles, or bicycles or the rubber tires of other vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2034) 
Sec. 19-54. - Handbills; advertising matter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place in or on any unoccupied or unattended automobile or other vehicle in the city or to otherwise distribute anywhere in the city any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard or literature of any kind; provided, however, such distribution may be permitted directly to the occupants of businesses or private residences or to the occupants of occupied vehicles in such manner as not to create a litter problem. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2035) 
Cross reference— Advertising generally, § 11-86 et seq. 
Sec. 19-55. - Trucks and automobiles; littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent or employee, to operate any vehicle upon any public street, lane, alley, park, or reserve in the city unless the cargo is in closed containers, or unless such vehicle is covered by a tarpaulin or otherwise constructed in such a manner as to prevent any part of the cargo contents from falling or being scattered upon any such public street, lane, alley, park, or reserve. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2036) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12. 
Sec. 19-56. - Areas surrounding businesses; cleanliness. 
The proprietor or person in charge of every business and commercial establishment in the city is hereby required to keep the sidewalks abutting such business, driveways, yards, and parking lots and areas clean at all times with sweepings placed in a container to prevent a violation of section 19-51. In the case of shopping centers, the owner or person in charge of a center shall be responsible for keeping parking lots, rear areas, drives, and connecting property that is under the same ownership or control clean of litter, trash, garbage, and commercial or other wastes. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2037) 
Sec. 19-57. - Providing containers. 
Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any commercial, institutional or industrial building or property shall provide adequate litter and trash containers of sizes, numbers, and types as specified by the director of the solid waste department. Such containers shall be required for shopping centers, supermarkets, convenience stores, eating establishments, service stations, business establishments, parking lots, multifamily residential buildings or complexes, churches, schools, and colleges. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2038) 
Sec. 19-58. - Excessive litter; removal; suitable preparation required. 
In order to be removed by the solid waste department, excessive litter resulting from special occasions such as holiday activities, moving, or cleanup in or around residences or businesses shall be placed in bundles weighing not more than 50 pounds each and securely tied so that such bundles are not more than four feet long and two feet by two feet. All empty cartons will be broken down and placed in bundles in accordance with such size requirements and placed at the curb for pickup. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2039) 
Sec. 19-59. - Garbage areas; clean condition. 
Every owner, occupant, or lessee of a house or building used for residence, business, or commercial purposes shall maintain garbage storage areas in a clean condition and ensure that all garbage is properly containerized as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2040) 
Sec. 19-60. - Work area; cleanliness. 
All loading and unloading operations shall be provided with adequate containers by the owner or person in charge of such operations for the deposit of litter and trash created by packing or repacking or loading or unloading operations. The owner or person in charge of the operations outlined in this section shall require persons in their employ or under their supervision to insure that all litter is placed in a proper container and the area is kept clean. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2041) 
Sec. 19-61. - Construction sites; demolition sites; cleanliness. 
(a)  The property owners and the prime contractor in charge of a construction site and/or demolition site shall furnish litter containers for litter produced by the construction and by workers. All litter from construction, demolition or related activities shall be picked up and placed in containers by the end of each workday. Provided, however, that construction material and debris which cannot be blown away by the wind or blown or carried away by any other natural force shall not be affected by this subsection until completion of the construction or demolition. 
(b)  No material shall be collected by the solid waste department resulting from construction, remodeling, or demolition of buildings, or any mixtures of trash containing building materials, including floor and carpet scraps. 
(c)  No debris from burned houses or their contents shall be put out for collection by the solid waste department. 
(d)  In order to comply with storm water quality standards established by the Clean Waters Act, all construction site operators are required to implement erosion and sedimentation controls and control waste at the construction site, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 78-9, § 2, 12-5-77; Ord. No. 82-11-1, § 1, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 90-4-4, § 1, 4-16-90; Code 1981, § 5-2042; Ord. No. 2014-4-1, § I, 4-14-14) 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5. 
Sec. 19-62. - Property owners, occupants; sidewalks. 
The owners or occupants of residential property shall keep the sidewalk in front of and/or around such property free of litter. All litter shall be placed in containers for collection by the solid waste or streets and drainage department. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2043) 
Sec. 19-63. - Removal of trapped litter. 
The owner, occupant, or lessee of all types of property shall remove all trapped litter and place same in a proper container for collection. Vacant lots, borders, parking lots, embankments, fences, walls, and sidewalks shall be kept free of litter. Parking lots of all business, commercial, and industrial occupancies shall be kept free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 78-7, § 2, 11-21-77; Code 1981, § 5-2044) 
Chapter 20 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Regulation of streets, §§ 2-10, 2-14; public improvements, § 2-15; extraterritorial condemnation, § 2-16; franchises, art. XVI. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; city divisions and departments, § 2-2; standing committees of city commission, § 2-51; buildings, ch. 5; moving structures on public streets, § 5-4; easements in cemeteries, § 6-11; use of proceeds of license tax on attorneys, § 8-167; objectives of flood damage prevention, § 10-3; advertising on sidewalks, § 11-90; peddlers, § 11-196 et seq.; public demonstrations, parades, races, § 11-476 et seq.; pickets and demonstrations, § 11-501 et seq.; parades, § 11-531 et seq.; disorderly conduct, § 14-2; conditions constituting nuisances, § 14-51; planning and development, ch. 16; enforcement of solid waste chapter, § 19-2; littering streets and sidewalks, § 19-52; subdivisions, ch. 21; streets in subdivisions, § 21-92; streets and sidewalks in subdivisions, § 21-131 et seq.; street name signs, § 21-134; utilities, ch. 22; purposes of zoning chapter, § 23-3; procedures for approval of private subdivision developments, § 23-104; mobile home park permit, § 23-136; standards for mobile home parks, § 23-139. 
State Constitution reference— Outdoor advertising devices near certain highways, art. III, § VI, par. II(a)(6). 
State Law reference— Obstruction of streets, sidewalks, etc., O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-43, 32-6-1, 36-30-10; eminent domain, O.C.G.A. tit. 22; highways, bridges and ferries, O.C.G.A. tit. 32; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; subdivisions abutting on state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.; streets and sidewalks generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; grants for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Obstructions prohibited; offensive deposits or discharges prohibited. 
No person shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed the streets, alleys, sidewalks, culverts, or ditches, nor shall any person throw or discharge anything upon them so as to render such streets, sidewalks, or other public ways offensive. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1001) 
Sec. 20-2. - Obstructing to vend or advertise merchandise prohibited. 
No auctioneer, commission merchant or other merchant shall obstruct any public street or sidewalk for the purpose of selling, vending, showing, or disposing of their wares and merchandise or of delivery of the same. Nor shall an assemblage of persons as bidders be assembled for the purpose of bidding for the same, so as to obstruct free passage on the sidewalks or streets of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 27-4; Code 1981, § 5-1002) 
Sec. 20-3. - Placing goods on sidewalk prohibited; exception. 
No person occupying any store, stall, shop, or other place of business or any residence, hotel, apartment house, or other place of residence, shall obstruct the sidewalk in front of the place so occupied, or the view of the street, to or across the sidewalk, by placing any sign, goods, or article of any kind, on or over such sidewalk; provided, however, that such person may place such goods or articles on the sidewalk for such a length of time only as may be necessary in delivering same to or from places so occupied. 
(Code 1959, § 27-5; Code 1981, § 5-1003) 
Sec. 20-4. - Encroachments upon sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make an encroachment upon or to place any obstruction in or upon any street, lane, alley or sidewalk of the city, whether the same is of a permanent or temporary nature, without first obtaining permission from the city authorities to do so. Any person making any encroachment or placing any obstruction upon the streets, lanes, alleys, or sidewalks, or causing the same to be done, shall remove the same immediately upon notice from the director of public works or the chief of police or his representative. Should such person, after notice, fail or refuse to remove the same then the city shall have the same removed and an itemized bill of the expense for removing the encroachment or obstruction shall be presented to the person placing, or causing the same to be placed, in the street, lane or sidewalk, and immediate payment of same demanded. Should any person fail or refuse to promptly pay the bill, then the secretary shall forthwith issue an execution against the person, which shall be placed in the hands of the chief of police, who shall proceed to collect the same by levy and sale, as is by law provided in the cases of tax sales, and the same when collected shall be turned into the city treasury to replace the amount expended for the removal of the encroachments or obstructions. Anyone violating this section shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-9. 
(Code 1959, § 27-7; Code 1981, § 5-1005) 
Sec. 20-5. - Utility poles. 
No public utility shall erect any telephone, telegraph, or power poles, nor string any wires, either above ground or below ground, within the city without the prior approval of the director of public works. Such utility shall, upon request of the director of public works, move and reset any poles or wires when necessary for the convenience of the city in the city's maintaining, widening, or laying out of streets. Such removal shall be at the expense of the public utility. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1006) 
Sec. 20-6. - Dirt, gravel, rocks, etc.; digging or carrying away prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or scrape up and carry away gravel, earth, dirt, rocks, or sand from any street, lane, or alley, or from the river banks of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 27-8; Code 1981, § 5-1007) 
Sec. 20-7. - Obstructing drainage or flow of water. 
No person shall, by the erection of a dam or obstruction of any kind, prevent the natural flow of water and cause the same to be dammed up or collected in pools upon any street or alley. Provided, that the provisions of this section shall not prevent owners or others from filling up lots as they may desire if sufficient drainage or water detention area is provided through or across the same for such natural flow; and provided, that the above shall not prevent the changing of the grade of any street as may be for the public interest. 
(Code 1959, § 27-11; Code 1981, § 5-1008) 
Sec. 20-8. - Shrubbery and trees—Planting in rights-of-way prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cause to be planted any trees or shrubbery upon the rights-of-way of the public streets and alleys of the city without receiving prior approval from the public works committee of the city commission. Such prohibition of the planting of trees and shrubbery applies especially to that portion of the streets which lies between the paved portion of the streets and the sidewalks. 
(Code 1959, § 27-13; Code 1981, § 5-1009) 
Sec. 20-9. - Same—Authority to permit. 
The public works committee of the city commission is hereby empowered and directed to allow the planting of trees and shrubbery and shall grant permission to so do, if, in its opinion, the planting of the trees and shrubbery shall not damage the curb and gutters, the pavement and the sewers of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 27-14; Code 1981, § 5-1010) 
Sec. 20-10. - Same—Violations; penalties therefor. 
Any person violating the terms of sections 20-8 and 20-9 shall be punished as provided in section 1-9, and the judge of the municipal court may further order such trees and shrubbery removed at the expense of the violator. Each day the trees or shrubbery remain after the direction of the judge of the municipal court shall constitute another violation of such sections. 
(Code 1959, § 27-15; Code 1981, § 5-1011) 
Sec. 20-11. - Excavations; permission required; refilling. 
Any person who may desire to excavate any street for the purpose of laying sewer, gas, or water pipes, or for any other purpose, shall first apply and obtain permission from the director of public works. Such excavation shall be made at the expense of the person making such excavation. Refilling and replacing such excavation shall be under the supervision of the director of public works and at the expense of the excavator. 
(Code 1959, § 27-16; Code 1981, § 5-1012) 
Sec. 20-12. - House numbering required; proper numbering information; numbers on houses; failure to number; penalty. 
(a)  All lots, houses, buildings, offices, and structures within the corporate limits of the city shall be properly and orderly numbered in accordance with the master plan of proper and orderly numbering in the office of the director of engineering services. 
(b)  The director of engineering services shall keep a chart showing proper street numbers and shall make available, to any person inquiring, the proper number by which a building or lot is to be designated. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every house, building, and lot within the city to have placed thereon, in a place visible from the street, figures at least 2½ inches high, showing the proper number of such house, building, or lot. 
(d)  Any person failing to so number any house, building, or lot owned or occupied by him shall be subject to penalty for violation of this section and if, after receiving notice to provide proper numbering, such person shall continue in his failure to do so, he shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 for each day, after notice, such failure continues. 
(Code 1959, § 27-18; Code 1981, § 5-1013) 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5. 
Sec. 20-13. - Driveways and private ways—New curb, guttering, and sidewalk required. 
(a)  In the construction or repair of driveways and private ways intersecting the streets of the city, the existing curb and guttering on the city street and the sidewalk, if there is a sidewalk, shall be removed in its entirety prior to the construction or repair of such driveway and private way, and a new guttering and sidewalk (if there is a sidewalk) shall be poured as an integral part of the driveway or private way. 
(b)  The installation of pipe in the gutter shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1959, § 27-21; Code 1981, § 5-1014) 
Sec. 20-14. - Same—Material for new curb, guttering, sidewalk; thickness of sidewalk. 
The new curbing and guttering and sidewalk shall be of the same material as the material removed, and the sidewalk shall be at least six inches thick. 
(Code 1959, § 27-22; Code 1981, § 5-1015) 
Sec. 20-15. - Same—Radius of curb returns on new sidewalks. 
The angle of the curb returns on the new sidewalk shall have a minimum radius of two feet with radius point being perpendicular to the existing curbline of the city street. 
(Code 1959, § 27-23; Code 1981, § 5-1016) 
Sec. 20-16. - Grade of driveways and private ways. 
The grade of driveways and private ways shall be such that motor vehicles will not drag upon being driven on and over such driveways or private ways. 
(Code 1959, § 27-24; Code 1981, § 5-1017) 
Sec. 20-17. - Construction of driveways; inspection, approval of building inspector required. 
Before the pouring, construction, and repair of any driveway, the building inspector must be notified and must make or cause to be made an inspection thereof, and the proposed improvement must receive his approval that the proposed improvement meets the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 27-25; Code 1981, § 5-1018) 
Sec. 20-18. - Mailbox regulations for residential neighborhoods. 
In order to protect the character of neighborhoods where mailboxes were traditionally mounted on the building wall or porch; and to preserve the viability of on-street parking in traditional neighborhoods, placement of mailboxes and newspaper boxes adjacent to the street is prohibited within designated local historic districts including Oakdene, Between the Rivers, East Rome (excepting the Notasulga neighborhood), College Heights, and Avenue A; along South Broad/East Main Street between the Charles Graves Bridge and Cedar Avenue; along Kingston Avenue between Calhoun Avenue and Church Street; along Calhoun Avenue between North Broad Street and North Avenue; along Maple Street between East 6th Street and East 20th Street; and along 5th Avenue between Turner McCall Boulevard and Martha Berry Boulevard. In residential neighborhoods where mailboxes are allowed to be placed adjacent to the street, the mailbox shall be placed on the same side of the street as the address being served. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10-1, § I, 10-3-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-10-1, § I, adopted Oct. 3, 2011, set out provisions that where intended to add § 20-31. Due to the current existence of a § 20-31, this section has been redesignated as § 20-18. 
Secs. 20-19—20-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HAZARDOUS TREES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-4-2, § I, adopted April 16, 2001, did not specifically amend this Code. Hence inclusion of said ordinance provisions as §§ 20-31—20-41 was at the discretion of the editor to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 20-31. - Hazardous tree ordinance. 
The purpose of this article is to exercise the police power in relation to public nuisances and abatement of such nuisances, to protect the public health, safety and welfare. In particular, it is the purpose of this article to prevent and prohibit those conditions which create and constitute safety hazards in the form of trees or other horticultural growth, and generally create a menace to the health and welfare of the public and public rights-of-way. It is necessary to regulate, prevent and prohibit hazardous trees which may constitute unsafe conditions or hazards which are potentially dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 01-4-2, § I, 4-16-01) 
Sec. 20-32. - Hazardous tree nuisance. 
The growing, maintaining, permitting or allowing the presence of a hazardous tree on any premises owned, occupied or in control of the responsible person or persons is declared to constitute a public nuisance and is unlawful, and whenever it is determined that such a condition exists upon any premises, the city may require or provide for the abatement thereof pursuant to this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 01-4-2, § I, 4-16-01) 
Sec. 20-33. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the enforcement and application of this article: 
County means Floyd County, Georgia. 
Governing body means the City Commission of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
City means the City of Rome, Georgia. 
City arborist means the public officer appointed by the City Manager of the City of Rome in charge of investigating issues concerning the existence and abatement of hazardous trees as public nuisances. 
Hazardous tree means: a) Any tree, weed, undergrowth, vegetable or horticultural growth which obstructs, overhangs, encroaches upon or in any manner interferes with the full and free use by the public of any street, sidewalk, sidewalk area or other public ways; or b) any tree, weed, undergrowth, vegetable or horticultural growth which has died or grown in any manner which would constitute a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare within the City. 
Municipal court means the Municipal Court of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
Municipal judge means the judge who presides over the Municipal Court of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgage of record of a particular piece of real property. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of real property and all individuals, associations and corporations who have interest of record in said property in the Floyd County including executors, administrators, guardians, and trustees. 
Public officers means those officers and employees of the city, county or State of Georgia whose duties include code enforcement, inspections and the preservation of public safety within the city, including, without limitation, the city manager, the assistant city manager, the city arborist, the city arborist staff, the fire chief of the City of Rome, the Floyd County Health Inspector, and the state fire marshal. 
Resident means any person residing in the City of Rome on or before the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 01-4-2, § I, 4-16-01) 
Sec. 20-34. - Jurisdiction. 
The city shall have jurisdiction to try issues concerning the existence and abatement of public nuisances in the form of hazardous trees within the geographical limits of the city in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A., chapter 2 of title 41. 
(Ord. No. 01-4-2, § I, 4-16-01) 
Sec. 20-35. - Appointment of city arborist; duties. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint a person to be known as the city arborist to investigate and abate cases concerning the existence of public nuisances in the form of hazardous trees. 
(b)  The city arborist shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To investigate the conditions existing on any private property within the city to determine if a hazardous tree exists; 
(2)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(3)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses and to receive evidence; 
(4)  To represent the city in any proceeding before the municipal court to abate a hazardous tree; 
(5)  To employ such assistance and, consistent with the procedures set forth in this Code section, adopt such means as may be necessary to effect the entire abatement of a condition determined to constitute a hazardous tree. It shall be the duty of the city arborist to proceed with due care and without unnecessary destruction of property. 
(Ord. No. 01-4-2, § I, 4-16-01) 
Sec. 20-36. - Procedure for abatement of nuisances; service. 
(a)  A proceeding to abate a hazardous tree may be commenced under this Code section by filing a complaint in the name of the city against the respondent with the city arborist, specifically setting forth therein the facts of the alleged nuisance. Except when brought in the name of the city by the city arborist or other public officer, private citizens may not have a public nuisance abated unless special injury can be shown. For purposes of this Code section, special injury shall include any condition which is potentially dangerous and injurious to health, safety. Upon the written petition of a resident of the city, which specifically sets forth the special injuries alleged, the city arborist or his designee may cause a complaint to be filed, identifying therein the petitioner and injuries alleged. Where the alleged public nuisance involves a condition existing upon private property, the respondent shall be the owner(s) of such property, each person in lawful possession if not the owner, and any parties in interest. 
(b)  Complaints or orders issued under this Code section shall be served upon each named respondent, and a return of service signed by the serving agent shall be filed with the city arborist reciting that a copy of such complaint or order was served upon such respondent personally or by leaving such copy at the respondent's place of residence, or if a corporation, at its place of business. Service on each named respondent may be perfected by any police officer or any public officer. 
(c)  If a respondent resides outside the city but within the State of Georgia, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of residence of such party. Nonresidents of this state shall be served by posting a copy of the complaint or orders in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such out-of-state nonresident is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to the nonresident by registered or certified mail. 
(d)  In the event the respondent is a minor, an estate or incompetent person, the guardian or other personal representative shall be served in the manner hereinabove provided; however, if such party has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the Probate Judge of Floyd County, Georgia, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the petitioners in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the petitioner shall make an affidavit to that effect and such service as described in subsection (c) of this section, shall be sufficient. Where known, any person, firm or corporation holding itself out as an agent for the property involved shall be served in the manner provided herein. 
(f)  At the time of filing a complaint or orders with the municipal court, a copy thereof may also be filed in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Floyd County, Georgia, on the lis pendens docket, and such filing shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law; provided, that any such complaint shall contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained in the office of the city clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-4-2, § I, 4-16-01) 
Sec. 20-37. - Procedure for hearings; findings by city arborist; abatement. 
(a)  Whenever a public officer issues a citation to a property owner as provided in this Code section, and the property owner fails to respond by taking the necessary action to correct the condition within 15 days of the service of citation, the public officer shall file a complaint in the name of the city seeking to abate the conditions on grounds it constitutes a public nuisance. The complaint shall state all charges giving rise to such action, including a reference to this Code section and those facts known in support of the complaint. If the complaint is based upon the petition of a resident of the city, it shall identify the petitioner and the specific injury alleged. The complaint shall be served upon the responding parties in the manner set forth herein, and shall be accompanied by a notice of the date of hearing before the municipal court which date shall not be less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the date service is perfected. Continuances will only be granted by the municipal judge for good cause shown. 
(b)  At the hearing, the burden shall be upon the city to prove its complaint by competent evidence. The responding party(s) shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by counsel, to present evidence and to cross-examine the city's witnesses. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling at the hearing. 
(c)  If, after hearing, the municipal judge determines that a hazardous tree exists, he shall make his findings and conclusions of law in writing and impose such order as required to assure its abatement; provided, however, the responding party shall be afforded a reasonable time in which to comply with the order of abatement. Costs may be imposed upon the respondent, which costs must be paid as a condition for the issuance of any permit or license necessary to abate the nuisance, in addition to regular permit fees, if any. 
(d)  If the municipal judge determines that a hazardous tree exists, he shall cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest an order requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove such tree or other horticultural growth. 
(e)  If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to remove such tree or other horticultural growth within the time specified therein, the city arborist, the city manager or his designee, may cause the tree or other horticultural growth to be removed. 
(f)  The cost of bringing a complaint pursuant to this chapter, together with any costs reasonably incurred by the city in abatement of a public nuisance after determination thereof by the municipal judge, shall be in a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a statement of the total sum of the costs by the city arborist, city manager or his designee, in the office of the city clerk of the city on a lien docket maintained for such purposes and, if desired, in the deed records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Floyd County. 
(g)  The city may enforce its lien in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within 30 days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual installments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment; 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be immediately due and payable to the city; and 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, not be paid as herein provided or be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, the city may enforce the collection of the full amount due in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable tax statutes; provided, however, this procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon the property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. title 48, article 3, chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 01-4-2, § I, 4-16-01) 
Sec. 20-38. - Temporary injunction restraining public officer from carrying out provisions. 
As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13, any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the Superior Court of Floyd County for an injunction restraining the city from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the superior court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the city, pending the final disposition of the matter; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the service of the order of the municipal judge. De novo hearings shall be had by the superior court on petitions within 20 days of the filing thereof. The superior court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 01-4-2, § I, 4-16-01) 
Sec. 20-39. - Eminent domain. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner or owners of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state, nor as permitting any property to be destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
(Ord. No. 01-4-2, § I, 4-16-01) 
Sec. 20-40. - Use of revenues, grants and donations. 
The city commission is authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary or appropriate and may accept and apply for and utilize grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-4-2, § I, 4-16-01) 
Sec. 20-41. - Applicability of Code section. 
The powers and authority granted hereunder shall be in addition to and supplemental of any other powers and authority granted to the governing body of the city and its agents by any state statute or ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-4-2, § I, 4-16-01) 
Chapter 22 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Regulation of sewerage, §§ 2-10, 2-14; extraterritorial condemnation, § 2-16; rental for sewer connections, § 2-17; waterworks, art. VIII. 
Cross reference— City divisions and departments, § 2-2; standing committees of city commission, § 2-51; buildings, ch. 5; penalties and interest on unpaid bills, § 8-38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; objectives of flood damage prevention, § 10-3; flood hazard reduction, § 10-15; flood damage prevention standards for subdivision proposals, § 10-18; franchises, § 11-626 et seq.; diversion of utility service, § 14-17; planning and development, ch. 16; solid waste, ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; subdivisions, ch. 21; purposes of zoning chapter, § 23-3; procedures for approval of private subdivision developments, § 23-104; mobile home park permit, § 23-136; standards for mobile home parks, § 23-139. 
State Constitution reference— Municipal water, storm water and sewage services, art. IX, § II, par. III. 
State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; acquisition and construction of water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; grants for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; contracts to provide industrial wastewater treatment services, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-2; public utilities, O.C.G.A. tit. 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Water and sewer department created. 
The water and sewer department of the city is hereby created as a separate department of the city under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 24-1; Code 1981, § 6-1001) 
Secs. 22-2—22-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Cutting off water being used in extinguishing fire, § 9-41; conditions constituting nuisances, § 14-51; water supply in subdivisions, § 21-128. 

Sec. 22-36. - Right of access to premises of water takers. 
The officers of the water and sewer department and their agents and assistants may enter the premises of any water taker, at any reasonable time, to examine the water pipes and fixtures. 
(Code 1959, § 24-2; Code 1981, § 6-1002) 
Sec. 22-37. - Water; authority to turn on or off to premises. 
Water cannot be turned on or off under any circumstances to any premises, or for any purpose but by the authority of the director of the water and sewer department, except by the plumber for testing his work, who must turn the water off immediately thereafter. 
(Code 1959, § 24-3; Code 1981, § 6-1003) 
Sec. 22-38. - Fire hydrants; persons permitted to open. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city's employees to open any fire hydrant within the city limits. 
(Code 1959, § 24-4; Code 1981, § 6-1004) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 9. 
Sec. 22-39. - Discontinuance of water use; notice of intention. 
Persons wishing to discontinue the use of water supplied by the water and sewer department shall give notice of such intention at the department office, and they will be charged full rates until such notice is given. No allowance will be made for nonoccupancy unless the water has been cut off in accordance with such notice. 
(Code 1959, § 24-5; Code 1981, § 6-1005) 
Sec. 22-40. - Furnishing water to other persons; separate service pipes for each premises. 
No owner or occupant of any premises supplied with water from the water and sewer department shall supply water to other persons, for any purpose, without written authority from the director of the water and sewer department, such permit stating for what purpose or reason water is so supplied and for what length of time. A separate service pipe for each premises shall be required. 
(Code 1959, § 24-6; Code 1981, § 6-1006) 
Sec. 22-41. - Water meters—Required; property of city. 
Each house, building, or structure using city water, whether within or without the city limits, shall each have a water meter installed by the city for the fees and charges as provided in this chapter. All such meters shall be the property of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 24-7; Code 1981, § 6-1007) 
Sec. 22-42. - Same—Number of buildings serviced. 
In no event shall one water meter be installed for the servicing of more than one house, building, or structure, if the water lines and mains of the city are present and permit the installation of a water meter for each house, building, or structure. 
(Code 1959, § 24-8; Code 1981, § 6-1008) 
Sec. 22-43. - Water conservation plan. 
(a)  Authorized. Consistent with a water conservation/drought program, the city may from time to time provide for a conservation plan, notice of which shall be given to the water customers of the city. 
(b)  Adopted. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7(a)(1), the city may, from time to time and upon application to and approval by the director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, and for good cause shown, impose more stringent restrictions on outdoor water use during nondrought periods or state declared periods of drought than those applicable restrictions, if any, imposed by the state during such periods. Furthermore, the city may, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7(a)(2), impose more stringent restrictions on outdoor water use in case of an emergency which immediately threatens the public health, safety, or welfare; provided, however, that such emergency restrictions shall be valid for a period not exceeding seven days unless the director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources grants a variance pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7(a)(1). 
(c)  Warnings; citations. The city, in order to enforce its water conservation program, may issue warnings and citations. 
(d)  Penalties. For violations of the water conservation plan the city may punish a violator as provided in section 1-9 of this Code for each violation and/or by shutting off the water supply to such violator. 
(Ord. No. 88-7-1, §§ 1—3, 7-5-88; Code 1981, § 6-1009; Ord. No. 2010-11-1, § I, 11-15-10) 
Sec. 22-44. - Cross-connection and backflow prevention requirements. 
All persons connected to or proposing to connect to the city public water supply system shall install and maintain a building water conveyance system which minimizes cross-connections between potable and non-potable water flows. Where such connections cannot be eliminated, the consumer shall install and maintain devises designed to totally eliminate the hazard of backflow or back siphonage of non-potable waters into the potable water system. Said backflow and back siphonage prevention devices shall be of design and installation to conform with the requirements of the current plumbing code. 
Within and without the city corporate limits the director of the utility department, or his designated representative, shall have authority independent of the respective plumbing inspector to ensure that all consumers have installed and maintained adequate backflow and back siphonage protection insofar as is necessary to protect the public water supply. This authority shall include the review, inspection and approval of new installation or alterations and the periodic review of existing systems. At the discretion of the director, he may delegate this authority to the respective plumbing inspector or the city building inspector. Such delegation does not terminate the right of the director to make or have made independent inspections. 
(Ord. No. 97-3-2, § II, 3-17-97) 
Sec. 22-45. - Authority to disconnect service. 
Whenever the director or city manager of the city determines that a person is violating or has violated the cross-connection provision of this chapter, and determines that the violation of this section will cause immediate damage or harm to the treatment process, equipment, or treatment and distribution facilities of the city, or that violation endangers the public health, safety or general welfare of the community, the director or city manager of the city shall have the power and authority to immediately terminate that person's water service until that person has ceased the violation. 
(Ord. No. 97-3-2, § II, 3-17-97) 
Secs. 22-46—22-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE COLLECTION, TREATMENT, AND DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 96-7-2, adopted July 22, 1996, replaced §§ 22-71—22-72, 22-101—22-103, 22-126—22-129, 22-151—22-161, 22-186—22-197, 22-226—22-240, 22-266—22-268, 22-291—22-298 with new sections to read as herein set out. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions. Refer to Code Comparative Table for history of such sections. 
Cross reference— Sanitary sewerage in subdivisions, § 21-129. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-71. - Purpose and policy. 
This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the sewage works for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewage works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewage works that will pass through the sewage works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the sewage works; 
(3)  To protect both sewage works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge form the sewage works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the sewage works; and 
(6)  To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws which the sewage works is subject. 
This article shall apply to all users of the sewage works. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of frees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-72. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated by the city manager to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-73. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meaning: 

 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-74. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means the part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471. 
City means the City of Rome, Georgia. 
City manager means the city manager of Rome, Georgia, appointed by the city commission and authorized by the commission to fulfill the requirements of this article and be responsible for the operations of the water and sewer system, or his duly authorized representative. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Commission means the city commission, which has jurisdiction over the maintenance and operations of the water and sanitary sewer system within the city and adjacent areas in the county. 
Director means the director of the water and sewer department, appointed by the city manager to manage the daily affairs of the department, or his duly appointed representative. 
Discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the city's sewerage from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 3-7 of the Act. 
Food service establishment means any restaurant, eatery, food caterer, cafeteria or other institution processing and serving food such as motels, hotels, prisons or schools. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Grease trap means a device primarily used in the food service industry for removal of oils, greases and food solids from a process waste stream. 
Industrial user means any nondomestic customer of the water and sewer department who produces industrial wastes. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations; section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program. 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies to not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Normal strength discharge means an industrial user discharge which has a biochemical oxygen demand concentration less than or equal to 235 mg/L and a total suspended solids concentration less than or equal to 200 mg/L and an oil and grease concentration less than or equal to 100 mg/L. 
NPDES permit means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to the city authorizing the discharge of sewage treatment effluent to the waters of the state. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local government entities. 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutant into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
Publicly owned treatment works, POTW or sewage works means a "treatment works" as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to be inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may inadvertently be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Significant industrial user means any industrial user who: 
(1)  Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; 
(2)  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the sewage treatment plant; 
(3)  Has an average discharge flow of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater) equal to or greater than 25,000 gallons per workday; 
(4)  Discharges a wastewater containing any substance defined as a toxic or priority pollutant by the Environmental Protection Agency; or 
(5)  Is designed by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
However, the city need not designate as significant any noncategorical user that, in the opinion of the city and with the agreement of the state environmental protection division, has no potential for adversely affecting the sewage treatment plant's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
Slug means any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which causes interference or which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in sections 22-188 and/or 22-189 of this article. 
Storm drain or storm sewer means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of the city sewage treatment plants or his duly appointed representative. 
Suspended solids means the portion of total solids in water, sewage, or other liquids which are retained on a laboratory filter in accordance with EPA procedure. 
User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. 
Waste hauler means any individual, association, partnership, corporation, municipality, state, federal agency, or any agent or employee thereof that transports waste by truck. 
Water and sewer department means the city water and sewer department which is the operating organization working under the policies and direction of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-75. - Protection from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewer works. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-76. - Notification of violation. 
When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 15 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city manager to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-77. - Consent orders. 
The city manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 22-79 and 22-80 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-78. - Show cause hearing. 
The city manager may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the city manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 15 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-79. - Compliance orders. 
When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-80. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city manager may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(a)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(b)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-81. - Emergency suspensions. 
The city manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city manager may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(a)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 22-82 of this article are initiated against the user. 
(b)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under sections 22-78 or 22-82 of this article. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-82. - Termination of discharge. 
In addition to the provisions in section 22-238 of this article, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(a)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(b)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(c)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(d)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(e)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections 22-188—22-191 of this article. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 22-78 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-83. - Water supply severance. 
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-84. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city manager to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the city manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment shall be returned to the user. The city manager may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(c)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-85. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or other issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $50,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The city manager may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained throughout the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-86. - Injunctive relief. 
Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this article, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the city manager may petition the Superior Court of Floyd County for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the industrial user. The city manager may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive need shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-87. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. 
(b)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least $1,000.00, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(c)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-88. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The city manager may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with he city's enforcement response plan. However, the city manager may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city manager is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Secs. 22-89—22-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS 

Sec. 22-101. - Generally. 
The city manager and duly authorized employees shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the city manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(a)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city manager will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(c)  In accordance with section 22-196 of this article, the city manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at the manufacturer's recommended frequency to ensure their accuracy. 
(d)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(e)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-102. - Observance of safety rules; indemnification of company. 
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 22-101, the city manager or duly authorized employees of the water and sewer department shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. The company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city's employees. The city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by the city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in sections 22-101 and 22-196. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-103. - Entry of private property through easement. 
The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the water and sewer department holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspections, observations, measurements, sampling, repairs, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-104. - Search warrants. 
If the city manager or his representatives have been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Secs. 22-105—22-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 22-126. - Unlawful deposits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-127. - Treatment of sewage required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any natural outlet within any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-128. - Prohibited disposal facilities. 
Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-129. - Connection to public sewer required. 
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the jurisdiction of the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Secs. 22-130—22-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 22-151. - Building sewer permit—Required. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-152. - Same—Classes; application; fee; additional permit for significant industrial users. 
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service. 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the water and sewer department. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city manager. A permit and inspection fee, of an amount set out in the fee schedule book as provided in section 8-36, for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and an amount set out in such fee schedule book for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the water and sewer department at the time the application is filed. In addition to such building sewer permits, all significant industrial users shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit as described in division 6. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-153. - Connection costs; indemnification of city. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the water and sewer department from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-154. - Independent building sewers required; exception. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, in which case the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-155. - Use of old building sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the city manager to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-156. - Installation standards. 
The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the city building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the water and sewer department. All work shall conform to all applicable regulations of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Cross reference— Building code adopted, § 5-76; plumbing code adopted, § 5-333. 
Sec. 22-157. - Elevation of connection. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-158. - Prohibited connections. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-159. - Connections—Standards; deviations. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the city building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city manager before installation. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-160. - Same—Supervision by city manager. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city manager when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city manager or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-161. - Barricades around excavations; restoration of public property. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the water and sewer department. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Secs. 22-162—22-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DISCHARGES TO PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 22-186. - Wastewaters. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. All wastewaters shall be discharged to a sanitary sewer or treated by the generator and discharged to a natural stream under the conditions permitted by an NPDES permit issued by the state environmental protection division. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-187. - Unpolluted waters. 
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city manager. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city manager, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. Approval by the city manager for discharge of unpolluted process waters to a natural outlet within the city limit is required in addition to the issuance of an NPDES permit by the state environmental protection division. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-188. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sewage works any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the sewage works whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sewage works the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the sewage works, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the sewage works; 
(3)  Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than 12.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works; 
(4)  Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or resulting in interference; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the sewage works in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the superintendent in accordance with section 22-201 or this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-189. - Potentially harmful discharges. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the city manager, that such wastes can harm the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or otherwise endanger life, limb, or public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city manager shall give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. 
(b)  The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair. 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero to 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, other objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city manager for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city manager as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife concentration as may exceed limits established by the city manager in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH that will cause the pH of the waste entering the sewage treatment plant at any time to be in excess of 9.0. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, any textile fibers, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(11)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(12)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(13)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substance which may cause excessive foaming in the sewage works. 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by sections 22-188 and 22-189 of this article shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharge to the sewage works. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-190. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. 
(a)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(b)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(c)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(d)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(e)  Upon the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial subcategory, the national standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The superintendent shall notify all affected significant industrial users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-191. - Local limits. 
The following pollutant limits are based on treatment plant design specifications and are established to protect against pass through and interference. User discharge concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is discharged to the sewage works. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following maximum allowable discharge limits: 

 
The concentration limitations above are based on a specific mass limitation for each pollutant. The director may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration limitations above. The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the sewage works. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-192. - Authority of city manager. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to the public sewers which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in sections 22-189, 22-190, and 22-191 and which, in the judgment of the city manager, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city manager may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
(4)  Designate that certain wastewater by discharged only into specific sewers; 
(5)  Require industrial users to relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge; 
(6)  Require industrial users to separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams; 
(7)  Require any person discharging into the sewage works to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization; and/or 
(8)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 22-200 and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the sewage works and determine the industrial user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
If the city manager permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-193. - Grease interceptors; regulation of non-domestic food service establishments facilities. 
(a)  The Rome City Commission does hereby find that the city's sewage system is under undue strain as a result of the discharge of fats, grease and oil from local food service and preparation facilities. The Rome Water and Sewer Division here in after known as "the division" devotes equipment and man hours to unstopping and cleaning manholes, pump stations and sewers mains clogged with grease. The accumulation of such fats, grease and oil in the city's sewage system leads to clogged sewer infrastructure and sewage spills. The city finds that it is within the city's constitutional police powers to implement and enforce the provisions of this section, which are necessary to protect the public's safety, health and welfare. 
(b)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the division, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(c)  All food service establishments, including, without limitation, restaurants of all types, catering facilities, hospital cafeterias, school and business cafeterias, and convalescent homes, which discharge to the city's POTW shall install, operate, and maintain a sufficiently sized grease trap (as defined in section 22-74 of this Code) necessary to achieve compliance with the requirements set forth in this article. New facilities required to have a grease trap under this Code section must have an approved grease trap installed prior to connecting to the sanitary sewer system. 
(1)  All grease traps required in this section shall have a capacity of 15 gallons per seat, except that no single grease trap shall be smaller than 1,500 gallons nor larger than 3,000 gallons. The division may, in its sole discretion, approve multiple grease traps. 
(2)  All grease traps must be permitted through the division. Grease trap users must abide by the conditions set forth by the permit. Permit violations may result in loss of permit, disruption of water and sewer service and/or fines. 
(3)  All grease traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the division and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease traps shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, and shall be watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. Undersink manual grease traps shall not be permitted. 
(4)  Food service establishments located in existing buildings may apply for a hardship variance from the division to use undersink automatic grease interceptors. Such variances may be granted when, in the sole discretion of the division, the establishment's premises are incapable of supporting a grease trap which otherwise meets the necessary permit requirements, and the use of automatic grease interceptors will not effect the efficient handling and elimination of liquid wastes containing grease, oils, sand, or other harmful ingredients. 
(5)  a.  The division, through its employees and duly authorized agents, shall clean all grease traps within the city and shall remove all waste collected in said traps. 
b.  The division shall cause grease traps which are in active use to be pumped out completely and the wastes therefrom removed from the property at least once during every three month period, or more often if deemed necessary by the division or if requested by the user. Users shall notify the division if a grease trap has exceeded its total capacity or is in imminent danger of reaching such total capacity. 
c.  Users of grease traps will be given a specific date to have the grease trap cleaned. On such pre-arranged date, division personnel and other duly authorized agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of cleaning grease traps and hauling grease trap waste in accordance with the provisions of this article. City employees and agents will observe all company safety rules while on private properties. For purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing grease traps, such personnel and agents shall be permitted to enter upon all properties without prior notification. 
d.  Other than cleaning, all grease traps shall be maintained by the user at the user's expense to be in continuously efficient operation. Decanting or backflushing of the grease trap or its wastes for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled shall be unlawful and is strictly prohibited. 
(6)  The use of any additive, such as enzymes, chemicals, or bacteria on grease traps is unlawful and is strictly prohibited; provided, that the use of additives as a supplement to grease trap or sewer line maintenance may be authorized by the division after proper documentation and efficiency review. This authorization shall be obtained in writing from the director of the division or his designee. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any grease trap waste to be discharged directly or indirectly to the POTW. Further, it shall be unlawful for any non-domestic kitchen or any food service establishment to discharge, or cause to be discharged, into the POTW any amount of processing wastewater which contains oils, greases, solids, or liquids sufficient to cause obstruction or otherwise interfere with the proper operations of the public sewer. 
Notice shall be taken that grease trap waste discharged onto or into public or private rights-of-way, manholes, public property, storm sewers, lakes, creeks and streams is a violation of the Federal Clean Water Act in addition to a violation of state and local law and ordinances. 
(d)  The Rome City Commission shall, by resolution, adopt fees for the issuance of permits and the cleaning of grease traps and removal of waste required under this section 22-193. 
(1)  The amount of the permit fee and the periodic grease trap cleaning and waste removal fee shall be set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36 of this Code. 
(2)  The fee to clean grease traps and remove wastes therefrom will be assessed through the user's water and sewer bill. Water, sewer, garbage and grease interceptor charges shall be paid as one bill. Failure to pay any such charge shall be subject to penalties and remedies as provided in section 22-328 of this Code. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any condition set forth in this Code section. First violations of this section could result in fines of up to $2,000.00 per offense. Second and subsequent violations of this section could result in fines and/or the termination of water and sewer services. For properties located outside of the city limits which are connected to city POTW, upon whose owners and users the city may not levy a fine, violations of this Code may result in the termination of water and sewer services. 
(f)  The Rome Police Department shall be the enforcement agency responsible for gaining compliance with this Code section; provided, however, coordination of warnings or notices of violations shall be the responsibility of the division. Notices of violations may be issued by the heads or the designated employees of other departments including the solid waste processing and disposal department, building inspection department, bureau of fire prevention, police department, and streets and drainage department. Notices issued by any department shall be promptly turned over to the division for follow-up and coordination. The notice issued shall be followed up by the division, and evidence of noncompliance will result in enforcement action by the police department upon request of the division. Notices issued shall specify a reasonable time limit for compliance. Nothing in this section shall preclude immediate enforcement by a police officer on complaint of any person or upon witnessing any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96; Ord. No. 04-6-2, § I, 6-7-04) 
Editor's note— Section II of Ord. No. 04-6-2 states: Existing facilities for which a grease trap is required under this article, and which currently has a written contract with a commercial grease disposal provider, shall be allowed to continue such service until Dec. 31, 2004. Such commercial grease provider shall cause grease traps to be pumped out completely at least once during every three month period, and the waste therefrom to be disposed of at a facility permitted by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division to receive such waste. After Dec. 31, 2004, the use of commercial grease disposal providers within the city limits or at a facility which uses any sewage system owned and operated by the City of Rome shall be prohibited. 
Sec. 22-194. - Operation, maintenance of pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities. 
(a)  Industrial users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in sections 22-188—22-191 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the city manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the city manager before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Upon reduction of efficiency of operation, or loss or failure of all or part of the treatment facility, the permittee shall, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with its permit, control its production or discharges (or both) until operation of the treatment facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies, for example, when the primary source of power of the treatment facility fails or is reduced. It shall not be a defense for a permittee in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the permitted activity in order to maintain compliance with the conditions of this permit. 
(c)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section. 
(d)  (1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the city, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the city of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards immediately upon it becoming aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
(e)  (1) Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)  The city manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the city manager determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (e)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-195. - Mandatory certification. 
The operator in responsible charge of a wastewater treatment system required by section 22-194 of this article, and all laboratory analysts performing laboratory tests in conjunction with the operation of a wastewater treatment system required by section 22-194, must be certified in accordance with the rules of the "Georgia State Board of Examiners for Certification of Water and Wastewater Treatment Plan Operators and Laboratory Analysts." 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-196. - Manholes. 
All significant industrial users shall install a suitable control manhole or other suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city manager. The structure shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-197. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
At least once every two years, the superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternately, the superintendent may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(a)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(b)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(c)  Procedures for immediately notifying the city of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 22-315 of this article; and 
(d)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-198. - Measurements, tests, and analyses. 
(a)  All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, required to be submitted by this article shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA and the city manager. 
(b)  All pollutant analyses shall be performed at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(c)  Except as indicated in subsection (d), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(d)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(e)  Results from the above specific measurements, tests, and analyses of characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be reported to one significant digit beyond those indicated. 
(f)  Compliance with this article shall be based on a round-off of the reported data to the number of significant digits indicated in this article. 
(g)  Detection levels of pollutant concentrations shall be equal to or less than those established by the state environmental protection division. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-199. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city manager, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-200. - Authority to accept industrial waste. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the water and sewer department and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the water and sewer department for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-201. - Waste haulers; duties. 
A waste hauler shall: 
(1)  Discharge loads at times and locations specifically designated by the superintendent. 
(2)  Be limited to discharging only domestic wastes. 
(3)  Purchase a waste hauler discharge ticket(s) from the water and sewer department at a price and of a form determined by the city commission. The ticket(s) must be presented to the superintendent prior to any discharge. 
(4)  Provide prior notice to the superintendent of the intent to discharge, and the actual discharge must be performed during supervision by plant personnel. 
(5)  Be prohibited from discharging any waste which would violate federal, state, or local regulations. 
(6)  If required by the superintendent, provide a completed waste manifest form which shall contain information regarding the waste from, and the signature of, each waste generator. The hauler shall also sign the form, indicating that he has accepted no wastes other than those listed. 
(7)  If required by the superintendent, provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(8)  Carry liability insurance, and provide satisfactory evidence of it to the city, in such amounts and form as determined by the city commission. Such insurance shall afford compensation for taking corrective action and for bodily injury, and for property damage to third persons caused by hauler negligence and/or accidents. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 11. 
Sec. 22-202. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)  A user shall have an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance of the prohibitions established in paragraphs (a), (b)(2), (b)(4), (b)(5), (b)(6), and (b)(7) of section 22-188 if the user can demonstrate that: 
(1)  It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference; and 
(2)  The user was in compliance with each local limit in the user's discharge that cause the pass through or interference directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or 
(3)  If no local limit exists for the pollutant(s) that caused the pass through or interference, the user's discharge directly prior to and during the pass through or interference did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge activity when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the user can demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days); 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and the cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof; 
(5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Secs. 22-203—22-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 22-226. - Required. 
All significant industrial users connected to, proposing to connect to, or otherwise contributing to the sewage works shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit. Proposed new significant users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connection to the sewage works and shall obtain the permit prior to contributing to the system. The city manager may require other users to obtain wastewater permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-227. - Application; fee. 
Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed and furnished by the city and accompanied by a fee as set out in the fee schedule book as provided in section 8-36. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-228. - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The city manager may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(a)  All information required by section 22-311 of this article; 
(b)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the sewage works; 
(c)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(d)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(e)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(f)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(g)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(h)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the city manager to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-229. - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-230. - Wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the city manager, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The city manager may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-231. - Permits subject to other applicable regulations. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all sections of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the city, and requirements of the federal pretreatment regulations, 40 CFR 403, described in this article. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 22-76—22-87 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-232. - Form; contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the city manager to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the sewage works. Wastewater discharge permits shall be in the form prescribed by the city commission but shall include at least the following: 
(a)  (1)  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards. 
(2)  Requirements for self monitoring, sampling, notification, record-keeping, and reporting. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law. 
(3)  Any requirements more stringent than, or in addition to those listed in section 22-267, and affording city access thereto. 
(4)  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. 
(5)  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years. 
(6)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 22-234(d) of this article. 
(7)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by federal, state or local law. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirement for flow regulation and equalization. 
(2)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works. 
(3)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges. 
(4)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewage works. 
(5)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharge to the sewage works. 
(6)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
(7)  a statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit. 
(8)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-233. - Duration; renewal; modification by city; nontransferability. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the city manager. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(b)  The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. If no new local, state, or federal pretreatment requirements are impending on the user and the user has had no violation of the existing permit, the city shall renew the permit for a time period at least equal to the existing permit. All other expiring permits shall be reviewed and revised or renewed as determined by the city manager. 
(c)  Permits are subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit for good cause, including, but not limited, to the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the sewage works that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's sewage works, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(d)  Discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation and are not transferable to any succeeding user or the current user for a new operation without prior notification to and approval from the director: 
(1)  The permittee must give at least 30 days advance notice to the director; 
(2)  If the permit is to be transferred to a new owner, the notice must include a written certification by the new owner which: 
a.  States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
b.  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; 
c.  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-234. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Any user may appeal an altered or new permit condition or alleged violation of a current permit condition to the city commission. Such appeal must be received, in writing, by the water and sewer committee of the commission within ten workdays of its issuance. 
(b)  The committee shall schedule an appeal review meeting within 30 days to discuss the appealed condition of this division or wastewater discharge permit and corrective or remedial action to be taken. If the user and the committee can agree to appropriate corrective remedial and/or preventive measures, such measures and a reasonable compliance schedule shall be incorporated as a supplemental condition of the user's wastewater discharge permit. If the user and the committee cannot agree, the issue will be presented to the full commission. If an agreement is not reached through the conciliation process, the commission shall institute such other actions, as deemed advisable, to insure the user's compliance with the provisions of this division or other laws or regulations. 
(c)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-235. - Publication of violations. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Significant noncompliance means: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of sewage works personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(b)  The city shall annually publish in the local newspaper with the largest circulation a list of industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-236. - Variances. 
The city manager, after consultation with a duly qualified engineer, may recommend to the commission that a variance from the discharge standards of this article be issued to a specific user. Such recommendation must document that an existing pretreatment system is being operated without significant operational or maintenance problems and that further pretreatment is not technically feasible or it is not economically feasible. A variance shall not be issued to any state or federal pretreatment standard. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-237. - Expiration, reissuance of permits. 
An expired permit under this division will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued if: 
(1)  The user has submitted a complete permit application at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit. 
(2)  The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the user. 
(3)  The time period between the expiration of the previous permit and the issuance of the permit does not exceed 180 days. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-238. - Termination. 
A wastewater discharge permit may be terminated for the following reasons: 
(1)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(2)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(3)  Refusing to allow the timely access to the user's premises and records; 
(4)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(5)  Failure to pay fines; 
(6)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(7)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(8)  Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(9)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(10)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; or 
(11)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharger permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-239. - Records retained. 
(a)  The significant industrial user shall retain records of all monitoring information, including all calibration and maintenance records and all original strip chart recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation, copies of all reports required by the user's permit, and records of all data used to complete the user's permit application for a period of at least five years from the date of the sample, measurement, report, or application. This period may be extended by the request of the city manager at any time. 
(b)  All records that pertain to matters that are the subject of special orders or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city shall be retained and preserved by the user until enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(c)  Records of sampling and analyses shall include: 
(1)  The date, exact place, time, and methods of sampling or measurements, and sample preservation techniques or procedures. 
(2)  Who performed the sampling or measurements. 
(3)  The dates analyses were performed. 
(4)  Who performed the analyses. 
(5)  The analytical techniques or methods used. 
(6)  The results of such analyses. 
(d)  The user shall furnish to the city, within 30 days, any information which the city manager may request to determine whether cause exists for modifying, revoking, and reissuing, or terminating the user's permit, or to determine compliance with the user's permit. The user shall also, upon request, furnish to the city, within 30 days, copies of any records required to be kept by this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-240. - Violation shown by analysis results. 
If the results of the significant industrial user's wastewater analysis indicate that a violation has occurred, the user must notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation and repeat the sampling and pollutant analysis and submit, in writing, the results of this repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the industrial user is not required to resample if: 
(1)  The city performs sampling at the user at a frequency of at least once per month; or 
(2)  The city performs sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-241. - Substitute for adequate treatment prohibited. 
The significant industrial user shall not increase the use of potable or process water or in any way attempt to dilute an effluent as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations in this article or the user's permit. The city may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-242. - Signing of applications, reports. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Responsible corporate officer means: 
(1)  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(2)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having a gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(b)  All applications and reports required by this article or the user's permit must be signed in accordance with subsection (1), (2), (3), or (4): 
(1)  By a responsible corporate officer, if the user submitting the reports is a corporation. 
(2)  By a general partner or proprietor if the user submitting the reports is a partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively. 
(3)  By the principal executive officer or director having responsibility for the overall operation of the discharging facility if the user submitting the reports is a federal, state, or local government entity or its agent. 
(4)  By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection (1), (2), or (3) if: 
a.  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsection (1), (2), or (3). 
b.  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters of the company. 
c.  The written authorization is submitted to the city. 
(5)  If an authorization under subsection (4) is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of subsection (4) must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 22-243—22-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - USER CHARGE SYSTEM 

Sec. 22-266. - Generally. 
(a)  All users under this article shall be subject to the charges associated with the costs of operation, maintenance, and replacement of equipment and appurtenances as necessary to maintain wastewater treatment performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
(b)  Revenues collected in excess of revenues used to defray operation and maintenance costs in any year shall be applied to the costs of operation and maintenance for the next year, and the user charge shall be adjusted to absorb the excess. 
(c)  Each user which discharges any toxic substance to the publicly owned sewer which causes an increase in the costs of managing the effluent or the sludge of the treatment works shall pay for such increased costs. 
(d)  Maintenance and operation costs for all flows not attributable to users shall be distributed among all users in proportion to flow volume of the user discharge. 
(e)  Upon request by any user, said user shall be notified in conjunction with his regular bill, as to the portion of the total bill which is attributed to user charges for wastewater treatment services. 
(f)  The total costs of operation and maintenance of the treatment works, its approved user charge system, and the contribution of the users shall be reviewed not less than every two years. Charges for users shall be revised to maintain the distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and to generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance cost necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of treatment works equipment. 
(g)  The user charge system shall take precedence over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between the city and the user, including industrial users, districts, other municipalities, or federal agencies which are inconsistent with the requirements of section 204(b)(1)(a) of the Clean Water Act and this article. 
(h)  All cost of any additional or supplemental sampling or analyses required as a result of any user's excessive pollutant loadings such as BOD, suspended solids, floating oil and grease, heavy metals, or priority pollutants as determined by the city manager or resulting from a user's suspected, regular, or frequent violation of this article shall be paid for by that user. 
(i)  User charges will be incorporated into the sewer rate structure along with system costs for collection system maintenance and operations, system administration, renewal and extension, debt service, and all other costs to be funded by sewer system revenues. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-267. - Determination of charges. 
(a)  Generally. The wastewater characteristics which are used to determine user charges are BOD, suspended solids, flow volume, and grease. Persons and industrial users which discharge normal strength wastewaters shall be charged a base user charge in which flow volume is the wastewater characteristic for determining the charge. When BOD, suspended solids, or grease concentrations in a user's wastewater discharge are in excess of the range of concentration in normal strength wastewater, a surcharge shall be added to the base charge. 
(b)  Base charge. The formula for determining the base user charge which applies to normal strength discharges shall be as follows: 
R = V m C t 

 
(c)  Surcharges. When BOD, suspended solids, and grease exceed the range of concentration of those pollutants in normal strength wastewater, a surcharge shall be added to the basic charge. The surcharge shall be determined as follows: 
C;sub§\sub; = 0.000692 (B c × B + S c × S + G c × G) V u 

 
(d)  Unit value determination. 
(1)  The basic unit C t , which shall be revised biennially, shall be determined as follows: 
C t = B d B c = S d S c + G d G c + V c 

 
(2)  B d , S d , and G c shall be revised not less frequently than biennially and shall be determined by either: 
a.  Dividing actual wastewater treatment plant loading less total surcharged loading by total annual volume contribution by domestic wastewater dischargers; 
b.  Actual sampling of domestic wastewater dischargers; or 
c.  Utilizing wastewater treatment plan design capacity for average concentration. 1995 values for these normal loadings are as follows: 
B d = 1.96 pounds per thousand gallons 
S d = 1.67 pounds per thousand gallons 
G d = 0.83 pounds per thousand gallons 
(3)  V c , B c , S c and G c shall be revised not less often than every two years by dividing their respective annual maintenance and operation costs by their respective annual loadings. 1995 values for these unit costs are as follows: 
V c = $0.178 per thousand gallons 
B c = $0.032 per pound 
S c = $0.032 per pound 
G c = $0.029 per pound 
(4)  Wastewater monitoring and reporting shall be as described in division 6. 
(5)  Wastewater discharge of volume (V m ) for dischargers of normal strength wastewater shall be 100 percent of the amount of water metered. For industrial wastewater dischargers which discharge surcharged waste, the wastewater discharge volume (V u ) shall be 80 percent of the amount of water metered unless it can be shown that the volume of wastewater discharged is less. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-268. - Implementation. 
The city shall implement the user charge system as soon as it is approved by the director of the environmental protection division. For the first year of operation, operation and maintenance charges shall be based upon past experience and judgment. After one year of documentation of operation and maintenance costs and user loadings, user charges will be revised based on actual data. User charges shall be reviewed biannually and revised to reflect actual treatment plant works' operation and maintenance costs. The city shall document the various waste treatment plant loading categories and the operation and maintenance costs attributable to each category, record user charge revenues, and demonstrate that the user charge derived is a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs. The sewer rate structure shall be evaluated biannually to ensure that the user charges and other costs are represented by the set billing rates. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Secs. 22-269—22-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 22-291. - When connection permitted. 
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 22-129, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-292. - Permit required; application; fee. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city manager. The application for such permit shall be made on a form, furnished by the water and sewer department, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the city manager. A permit and inspection fee of an amount set out in the fee schedule book, as provided in section 8-36, shall be paid to the water and sewer department at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-293. - Inspection of installation. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city manager. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city manager when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-294. - Compliance with health department regulations. 
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the county health department. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities unless approval of such methods has first been obtained from the county health department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-295. - Connection to public sewer when available. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 22-129, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-296. - Operation and maintenance. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city, unless arrangements in writing have been made with the water and sewer department for such operation and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-297. - Additional health department requirements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Secs. 22-298—22-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 22-311. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the sewage works shall submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the sewage works from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the sewage works from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 22-198 of this article. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out n section 22-198 of this article. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 22-312 of this division. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 22-243 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-312. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to any compliance schedule required by this article: 
(a)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(b)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(c)  The user shall submit a progress report to the city no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(d)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-313. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewage works, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing the information described in section 22-311(b)(4) through (6) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 22-243 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-314. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 22-243 of this article. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in section 22-198 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-315. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the sewage works, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewage works, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-316. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the city, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the sewage works of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the sewage works, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. The notification requirement does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 22-311, 22-313 and 22-314 of this division. 
(b)  Discharges are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulation under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the city, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-317. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city manager as the city manager may require. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 22-318. - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 96-7-2, 7-22-96) 
[DIVISION 10. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS] 

Sec. 22-319. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent: The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This division establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this division are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this division. 
Findings: 
It is hereby determined that: 
Discharges to the City of Rome Separate Storm Sewer System that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; and 
These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the City of Rome Separate Storm Sewer System from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments; and 
These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters; and 
The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; and 
These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the City of Rome Separate Storm Sewer System; and 
Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the City of Rome Separate Storm Sewer System. 
Therefore, the Rome City Commission adopts this division to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the City of Rome Separate Storm Sewer System. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the City of Rome Separate Storm Sewer System is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(b)  Applicability: The provisions of this division shall apply to all areas within the corporate limits of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations: This division is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this division are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this division imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability: If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this division shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this division. 
(Ord. No. 07-2-1, § I, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 22-320. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Accidental discharge" means a discharge prohibited by this division which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
"Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
"Construction activity" means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
"Emergency condition" means any condition or circumstance which the public works director or chief building official judges to constitute an immediate threat or danger to the occupants of the building, structure, facility or premises or to persons or property exposed to an illicit discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, such as hazards associated with fire, explosion, the threat of fire or explosion, contamination of public or private water supplies, or exposed to risks from some other hazardous condition or circumstance. 
"Illicit discharge" means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in this division 10. 
"Illegal connection" means either of the following: 
a.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
b.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
"Industrial activity" means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit" means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
"Municipal separate storm sewer system" means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(a)  Owned or maintained by the City of Rome; 
(b)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(c)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
"Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
"Person" means, except to the extent exempted from this division, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
"Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: Paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
"Pollution" means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
"Premises" mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
"State waters" means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
"Stormwater runoff" or "stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
"Structural stormwater control" means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 07-2-1, § I, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 22-321. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges: No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, individual residential and non-commercial car washing, dechlorinated swimming pool water, street wash water, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains, crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the public works director as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections: The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this division if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this division must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the water and sewer division. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the public works director requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 07-2-1, § I, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 22-322. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the public works department prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 07-2-1, § I, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 22-323. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The public works director or his or her designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this division. 
(a)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the public works director or his or her designee. 
(b)  The owner or operator shall allow the public works director or his or her designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(c)  The public works director or his or her designee shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the public works director or his or her designee to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(d)  The public works director or his or her designee may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the public works director or his or her designee. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the public works director or his or her designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the public works director or his or her designee access to a facility is a violation of this division. 
(g)  If the public works director or his or her designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the public works director or his or her designee is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this division or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the public works director or his or her designee may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 07-2-1, § I, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 22-324. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a commercial, industrial, business or institutional facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for such a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from said facility, activity or operation into the municipal separate storm sewer system, or state waters, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the public works department within 24 hours in-person, by phone or facsimile concerning the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the public works director within three business days of the phone or facsimile notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to prevent a recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event that a discharge, spill, or other release contains hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(Ord. No. 07-2-1, § I, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 22-325. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations : It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this division. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this division, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the public works director or his or her designee is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The public works director or his or her designee is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in division 7. 
(b)  Notice of violation: Whenever the public works director or his or her designee finds that a violation of this division has occurred, the public works director or his or her designee may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the public works director or his or her designee by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation: Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the public works director or his or her designee. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal shall be conducted by the board of appeals and adjustments as provided in Article 2.11 of the Unified Land Development Code. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal: If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the public works director or his or her designee, then representatives of the public works director or his or her designee may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation: Within 90 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the City of Rome by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Penalties; separate violations: Any person who shall fail to comply with an order of abatement as set forth in this section, or who shall act in violation of this Code or of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved under authority of this Code in connection with any approval, certificate, or permit issued thereunder, or who shall perform any act deemed to create a serious potential for an illicit discharge or illegal connection and for which the issuance of an order to correct or abate is not adequate, and who is found guilty shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. A person found guilty under this section shall, for each violation and noncompliance, respectively, be subject to punishment by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 120 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and the responsible persons shall correct or abate such violation within a time limit as ordered by the court. When not otherwise specified, each day a prohibited condition or violation continues following an order of the court to correct or abate same shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)  Violations deemed a public nuisance: In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(h)  Remedies not exclusive: The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the public works director may seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 07-2-1, § I, 2-5-07) 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER RATES 

Sec. 22-326. - Bimonthly water rates and charges—Generally. 
The bimonthly rate schedule for the sale of water by the city to premises within and without the city shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1981, § 6-1021) 
Sec. 22-327. - Same—Minimum fee. 
The minimum bimonthly fee for a connected meter to the city waterline shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1981, § 6-1022) 
Sec. 22-328. - Penalty—Discontinuance of service for nonpayment; cutoff fee; advance deposit. 
Upon failure of any person to pay any water and/or sewer or garbage bill, assessment, or charge against any building, place, or premises within ten days from the date such bill is due, an automatic lien, with the same priority as a lien for ad valorem taxes, shall arise and exist against the building, place, or premises served, and the director of the water and sewer department is authorized to cut off and discontinue the water and/or sewer service until such bill or charge is paid. A charge shall be made for each cutoff. The cutoff charge, the amount of the past due bill, and an advance deposit for future services must be paid by the owner of the building, place, or premises or his tenant as his agent before the water and/or sewer service is resumed. The cutoff charge and advance deposit charge, as applicable, shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36 of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 24-11; Ord. No. 83-3-6, § 1, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 85-3-14, § 1, 3-18-85; Code 1981, § 6-1023; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § IV, 4-17-00) 
Sec. 22-329. - Responsibility of landlords. 
Landlords and agents are hereby held responsible for water rates on their premises and shall pay the same immediately upon the failure or refusal of their tenants to do so. 
(Code 1959, § 24-12; Code 1981, § 6-1024) 
Sec. 22-330. - Water connection and meter setting charges. 
The charges for making water connections and setting meters within the city and outside the limits of the city shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1981, § 6-1025) 
Sec. 22-331. - Sewer tapping and connection charges. 
The fee charged by the city for tapping and connecting the sewer lines or mains of the city within the limits of the city and outside the limits of the city shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1981, § 6-1026) 
Sec. 22-332. - Sewer connections—Authority to make. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to any city sewer except as authorized by the city manager or the director of the water and sewer department. 
(Code 1959, § 24-17; Code 1981, § 6-1027) 
Sec. 22-333. - Same—Permission discretionary. 
Permission for a person to connect with a sewer or sewers may, in the discretion of the director of the water and sewer department, be confined to such character and kind of water and other deposits as in his judgment is necessary and proper, considering the locality and size of the sewer. An application to the director of the water and sewer department to connect to a city sewer must set forth fully the size and character of the sewer which is to be put down, the point or points at which connections are to be made, and the purpose for which the sewer is to be used. 
(Code 1959, § 24-18; Code 1981, § 6-1028) 
Sec. 22-334. - Same—Maintenance. 
The occupants of premises from which any sewer connection is made shall be bound at their own expense to keep such connection in good condition. Any person who shall make connection with any sewer of the city, except by permission as provided in this article, or who after permission shall fail to perform or violate any of the terms and conditions of such permission, or shall fail to keep such connection in good order, shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-9. 
(Code 1959, § 24-19; Code 1981, § 6-1029) 
Sec. 22-335. - Bimonthly sewer rate. 
The bimonthly rate schedule for the use of city sewers and mains within and without the city shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1981, § 6-1030) 
Sec. 22-336. - Minimum sewer rates. 
The bimonthly minimum charge for a sewer service connected to the city sewer lines or mains shall be based on the size of the water meter then in service and shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Code 1981, § 6-1031) 
Sec. 22-337. - Water and sewer and garbage charges paid as one bill. 
Water, sewer and garbage charges shall be paid as one bill. Failure to pay any such charge shall be subject to penalties and remedies as provided in section 22-328 of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 24-26; Ord. No. 85-3-15, § 1, 3-18-85; Code 1981, § 6-1032; Ord. No. 00-4-1, § IV, 4-17-00) 
Sec. 22-338. - Service fee for returned checks. 
A service fee shall be imposed for checks received by the city for water and sewer charges, that, upon deposit by the city, are returned unpaid for any reason. The amount of any such service charge shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36, and collection thereof shall be in the same manner as provided in this Code for the collection of water and sewer charges. 
(Ord. No. 83-3-7, § 1, 3-21-83; Code 1981, § 6-1033) 
Sec. 22-339. - Bimonthly fire service rate. 
The bimonthly rate schedule for the availability for use of nonmetered water for fire protection purposes to premises within and without the city shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Ord. No. 83-3-5, § 1, 3-21-83; Code 1981, § 6-1034) 
Sec. 22-340. - Penalty for late payment. 
A penalty shall be imposed on all accounts for water and sewer services not paid within ten days of the date of the billing of such accounts in the percentage amount as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(Ord. No. 83-3-4, § 1, 3-21-83; Code 1981, § 6-1035) 
Sec. 22-341. - Penalty for unauthorized reinstatement of services. 
(a)  If an unauthorized reinstatement of service occurs on premises where water and/or sewer service has been discontinued for whatever reason, a penalty shall be imposed, in addition to the charges provided for in section 22-340, prior to the reconnection of such services, as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city as provided in section 8-36. 
(b)  Prior to the reconnection of any services, charges for repairs to the meter must be paid. 
(Ord. No. 83-3-3, § 1, 3-21-83; Code 1981, § 6-1036) 
Chapter 23 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; certain boards designated, § 2-78; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; animals, ch. 4; buildings, ch. 5; cemeteries, ch. 6; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 11; transfer of business license, § 11-16; sidewalk cafes, § 11-60; signs and outdoor advertising, § 11-116 et seq.; signs permitted and regulated in designated zoning districts, § 11-125; off-premises freestanding signs, § 11-126; political signs, § 11-134; definitions pertaining to motor vehicles and traffic, § 12-2; riding bicycle or skateboard on sidewalk, § 12-277; parks, recreation and cultural affairs, ch. 15; planning and development, ch. 16; subdivisions, ch. 21; development plans for subdivisions, § 21-57; unified land development code, appendix b. 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflict of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, adopted July 16, 2001, repealed §§ 23-1—23-8. Formerly said sections pertained to short title; definitions; purposes; interpretation, application, compliance, jurisdiction; division of city into districts; zoning map; interpretation of district boundaries; continuance of nonconforming uses as related to general zoning regulations. The user of this Code is directed to appendix B for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 23-1—23-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, adopted July 16, 2001, repealed § 23-36. Formerly said section pertained to designated by district as related to zoning permitted uses. The user of this Code is directed to appendix B for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 23-36—23-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, adopted July 16, 2001, repealed §§ 23-61—23-67. Formerly said sections pertained to general provisions; district development standards; exceptions and modifications; offstreet automobile parking and storage; offstreet loading and unloading space; driveway regulations and environmental protection requirements as related to zoning development standards generally. The user of this Code is directed to appendix B for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 23-61—23-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, adopted July 16, 2001, repealed §§ 23-96—23-108 in their entirety. Formerly said sections pertained to purpose and objective; general provisions; single-family attached subdivision; planned unit development (PUD); planned shopping development; cluster housing subdivision; apartment developments; high-rise apartment development; procedures for approval of private subdivision developments; procedures for approval of planned developments (except private subdivision requirements); notice, hearings, orders; variances and penalties as related to planned developments. The user of this Code is directed to appendix B for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 23-96—23-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOBILE HOME PARKS; MOBILE HOMES 

Sec. 23-136. - Permits and applications. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid permit issued by the building inspector in the name of that person for the specific construction, alteration, or extension proposed. 
(1)  Rezoning application. An application requesting the creation of an R-3 district shall be submitted to the building inspection department prior to the submission of an application for a mobile home park building permit. Any area zoned R-3 shall revert to its previous classification one year from the date the zone was created by the city commission, unless actual construction has been initiated or a request for an extension of one year is granted by the city commission. Not more than one extension shall be granted. 
(2)  Mobile home park building permit. Subsequent to the required zoning amendments, an application for a permit to construct may be submitted to the office of the Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission in triplicate at least two weeks prior to a regularly scheduled meeting. The planning commission may recommend approval of a planned mobile home park when all provisions of this chapter have been met. All applications for building permits shall contain the following: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant. 
b.  The location and legal description of the mobile home development. 
c.  Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed development on a topographic map showing, but not limited to the following: 
1.  The area and dimensions of the tract of land. 
2.  The number, location, and size of all mobile home lots. 
3.  The location and width of roadways, driveways, and walkways. 
4.  The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes. 
5.  Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and sewage disposal facilities. 
6.  Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed within the mobile home park and proposed recreation facilities. 
7.  The location and details of the lighting and electrical system. 
(3)  Mobile home park building permit issuance. If the proposed mobile home park will, when constructed, altered, or expanded according to the submitted plans and specifications, be in accordance with all provisions of this chapter, as well as all other applicable ordinances of the city, then the building inspection department, with the written approval of the planning commission, and endorsed by the health department and the fire inspector, shall issue upon payment of a fee, as stipulated by the city commission, a mobile home park building permit. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6055) 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5; solid waste, ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; utilities, ch. 22. 
Sec. 23-137. - Licenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to open, operate, or administer any mobile home park within the city limits unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the business license inspector in the name of such person for the specific mobile home park. All applications for licenses shall be made to the business license inspector, who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this chapter, after a site inspection and review by the building inspection department, the department of health, and the authorized fire inspector. 
(b)  The license shall be nontransferable. The licensees shall give notice in writing to the enforcing agency 48 hours prior to selling, transferring, giving away, or otherwise disposing of interest in or control of any mobile home park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the persons succeeding to the ownership or control of the mobile home park. Upon application in writing for a new license and deposit of a fee, as stipulated by the city commission, the license shall be reissued if the mobile home park is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The application for the original license shall be in writing signed by the applicant, and by a deposit of a fee as stipulated by the city commission, and shall contain the name and address of the applicant and the location and legal description of the mobile home park. 
(d)  Applications for the renewal of licenses shall be made in writing yearly as is required of the holders of business licenses, shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee as stipulated by the city commission, and shall contain any change in the information submitted since the original license was issued or the latest renewal. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, a duly authorized official of the city or the health authority finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provisions of this chapter, that person shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the license was issued and the tenants of the mobile home park, with copies to all concerned officials, that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable time specified in the notice by the building inspection department or the health authority, the license shall then be suspended. At the end of such period, the appropriate authority shall reinspect such mobile home park and, if conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice in writing, with copies to all concerned officials, of such suspension. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such person shall cease operation of the mobile home park. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6056) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 9. 
Sec. 23-138. - Inspection. 
The building inspection department and the health authority are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections of mobile home parks as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with the development standards and maintenance regulations set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6057) 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5. 
Sec. 23-139. - Specific standards. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  A mobile home park shall be located only upon property properly zoned for that use. No mobile home park shall contain less than five acres in gross land area. The maximum density will then be regulated by separation requirements, occupied lot area ratios and recreation area requirements as set forth in this chapter. In no instance shall the number of mobile homes exceed eight per gross acre. 
(2)  Conditions of soil, groundwater level, drainage, and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, dust, noise, odors, or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to predictable sudden flooding or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
(3)  No mobile home park not now in existence, licensed, and in operation shall be licensed with less than 25 spaces ready for occupancy. 
(4)  Mobile home stands shall not occupy more than one-third of the respective lot areas. The accumulated occupied area of a mobile home lot, including the mobile homes and accessory structures, shall not exceed two-thirds of the respective lot areas. 
(b)  Mobile home lot. The limits of each mobile home lot should be marked on the ground by an iron pin. The location of lot lines on the ground shall correspond with those as shown on the plan approved by the planning commission. 
(1)  No mobile home lot shall contain less than 4,000 square feet. 
(2)  Each lot shall be at least 40 feet wide. 
(3)  There shall be at least a 14-foot side yard and a 14-foot rear yard setback. No mobile home shall be located closer than 20 feet from any internal driveway. 
(c)  Mobile home stand. Each mobile home lot shall contain a mobile home stand capable of containing a mobile home in a fixed position. The stand shall be graded and paved with an impenetrable surface at least six inches in thickness. The entire area of each stand shall be so improved. It may be surfaced with a layer of uniform sized crushed stone to a depth of six inches in lieu of pavement. The topographic interval of a stand shall not exceed two feet. The elevation distance and angle of the stand in relation to the accessway shall be such as to facilitate the safe and efficient placement and removal of the mobile home. A concrete patio shall be provided with a minimum of 180 square feet of area. It shall be at least two inches thick on the access side of the mobile home so as to lie beneath both doors. 
(d)  Buffer strips. 
(1)  Each mobile home park shall have and construct a buffer area between the right-of-way line of adjacent public roads and highways and any portion of a mobile home lot of at least 40 feet. There shall also be a buffer area between the abutting properties and any mobile home lot of at least 25 feet. The buffer area shall be clear of obstruction with other than trees and landscaping materials. No mobile home lot shall extend into any required buffer strip. 
(2)  The mobile home park may be required to be enclosed entirely or in part, exclusive of driveways, at its external boundaries by a solid wall, fence, or evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height. 
(e)  Parking; interior drives; walkways. 
(1)  Each mobile home lot shall be provided with two paved parking spaces. Parking may be in tandem. A central auxiliary paved parking area shall be established and maintained within each park for the use of guests. The number of spaces within the area shall be equal to one for every five trailer lots. 
(2)  All mobile home lots shall abut upon an interior hard paved surface drive of not less than 20 feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street. Where interior drives are paved to a width of 26 feet or more, the required guest parking area shall be waived. Drives exceeding 20 feet may be required when warranted by proposed traffic. 
(3)  Walkways not less than three feet wide shall be provided from the mobile home spaces to service buildings and to facilitate safe and convenient pedestrian traffic throughout the park. 
(f)  Recreation area. Not less than eight percent of the gross site area shall be devoted to recreational facilities, generally provided in a central location. The recreation area shall be designed and developed for active recreation. Where individual lots are substantially above minimum standards and provide for sufficient outdoor recreation, an exemption may be granted to an extent that an absolute minimum of 100 square feet per lot be considered sufficient for the site of a centralized recreation area, provided that no recreation area shall contain less than 5,000 square feet. 
(g)  Water and sewage. Each mobile home space shall be provided with and each mobile home shall be connected to a central sanitary sewerage and water supply system approved by the health authority and the plumbing inspector. 
(h)  Lighting and overhead wires. 
(1)  All wiring shall be underground. Adequate lighting shall be provided to illuminate streets, drives, and walks for safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. To provide exterior lighting for mobile home parks, the following standards are required: 
a.  Discharge-type luminaries not smaller than 7,000 lumens shall be used. (Incandescent lamps are not acceptable.) 
b.  All street intersections shall be lighted. 
c.  Pole placement and luminaire mounting shall be planned to get maximum utilization of light on street areas. 
(2)  The preferred mounting height for roadway luminaries is 27 feet for 7,000 lumens and 30 feet for 20,000 lumens. The minimum mounting height for a post top luminaire is 16 feet. The minimum mounting height shall be 15 feet. Mounting heights are measured from ground level to bottom of luminaire. 
(3)  The ratio of average to minimum street illumination (footcandles) shall not exceed six to one. The illumination ratio shall be determined by using IES (Illuminating Engineering Society) calculation methods and luminaire manufacturer's standard performance data. The average horizontal footcandles should be not less than two-tenths. This will result in 7,000 lumen roadway type luminaries mounted approximately 27 feet above ground and spaced 200 to 250 feet. (The exact spacing will depend on the luminaire selected.) 
(i)  Refuse disposal. 
(1)  Every mobile home lot shall be provided with at least one 20-gallon garbage can, of acceptable material with a tightfitting cover. The cans shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times. It shall be the responsibility of the park owner to insure that garbage and rubbish shall be collected and properly disposed of. Collection shall be at least twice weekly. 
(2)  Stands in which the garbage cans can be placed shall also be provided and so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them. 
(j)  Service building. Every mobile home park not in existence, licensed and in operation on the effective date of this section shall be provided with a service building containing emergency sanitary facilities consisting of at least one lavatory with hot and cold water and one flush toilet for each sex per 100 mobile home lots or fraction thereof. The building containing such emergency sanitary facilities shall be accessible to all mobile homes and may be provided in connection with laundry and other service facilities. The design for the service building shall be submitted as part of the application for permit. 
(k)  Signing. Each mobile home park shall be permitted to display on each street frontage one identifying sign of a maximum size of nine square feet. The sign shall contain thereon only the name and address of the mobile home park and may only be lighted by indirect lighting. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6061) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; utilities, ch. 22. 
Sec. 23-140. - Maintenance regulations. 
(a)  Responsibilities of management. 
(1)  The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park in compliance with this chapter and to keep its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(2)  The management is charged with the responsibility of informing the residents of all applicable provisions of this chapter and of their duties and responsibilities under this chapter. A copy of section 23-138 shall be displayed in the mobile home park. 
(3)  The management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home stand, which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections. 
(4)  The management shall maintain a register containing the names of all park residents identified by lot number or street address and shall show each change in lot occupancy. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the park. 
(b)  Responsibilities of residents. 
(1)  The resident shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter and shall maintain his mobile home lot, its facilities, and equipment in good repair and in clean and sanitary condition. 
(2)  The open area under a mobile home shall be totally enclosed by skirting constructed of suitable weatherproof material. 
(3)  No flammable mixtures will be stored under the mobile home. Stored items shall be located so as not to interfere with the underneath inspection of the mobile home. 
(4)  First aid fire extinguishers for class B and class C fires shall be kept at the premises and maintained in working condition. All fire extinguishers shall be subject to inspection by an authorized official. 
(c)  Accessory structures. 
(1)  Accessory structures shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the mobile home park. 
(2)  Only one accessory structure will be allowed on each lot. A building permit will be required for each such structure as construction and electrical installation will be subject to existing city codes. Electrical circuits supplying the accessory structure shall be independent of the circuit supplying the mobile home. All setback requirements shall be maintained. 
(d)  Mobile home placement and anchorage. The mobile home shall be properly secured against high wind velocity. Overturning, sliding, or uplift shall be prevented through anchors, tie-downs, or similar devices acceptable to the building inspection department. 
(e)  Insect and rodent control. 
(1)  Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained free of insects and rodent harborage and infestation. Examination methods and other methods to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the health department. 
(2)  Storage shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage. Lumber, pipes and other building materials shall be stored at least one foot above the ground. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6062) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9. 
Sec. 23-141. - Existing mobile home parks and mobile homes on individual lots. 
(a)  Existing mobile home parks. 
(1)  All existing mobile home parks in the city which do not comply with regulations contained in this chapter shall be permitted one year to be brought into conformance. 
(2)  Should any existing mobile home park not be able to comply with the criteria for an R-3 zone, it will remain in nonconformance but must meet all other health and safety factors of this chapter. Prior to receiving a license, an itemized schedule will be provided each applicant, indicating deficiencies to be corrected. 
(b)  Mobile homes on individual lots. From and after the adoption of this chapter no mobile home shall be placed on an individual lot outside an R-3 zone for residential purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6063) 
Secs. 23-142—23-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 96-5-1, adopted May 20, 1996, amended §§ 23-176—23-186 by inserting in lieu of §§ 23-176—23-187. Formerly, such sections pertained to historic districts and derived from Ord. No. 79-5, §§ 1—8, 10, 11, 6-4-79; Code 1981, §§ 8-7001—8-7010; Ord. No. 81-7-2, § 1, 7-6-81. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. 05-2-6, § I, adopted Feb. 21, 2005, renamed article V to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article was entitled Historic Preservation Zoning Ordinance. 
State Law reference— Historic preservation, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; local ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-23. 

Sec. 23-176. - Purpose. 
(a)  In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that Rome's historic, cultural, architectural, archaeological and aesthetic heritage is among its most valued and important assets, that Rome's heritage is important to the education, culture, traditions, and economic well-being and potential of the city, and that the preservation of Rome's heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of its people; 
(b)  In furtherance of the goal to preserve its historic resources and maintain its quality of life as stated in the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  In order to stimulate revitalization of historic business districts and neighborhoods and to stabilize and improve property values in the process; 
(d)  In order to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions for tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business and strengthen the local economy; 
(e)  In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of their respective tax laws; 
(f)  In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; and 
(g)  In order to foster civic pride in the history, culture, architecture and appearance of the city; 
The city commission hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of districts, buildings, structures, objects, sites and landscape features having a special historic, cultural, architectural, archaeological or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5-1, 5-20-96) 
Sec. 23-177. - Relationship to planning and development. 
(a)  This article is a part of the planning and development functions of the city. The protective regulations described in this article shall be administered with and as a part of the development codes of the city. 
(b)  All individual buildings and properties in the city lie within zoning districts, which are classified by permitted types of land use. Historic preservation regulations described in this article is not concerned with the use of individual properties. Rather, the regulations are intended to protect and preserve the exterior appearance of historically, architecturally and culturally significant buildings, structures, objects, sites, districts and landscape features. Properties subject to historic preservation regulations are also subject to land use zoning regulations. This article shall apply to locally designated historic districts only. These districts are known as local historic district and local historic properties. 
(Ord. No. 96-5-1, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 05-2-6, § II, 2-21-05) 
Sec. 23-178. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
Building means a construction created principally to shelter any form of human activity. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a local historic property or an individual property located within a local historic district. 
District means a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, building form, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building materials including the initial application of (but not the color of) paints, stains, and other finishes, and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural features, fixtures, details or elements. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a property which affects its historical character. 
Historic means generally more than 50 years old, unless there is a strong justification concerning historical or architectural merit. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, urban or rural, which contains structures, sites, works of art, or a combination thereof which: 
(1)  Have special character or special historical or esthetic interest or value; 
(2)  Represent one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state, or region; and 
(3)  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
Integrity means authenticity of a property's historic identity, evidenced by the survival of physical characteristics that existed during the property's historic or prehistoric period. 
Landscape features means natural features or constructions that affect the historic character of a property, such as fences, walls, walks, statues, fountains, benches, lamp posts, hedgerows, gardens, trees and plantings which are not otherwise considered as a structure, object or site. 
Local historic district means a geographically definable area selected pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 23-180(b)(1) of this article and designated by the city commission. 
Local historic property means a building, structure, site or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof, selected pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 23-180(c)(1) of this article and designated by the city commission. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features, other than color, of a local historic property or any building, structure, object, site or landscape feature, excluding the color of said feature, within a local historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a building, structure or object, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal, covering, or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  The demolition or relocation of a building, structure, object or site; 
(3)  The commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building, structure, site, object or landscape feature within a local historic property or local historic district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features; or 
(6)  Allowing the deterioration of any building, structure, site, object or landscape feature of a local historic property or within a local historic district through neglect. 
Object means a construction primarily artistic in nature or relatively small in scale and simply constructed. Although it may be movable by nature or design, it is associated with a specific setting or environment. 
Property means an area of land containing a single resource or a group of resources. An individual property is a property that consists of a single resource or a main resource and a small number of related secondary resources. A district is a property that consists of a number of resources that are relatively equal in importance. In this article, the term generally is used to mean an individual property. 
Resource means any building, structure, site or object that is part of or constitutes a property. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the location itself possesses historic, cultural or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing building or structure. 
Structure means a functional construction made for purposes other than creating human shelter. 
Yard means an area that lies between the principal building on a lot and the nearest lot line, including: 
(1)  Front yard: A yard situated along any public street right-of-way or private street easement. 
(2)  Rear yard: A yard situated along a rear lot line. 
(3)  Side yard: A yard situated along a side lot line, but not extending into a front or rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 96-5-1, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 01-3-3, § I, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 05-2-6, § II, 2-21-05; Ord. No. 2011-3-1, § I, 3-7-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 23-179. - Historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of a historic preservation commission. There is hereby created a body whose title shall be the Rome Historic Preservation Commission, hereafter referred to as the historic preservation commission or HPC. The commission shall be a part of the planning and development functions of the city. 
(b)  Preservation commission members; number, appointment, terms and compensation. 
(1)  The historic preservation commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the city commission. All members should be residents of the county and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. To the extent available, at least three members should be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, historic preservation, planning, archaeology or related disciplines. At least one member shall be a property owner in a historic district. 
(2)  Members shall serve three-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: Two members for one year; two members for two years; and three members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses incurred while acting in the interests of the commission. 
(3)  Failure of a member to attend three consecutive meetings without satisfactory cause, as determined by the board, shall constitute a vacancy of said historic preservation commission member's position, and the position shall be filled by the city commission. 
(c)  Statement of the historic preservation commission's powers. The historic preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all properties within the city having potential for designation as local historic properties or local historic districts. 
(2)  Recommend to the city commission specific buildings, structures, objects, sites or districts to be designated as local historic properties or local historic districts. 
(3)  Consider applications for certificates of appropriateness and approve or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Recommend to the city commission that the designation of any building, structure, object, site or district as a local historic property or local historic district be revoked, altered, or removed. 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city with the city's consent. 
(6)  Promote the acquisition of facade easements and conservation easements by the city in accordance with the provisions of the Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976 (O.C.G.A. §§ 55-10-1 through 55-10-5). 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities. 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, that the city commission or the historic preservation commission may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for preserving historic resources. 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city commission concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired. 
(10)  Submit to the office of historic preservation of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts that have been designated. 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program. 
(12)  Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The historic preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent. 
(13)  Review and make comments to the office of historic preservation of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(14)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(15)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the historic preservation commission. 
(d)  Historic preservation commission's power to adopt rules and standards. The historic preservation commission shall adopt operational rules and standards for the administration of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness such as bylaws or rules of procedure, and design guidelines. The historic preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The historic preservation commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The historic preservation commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(e)  Conflict of interest. At any time the historic preservation commission reviews a project in which a member of the board has ownership or other vested interest, that member will be forbidden from presenting, voting, or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
(f)  Historic preservation commission's authority to receive funding. The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall insure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(g)  Technical, administrative and clerical assistance. Technical, administrative and clerical assistance shall be provided as required by the historic preservation commission. 
(h)  Records of historic preservation commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. No. 96-5-1, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 97-12-4, §§ I—III, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 98-5-1, § I, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 01-3-3, § I, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 05-2-6, § II, 2-21-05) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 23-180. - Designation of historic districts and historic properties as local historic districts and local historic properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by historic preservation commission. 
(1)  Historic preservation commission's mandate to conduct a survey of historic resources. The historic preservation commission shall work closely with the city in seeing that historic properties in the city are identified and inventoried through a historic resources survey. 
(2)  Historic preservation commission's power to propose historic districts and historic properties to the city commission for designation. The commission shall present to the city commission proposals for local historic districts and local historic properties. 
(3)  Historic preservation commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's presentation of a proposal for a historic district or historic property to the city commission for designation, it shall prepare a report consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing historic district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, noncontributing) of individual properties within the district, or showing historic property boundaries; 
d.  A statement justifying the boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district as a local historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection. A local historic district shall be a geographically definable area which contains buildings, structures, objects, sites and landscape features or any combination thereof, which: 
a.  Have special character or special historic or aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represent one or more periods, styles, or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of Rome, Floyd County, Georgia or the region; and 
c.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visible perceptible section of the city. 
(2)  Boundaries of local historic districts. Boundaries of local historic districts shall be included in, or amended to, the official historic preservation map of the City of Rome, Georgia. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within local historic districts. Individual properties, or the main resources of individual properties, within local historic districts shall be classified as follows: 
a.  Contributing. A building, structure, object or site that adds to the historic associations, historic architectural qualities or archaeological values for which the district is significant because it was present during the period of significance, relates to the documented significance of the district, and possesses historic integrity or is capable of yielding important information about the period. 
b.  Noncontributing. A building, structure, object or site that does not add to the historic associations, historic architectural qualities, or archaeological values for which a district is significant because it was not present during the period of significance or does not relate to the documented significance of the district, or due to alterations, disturbances, additions or other changes, it no longer possesses historic integrity or is capable of yielding important information about the period. 
(c)  Designation of a historic property as a local historic property. 
(1)  Criteria for selection. A local historic property shall be a building, structure, site or object, including adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worth of preservation for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example and representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style or type; 
c.  It is associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to Rome, Floyd County, Georgia, or the region; or 
d.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of Rome, Floyd County, Georgia, or the region. 
(2)  Boundaries of local historic properties. Boundaries of local historic properties shall be amended to the official historic preservation map of the City of Rome. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance amendment for the designation of historic districts and historic properties as local historic districts and local historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation. Designations may be proposed by the city, the historic preservation commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts. A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation; provided that such application is presented along with a petition of 75 percent of the property owners in the proposed district in support of designation. 
b.  For historic properties. A historical society, neighborhood association, or property owner may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of an ordinance amendment for designation. Any ordinance amendment for the designation of any historic district as a local historic district or any historic property as a local historic property shall: 
a.  Provide a legal description of the proposed local historic district or the proposed local historic property; 
b.  Require that, upon designation, a certificate of appropriateness be obtained, as required herein, from the historic preservation commission prior to any material change in the appearance of an individual property located in the local historic district or a local historic property; and 
c.  Require that, upon designation, the local historic district or local historic property be shown on the official historic preservation map of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Required public hearings. The historic preservation commission and the city commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance amendment for the designation of any historic district as a local historic district or any historic property as a local historic property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues of the principal local newspaper and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the historic preservation commission to all owners and occupants of the proposed local historic property or the individual properties located within the proposed local historic district. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than 10 nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll shall constitute legal notification to the owner under this article. 
(4)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or deny the proposed ordinance amendment for designation shall be made by the historic preservation commission at its next regular meeting or at a special meeting convened following the procedures set out in this article. The historic preservation commission shall review public comments and make a final recommendation and transmit said recommendation to the city commission. 
(5)  City commission action on historic preservation commission's recommendation. Following the receipt of the historic preservation commission's recommendation, the city commission may adopt the proposed ordinance amendment for designation, may adopt the proposed ordinance amendment with any changes it deems necessary, or may reject the proposed ordinance amendment. 
(6)  Notification of office of historic preservation. Not less than 30 days prior to a hearing on any ordinance amendment designating a historic district as a local historic district or a historic property as a local historic property, the historic preservation commission must submit the report, as required in subsection 23-180(a)(3), to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance amendment for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance amendment for designation by the city commission, the owner of the local historic property or the individual properties located within the local historic district shall be given written notification of designation by the city commission. This written notice shall inform said owner of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the local historic property or of any individual property located within the local historic district. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owners of said property or properties shown on the city tax roll shall constitute legal notification to the owner under this article. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The historic preservation commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance amendment for designation, including the local historic organization, and relevant public agencies. 
(e)  Alteration or modification of an existing local historic district. 
(1)  Application for modification of a local historic district. Application for alteration or modification of an existing historic district may be submitted to the historic preservation commission by the City of Rome, an historical society, neighborhood association located in such local historic district, or group of two or more property owners representing a majority of property owners in an area proposed to be added to or removed from the local historic district. An historical society, neighborhood association, or group of property owners may not apply for alteration of an existing local historic district for a period of one year following the city commission's rejection of an ordinance amendment to modify the boundary of the district, unless such application is substantially modified from the rejected ordinance amendment as determined by staff of the historic preservation commission. 
(2)  Required components of an ordinance amendment for designation. Any ordinance altering or modifying the boundaries of any local historic district shall include a description of the boundaries of the district and the area proposed to be added to or removed from the district and shall list each property located therein. 
(3)  Boundaries of the local historic district. Any ordinance altering the designation of any property as a local historic property or any district as a local historic district shall require that the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the City of Rome and be kept by the city as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(4)  Historic preservation commission's report on proposed alteration of the local historic district. The historic preservation commission shall make or cause to be made an investigation and shall report on the historic, cultural, architectural, or esthetic significance of each place, site, building, structure, or work of art in the area proposed to be added to or removed from the local historic district. The historic preservation commission shall compose a report of its findings that shall include a physical description of the area proposed to be added to or removed from the local historic district; a statement of historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; a map showing the existing and proposed boundaries of the local historic district; a statement justifying the boundaries; and representative photographs of each place, site, building, structure, or work of art in the area proposed to be added to or removed from the local historic district. This report shall be submitted to the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources or its successor which will be allowed 30 days to prepare written comments concerning the report. 
(5)  Required public hearing. The historic preservation commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance to alter or modify the boundaries of the local historic district. Notice of the hearing shall be published at least three times in the principal newspaper of general circulation within the municipality or county in which the property or properties to be affected by the ordinance are located; and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the city to all owners and occupants of such properties as shown on the city tax roll. All the notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. 
(6)  Recommendation of the historic preservation commission. Following the public hearing, a recommendation to affirm, modify or deny the proposed ordinance amendment shall be made by the historic preservation commission at its next regular meeting or at a special meeting convened following the procedures set out in this article. The commission shall review public comments and make final recommendations and transmit said recommendation to the city commission. 
(7)  City commission's action on historic preservation commission's recommendation. Following the receipt of the commission's recommendation, the city commission may adopt the proposed ordinance altering the boundaries of the local historic district, may adopt the proposed ordinance amendment with any changes it deems necessary, or may reject the proposed ordinance amendment. Provided the city commission shall not amend the proposed ordinance to add additional properties to an historic district if the owners of such properties were not notified of the public hearing, as provided above. 
(8)  Notification of affected property owners. Within 30 days immediately following the adoption of the ordinance amendment, the owners of each individual property located within the area included in or removed from the local historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the city commission. For properties included in the local historic district, such notice shall also apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in the appearance of the historic property within the designated local historic district. Notice sent via the United States Mail to the last known owners of said property or properties shown on the county tax roll shall constitute legal notification to the owner under this article. 
(9)  Creation of islands. The alteration or modification of an existing local historic district may not create an island of property within the district which is not a part of the local historic district. For purposes of this section, an island is defined as a parcel or parcels or property located wholly within a local historic district, such that aggregate external boundaries of the property or properties are completely surrounded by a local historic district. 
(f)  Interim protection. 
(1)  Finding and purpose. The city commission finds that immediate but temporary controls prohibiting any exterior material change in the appearance of a property or district for which an application for designation has been submitted to the historic preservation commission are necessary to preserve the historic integrity of the property or district during the evaluation process. 
(2)  Control regulations. Any property or properties for which an application for designation has been submitted shall receive the full legislative protection of, and be controlled by, the regulations governing a designated local historic property or district. Said protection shall become effective without further action of any kind immediately upon the date and time that the application is submitted. Said protection shall remain effective until the city commission has taken final action on the application. 
(3)  Notification. Upon receipt of an application for designation, staff of the historic preservation commission shall publish notice in the principal newspaper of general circulation within the city stating an application has been received and the property or properties included in the application shall receive the full legislative protection of, and be controlled by, the regulations governing a designated local historic property or district. 
(4)  Enforcement. The staff of the historic preservation commission shall deliver a copy of the application and published notice to the chief building official of the city. The chief building official shall immediately take all steps necessary to accomplish the requirements of this section, and is prohibited from accepting any applications or issuing any permit of any kind for any building, property, or district specified in the application, except as allowed in this article for local historic properties or properties within a local historic district. 
(Ord. No. 96-5-1, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 01-3-3, § I, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 04-5-1, § I, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 05-2-6, § II, 2-21-05; Ord. No. 2016-08-01, § I, 8-22-16) 
Sec. 23-181. - Certificates of appropriateness. 
(a)  Where required. 
(1)  A certificate of appropriateness shall be required before a person may undertake any material change that impacts the appearance of a contributing or noncontributing property within a local historic district as viewed from the exterior. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the following material changes shall not require a certificate of appropriateness, but may proceed upon permission being granted to the applicant by the staff of the historic preservation commission: 
a.  Work to sustain the existing form or to correct deterioration, decay or damage provided that such work does not involve a change in design, material or exterior appearance. 
b.  The removal or replacement of roofing materials, provided that no other significant alterations (i.e., removal of original architectural features, dormers and chimneys). Proposed replacement materials must be similar to existing materials. 
c.  Landscaping, provided the proposed work has no significant affect on the historic character of a property or district; including but not limited to, fences, walls, walks, pools statues, fountains, benches, lamp posts, hedgerows, gardens, trees and plantings, which are not otherwise considered as a structure, object or site. Administrative approval or a certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for minor landscaping, which meets the requirements of adopted design guidelines and does not affect the historic character of a property or district. 
d.  The construction or removal of decks and accessibility ramps which are not visible from a public right-of-way, other than an alley, provided that they do not require the removal or the alteration of the existing building or structure. 
e.  Work to sustain the existing form or to correct deterioration, decay or damage provided that such work does not involve a change in design or exterior appearance but does involve materials different from those currently being used. These materials must be listed within the design guidelines and recognized by staff as being appropriate for the work 
f.  The construction or removal of signs or awnings, provided that such signs or awnings comply with the applicable provisions of the city sign ordinance, and with the applicable historic preservation guidelines. 
g.  The demolition, relocation, location, construction, or removal of non-historic secondary structures, provided that the structure is under 20' x 20' and is located in the backyard. 
(3)  The staff of the historic preservation commission shall not be required to grant or review any application for permission to proceed with any work specified in paragraph (2), and may submit any such application for permission to proceed to the historic preservation commission as an application for a certificate of appropriateness. The historic preservation commission shall consider such application in the same manner as if the application had been originally filed as an application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(4)  If an application to proceed with work is denied by the staff of the historic preservation commission, upon the applicant's request, such application shall be submitted by the staff to the city historic preservation zoning commission, which shall consider such application in the same manner as if the application had been originally filed as an application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(5)  Upon consideration of an application for appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall either: approve, approve with conditions, deny, or find such application to be incomplete. Any appeal from such decision shall follow the procedures as established in the Historic Preservation Ordinance. For a period of six months following the issuance of a denial by the historic preservation commission, the secretary shall refuse to place a previously denied application for a certification of appropriateness on the agenda of the historic preservation commission, unless such application is substantially modified. 
(6)  Any local government, including the city and county, shall notify the historic preservation commission 45 days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the historic preservation commission an opportunity to comment. The historic preservation commission may take up to 45 days to review the proposed undertaking and to render its comments. Said local government shall comply with this and all other provisions of this article. 
(7)  The historic preservation commission may consider past actions when making decisions on applications for certificates of appropriateness; however, the historic preservation commission shall not be bound by the precedent of past decisions when considering new applications, which may appear similar in character. Each application shall be considered on its own merit. 
(b)  Filing. 
(1)  An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made by the owner or owner's agent to the office of historic preservation of the city for transmittal to the historic preservation commission. 
(2)  The historic preservation commission, where it deems necessary in order to review a particular application, may require the submission of any or all of the following items: Architectural plans, plat plans, landscaping plans, plans for off-street parking, plans for proposed signs, elevations of all portions of proposed additions, photographs, elevations or perspective drawings showing the proposed building and existing buildings that are within 100 feet or are substantially related to it visually or by reason of function, traffic generation or other characteristics. 
(3)  Should the historic preservation commission or staff of the historic preservation commission find that the material submitted is not adequate for the proper review of the proposal, the historic preservation commission or staff shall promptly notify the applicant and state the specific information that will be required. In such cases, the applicant shall not be deemed to have made a bona fide application to the historic preservation commission until the specific information is submitted. 
(4)  Schedules and fees. From time to time, the city may adopt reasonable fees for the submission of certificate of appropriateness applications. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no adverse affect on exterior architectural or environmental features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The historic preservation commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its membership on any application. The historic preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices and right to be heard. 
(1)  The historic preservation commission shall hold a public hearing at which each application for a certificate of appropriateness is discussed. 
(2)  Notice of the time, place and reason for holding a public hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation. All such notices shall be published not less than 15 nor more than 45 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. At the certificate of appropriateness hearing, the historic preservation commission shall give the applicant and other interested persons an opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  At least 15 days prior to the public hearing, the planning department shall post a sign or signs of not less than six square feet stating "Certificate of Appropriateness: Public Hearing Notice. For further information please contact the Rome-Floyd County Planning Department at (phone number) or (e-mail address)." One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the property for which is requested a certificate of appropriateness. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street near the point at which access will be gained to the property. 
(4)  Notice shall be given to all surrounding property owners as follows: At least five days prior to the public hearing, the planning department shall cause a notice to be mailed to all persons owning property located adjacent to or across the street from the property that is the subject matter of the request for a certificate of appropriateness. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearings. The written notice shall be mailed to the property owners as such names and addresses appear on the county's ad valorem tax records. 
(f)  Deadline for approval or denial of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The historic preservation commission shall approve or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof, unless any of the following conditions exist: 
a.  Any amendment or modification of the application by the applicant after the initial filing thereof shall extend the date for final action on said application to 45 days from the date of such amendment or modification. 
b.  A finding by the commission that the application is incomplete shall extend the date for final action on the application to 45 days from the date of such finding. 
c.  If a quorum is lacking at the regular meeting when the application is on the agenda, the commission may call a special meeting to act on the application prior to the next scheduled meeting; otherwise, the commission will act on the application at the next scheduled meeting where a quorum is met. 
(2)  Evidence of approval shall be a certificate of appropriateness issued by the board and returned to the building official. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States Mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing with the board. 
(3)  If the historic preservation commission fails to act within 45 days due to conditions other than those listed in subsection 23-181(f)(1) above, such failure shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(4)  Notwithstanding subsection 23-181(f)(1)c. and subsection 23-181(f)(3), if the historic preservation commission fails to act on an application for a certificate of appropriateness for two consecutive meetings due to lack of a quorum, such failure shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(g)  Criteria for review of applications for certificates of appropriateness. 
(1)  In reviewing applications for alterations or new construction, the historic preservation commission shall refer to the secretary of the interior's standards for the treatment of historic properties, along with any published guidelines accompanying the standards, and shall comply with local design guidelines adopted by the historic preservation commission. 
(2)  In reviewing applications for demolitions or relocations, the historic preservation commission shall not grant a certificate of appropriateness without reviewing at the same time the replacement plans for the site. The historic preservation commission shall hear evidence concerning the application at its public hearing and may approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness only if one of the following conditions is determined to exist: 
a.  The application is for the demolition or relocation of a main noncontributing building or structure, a portion of a main noncontributing building or structure, or a nonsignificant building or structure secondary to the main noncontributing building or structure, and the approval of the application will not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance of the local historic district; 
b.  The application is for the demolition or relocation of a nonsignificant addition to or portion of a main contributing building or structure or for a nonsignificant building or structure secondary to the main contributing building or structure, and the approval of the application will not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, architectural or archaeological significance of the local historic property or local historic district; or 
c.  The application is for the demolition or relocation of a local historic property or a contributing or noncontributing building or structure in a local historic district, the demolition or relocation of which would have a substantial adverse effect on the local historic property or local historic district, but the replacement project is of special merit. For a replacement project to be of special merit, it must meet the following criteria: 
1.  It must have significant benefits to the city or to the community by virtue of exemplary architecture, specific features of land planning, or social or other benefits having a high priority for community services; and 
2.  It must clearly serve the public interest to a greater extent than the retention of the present building(s). 
(h)  Deadline for approval or denial of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof; provided, that any amendment or modification of the application by the applicant after the initial filing thereof shall extend the date for final action on said application to 45 days from the date of such amendment or modification. Evidence of approval shall be a certificate of appropriateness issued by the board and returned to the building official. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing with the board. 
(2)  Failure of the historic preservation commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Historic preservation commission's necessary action upon denial of application for certificate of appropriateness. In the event the historic preservation commission denies an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the building official and the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(j)  Historic preservation commission's denial of application binding upon building official. In cases where the application covers a material change in appearance which would require the issuance of a building permit, the denial of an application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be binding upon the building official and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(k)  Unreasonable economic hardship. 
(1)  Objective of unreasonable economic hardship provision. The city commission recognizes that under some conditions the preservation of a designated property may subject the owner(s) to an unreasonable economic hardship. It is, therefore, the objective of this subsection to provide guidance as to the conditions under which a property owner who claims an unreasonable economic hardship should be granted a variance to construct, alter, relocate or demolish a building or structure, or portion thereof, not otherwise allowed by the provisions of this article and to provide procedures for processing applications for economic hardship variances. 
(2)  Application for an economic hardship variance. After final notification from the historic preservation commission of its decision to deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the applicant may apply to the historic preservation commission for an economic hardship variance on the basis that the denial of the certificate of appropriateness has resulted or will result in the loss of all reasonable use of or return from the subject property. An application for an economic hardship variance shall be filed in accordance with subsection 23-181(b)(1). 
(3)  Information needed by historic preservation commission. To substantiate a claim that a property owner has been deprived of all reasonable use of or return from the subject property, the applicant shall submit at the time of application at least the following information: 
a.  For all property: 
1.  Date the property was purchased by current owner(s); amount paid for the property; party from whom the property was purchased, including the relationship, if any, between the current owner(s) and the person(s) from whom the property was purchased; 
2.  Past and current use(s) of the property; 
3.  Assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according to the two most recent assessments; 
4.  All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner(s) in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the property; 
5.  Real estate taxes for the previous two years; 
6.  Mortgage history of current ownership of the property, including current mortgage and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years; 
7.  Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked, and offers received, if any; and 
8.  Extent to which the owner has considered alternative legal uses of the property and/or the feasibility of rehabilitation, including economic incentives available to the owner(s) through federal, state or local public or private programs. 
b.  For income-producing property: 
1.  Past and current income and expenses and annual cash flow; and 
2.  Income tax factors affecting the property, including depreciable basis in land and buildings, ownership structure, and tax bracket of ownership. 
The historic preservation commission may require that the applicant furnish such additional information the commission believes is relevant to its determination of unreasonable economic hardship and may provide that such additional information be furnished under seal. In the event that any of the required information is not reasonably available to the applicant and cannot be obtained by the applicant, the applicant shall file with his affidavit a statement of the information that cannot be obtained and shall describe the reasons why such information cannot be obtained. 
(4)  Public hearings on applications for economic hardship variances. 
a.  The historic preservation commission shall schedule and hold a public hearing on the application for an economic hardship variance within 45 days after the filing thereof. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in accordance with subsection 23-181(e)(2). All interested persons shall be allowed to participate in the hearing as provided in subsection 23-181(e)(3). 
b.  The historic preservation commission may solicit expert testimony or may appoint a special hearing officer from outside its membership to conduct the hearing, sort through the information presented, and make a recommendation based on the facts to the commission. 
(5)  Preservation commission decision on applications for economic hardship variances. 
a.  Within 45 days after the conclusion of the public hearing under subsection 23-181(k)(4), the historic preservation commission shall determine if the regulation imposed by this article results in the loss of all reasonable use of or return from the subject property. In making its determination, the commission shall take into account any written opinion of the appointed hearing officer, if any, on the evidence presented. The determination shall be accompanied by a report stating the reasons for the decision. Written notice of the determination shall be transmitted to the building official and, by United States mail, to the applicant. 
b.  If the historic preservation commission determines that reasonable use or return remains, or the applicant fails to submit information to prove the claim, or the applicant simply refuses to comply with the commission's request for information necessary to make a determination, the application for an economic hardship variance shall be denied. A denial of the application shall be binding upon the building official and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
c.  If the historic preservation commission determines that its previous denial of a certificate of appropriateness results in the loss of all reasonable use of or return from the subject property, it shall change the offending action by issuing a certificate of appropriateness, thereby allowing the proposed work to proceed. 
(l)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. If the work is not performed in accordance with such certificate, the building inspector shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The city commission or its representative shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent the material change in appearance of a local historic property or local historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such local historic property or local historic district. 
(m)  Timely completion of projects. Construction of an approved project must be commenced and completed within 18 months of the date of issuance of the certificate of appropriateness. Certificates of appropriateness are issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable at the discretion of the historic preservation staff. 
(n)  Recording applications for certificates of appropriateness. The historic preservation commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said applications. 
(o)  Acquisition of property. The historic preservation commission may, where such action is authorized by the city commission and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a significant historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange or otherwise of the property or any interest therein. 
(p)  Appeals. Any appeal of a decision of the historic preservation commission may be made to the superior court as allowed by Georgia law if it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the commission in the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-5-1, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 98-5-2, § I, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 98-5-2, § I, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 99-3-1, 3-1-99; Ord. No. 01-3-3, § I, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 05-2-6, § II, 2-21-05; Ord. No. 2011-3-1, §§ II—V, 3-7-11; Ord. No. 2014-9-1, § I, 9-8-14; Ord. No. 2015-02-04, § I, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 2015-11-01, § I, 11-23-15; Ord. No. 2016-08-01, §§ I, II, 8-22-16) 
Sec. 23-182. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning code, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 96-5-1, 5-20-96) 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5. 
Sec. 23-183. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of other validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-5-1, 5-20-96) 
Sec. 23-184. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 96-5-1, 5-20-96) 
Sec. 23-185. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 96-5-1, 5-20-96) 
Sec. 23-186. - Boundaries of local historic districts. 
(a)  Official historic preservation map. 
(1)  The boundaries of various historic districts and properties shall be shown on a map of the city entitled "Historic Preservation Map, City of Rome, Georgia" and shall be amended thereafter by the city commission from time to time in conformance with this Code. 
(2)  The "Historic Preservation Map, City of Rome, Georgia" is adopted as the official historic districts and property map and is hereby made a part of this Code, and all notations, references and other information shown on it shall be a part of this Code. 
(3)  The official historic preservation map, as adopted by the city commission and subsequently amended by its action, shall be maintained by the historic preservation staff of the City of Rome. 
(4)  The official historic preservation map, shall be printed and available to the public. Printed maps shall be identified by the following words: 
"Historic Preservation Map, City of Rome, Georgia: This is the official historic preservation map referred to in Rome's Historic Preservation Ordinance as of _______ (date)." 
(b)  Changes to the official historic districts and property map. Changes to the official historic preservation map shall be made in accordance with provisions listed in section 23-180 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 96-5-1, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 98-4-8, § I, 4-20-98; Ord. No. 99-5-4, § I, 5-17-99; Ord. No. 00-7-2, § I, 7-3-00; Ord. No. 05-2-6, § II, 2-21-05; Ord. No. 05-8-6, § I, 8-1-05) 
Sec. 23-187. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption by the city commission of Rome, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 96-5-1, 5-20-96) 
Secs. 23-188—23-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, adopted July 16, 2001, repealed §§ 23-211—23-219. Formerly said sections pertained to zoning enforcement officer; building permit, required; same, application; construction progress; certificate of occupancy, required; same, denial; records of applications and certificate; penalties for violation and remedies as related to zoning regulations administration, enforcement and penalties. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 23-211—23-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, adopted July 16, 2001, repealed §§ 23-251—23-255. Formerly said sections pertained to creation; proceedings; appeals, hearings, notices, stay of proceedings and decisions of the board as related to the board of zoning appeals. The user of this Code is directed to appendix B for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 23-251—23-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, adopted July 16, 2001, repealed §§ 23-276 and 23-277. Formerly said sections pertained to authority and legal status provisions as related to zoning regulations amendments and legal status provisions. The user of this Code is directed to appendix B for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 23-276—23-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 23-301. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult entertainment establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests; reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(b)  Findings. Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia; Richmond County, Georgia; Amarillo, Texas; Austin, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Houston, Texas; Renton, Washington; Phoenix, Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; St. Paul, Minnesota; Tucson, Arizona; Augusta, Georgia; LaGrange, Georgia; Dalton and Whitfield County, Georgia; Carrollton, Georgia; Smyrna, Georgia; and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences, we believe are relevant to the problems faced by the City of Rome, Georgia, the City Commission takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the findings of the commission that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior herein above described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. Based on these findings, this article is adopted to regulate certain types of businesses and to establish where such activity may or may not be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-302. - Adult entertainment establishments defined. 
Under this article, the term adult entertainment establishment shall include, without limitation, the following types of establishments, which shall be defined as follows: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means either: 
(1)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 25 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 25 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities of specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or person& who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnished or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-303. - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies; place where persons regularly assemble for worship; congregation; organization for religious purposes. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means, for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual simulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-304. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March first of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 am. and 1:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open on Christmas Day. 
(g)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(h)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(i)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(j)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(k)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(l)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(m)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths foot candles per square foot. 
(n)  If any portion or subparagraph of this section of this article or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-305. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-306. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the City of Rome any adult entertainment establishment without a license so to do. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-307. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-308. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-309. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-310. - Location. 
No adult entertainment establishment or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other adult entertainment establishment is located; 
(5)  Within any zoning category other than the following categories: 
(a)  General Heavy Commercial (H-C); 
(b)  Light industrial (L-I); and 
(c)  Heavy industrial (H-I). 
(6)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from any door of the establishment to the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95; Ord. No. 02-7-8, § I, 7-15-02) 
Sec. 23-311. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the city clerk of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall receive approval of such employment from the city clerk. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city clerk requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular City of Rome or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the city clerk for a hearing. The decision of the city clerk after hearing may be appealed to the Rome City Commission which may issue such order as is required. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the City of Rome, laws and regulations of the State of Georgia, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-312. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the city commission, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. 
(b)  The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-313. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to a corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual, applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any; 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal, possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-314. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the city clerk and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee has been paid; that the application containing the aforementioned and described information has been presented to the city clerk; and that all information contained therein is true and correct. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-315. - Application; investigation. 
The city clerk shall have 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city commission shall upon two readings, grant the license if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant complies with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the City of Rome, State of Georgia or the United States; 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Rome or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95; Ord. No. 95-8-6, § I, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 23-316. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the State of Georgia or the City of Rome. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-317. - License—Refusal; appeal. 
If the city clerk, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, he shall notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a license may appeal such denial as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-318. - Same—Renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed by the city clerk on a year-to-year basis, provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-319. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-320. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city commission, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city clerk. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the Code have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-321. - Appeal—Procedure. 
The licensee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination by the city clerk, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the city commission and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the commission, and the name and address of the applicant. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city commission meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt, of the application for commission's action. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-322. - Same—Commission determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the commission's agenda, the commission may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-323. - City commission hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city commission, at the time and date set therefor, the commission shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city commission may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-324. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-325. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city commission and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-326. - Hearing officer—Report. 
The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date a hearing before the hearing officer is terminated, submit a written report to the commission. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished the city manager and chief of police. The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-327. - Same—Action by commission. 
The commission may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the commission does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-328. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-329. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-330. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-331. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-332. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "unclean" or "unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Sec. 23-333. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 93-12-2, § I, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 95-3-3, § I, 3-6-95) 
Secs. 23-334—23-349. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PERSONAL WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES 

Sec. 23-350. - Purpose. 
(1)  This ordinance is designed and intended to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public while balancing the interests of the residents of the city, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers. It seeks to do so by establishing guidelines for the siting of all wireless, cellular, television and radio telecommunications towers and antennae within the incorporated limits of the city. 
(2)  The goals of this ordinance are: 
a.  To encourage the design and construction of communication towers and antennae to minimize adverse visual and residential impacts; 
b.  To minimize the total number of communication towers within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to residents of the city; 
c.  To encourage the location of communication towers in non-residential areas; 
d.  To encourage the joint use of new and existing communication tower sites among service providers; and 
e.  To enhance the ability of the providers of wireless communication services to deliver such services to the community effectively and efficiently. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-351. - General provisions. 
(1)  General requirements for all telecommunications facilities. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications facilities governed by this ordinance. 
(2)  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for such telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. The owner shall visually inspect each tower on an annual basis and file a written report to the building inspection department with the findings of such inspection. 
(3)  Regulatory compliance. 
a.  All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this chapter shall bring such telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the time frame established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 
b.  Owners of telecommunications facilities shall provide documentation showing that each telecommunications facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every 12 months. Failure to provide such documentation over the course of any five-year period shall constitute evidence of abandonment. 
(4)  Security. All telecommunications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. 
(5)  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on telecommunication facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. If lighting is required or necessary, the building official may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(6)  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this ordinance are met. 
(7)  Visual impact. 
a.  Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c.  Where feasible, telecommunication facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d.  Telecommunication facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
e.  Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports telecommunications facilities must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding, structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping, or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(8)  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmissions facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-352. - Exemptions. 
(1)  Any communications tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
(2)  Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service; 
(3)  Any telecommunications facilities located on property owned, lease or otherwise controlled by the city provided a license or lease authorizing the telecommunications facility has been approved by the governing body; or 
(4)  Any cable television headend or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-353. - Preferred locations. 
(1)  Co-location. The applicant shall make a reasonable attempt to co-locate on existing communications towers, buildings, or other tall structures. The applicant shall be willing to allow other users to co-locate on the proposed communications tower in the future, subject to engineering capabilities of the structure, frequency considerations, and proper compensation from the additional user. Proper compensation shall be determined by the applicant providing an average of the lease rates it pays for co-location sites in Floyd County. The rate information shall be deemed a trade secret of the applicant and shall be made available only to the building official who shall not be allowed to disclose it. 
(2)  Stealth or concealed structure. The support structure for an antenna which is primarily for another principal use or accessory to the principal use on the lot where it is located, and partially or wholly conceals the antenna or minimizes its appearance in relation to the principal use of the stealth structure. 
(3)  Existing publicly used facilities, structures and utilities. Publicly used structures are preferred locations throughout the city because they are dispersed throughout the city and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunications facilities. Therefore, telecommunications facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly used structures than when placed on commercial or industrial structures. Publicly-used structures include, but are not limited to, facilities such as police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. Construction of the telecommunications facility is permitted so long as the telecommunications facility adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing structure. 
(4)  Industrial and commercial structures. Wholly industrial and commercial structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, or service stations shall be Preferred Locations. Construction of the telecommunications facility is permitted so long as the telecommunications facility adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing structure. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-354. - Maintenance. 
An annual inspection of the telecommunications facility and its associated site is required. A report of this inspection is to be filed with the building official. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-355. - Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
(1)  Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed but are not to be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
(2)  Telecommunications facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-356. - Zoning, height and setbacks. 
(1)  Zoning. Communication towers may be placed in A-1, O-I, C-1, C-3, C-4, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts within the city. 
(2)  Height. Communication towers shall not exceed 250 feet in height. 
(3)  Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities: 
a.  Communication towers shall not be located any closer than 1,500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable. 
b.  Communication towers exceeding a height of 125 feet may not be placed within 3,000 feet of each other. 
c.  Communication towers must be set back from any off-site residential lot a distance equal to the height of the tower. 
d.  Communication towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
e.  For antennas attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ratio (example: ten-foot high antenna and supporting structure requires ten-foot setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-357. - Additional requirements for towers. 
(1)  Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district as much as possible. Communication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
(2)  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(3)  Communication towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-358. - Application requirements. 
(1)  General. The person, company or organization that will own or operate the communications facility shall make application for a building permit for any communication tower or antenna to the building official. An application will not be considered until it is complete. A building permit shall be required for each telecommunications facility to be installed. The following information shall be submitted for each permit request: 
(2)  Basic information. 
a.  The name, mail address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable, of the applicant. 
b.  The type of personal wireless service to be provided by the communications facility. 
c.  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of communications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, and adjacent land uses. 
d.  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
e.  A full description of the adjacent properties including any residential structures and districts, listed or eligible structures and sites on the National Register of Historic Places, floodplain, wetlands, listed threatened or endangered species or critical habitats, wildlife management areas, protected river corridors and state waters. 
f.  An elevation landscape drawing or computer-enhanced image showing the antenna and its supporting structure as seen: 
(1)  From the closest property line; and 
(2)  From the appropriate property line towards the nearest scenic view or site as established in the comprehensive plan of Floyd County and the cities of Rome and Cave Spring. 
g.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the communications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
h.  Report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the state that documents the following: 
i.  Communications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
ii.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
iii.  Evidence of structural integrity of the communication tower structure; and 
iv.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility. 
i.  Designation of which location preference, identified in section 23-353 above, the proposed telecommunications facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a preferred location, describe: 
(a)  What publicly used building, co-location site or other preferred sites are located within the geographic service area identified above. Provide a list (by street address with tax map reference number noted) and a map at an appropriate scale (but not less than 8½" by 11" in dimension) of all such locations within the service area; 
(b)  Documentation showing what good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure each of these preferred location sites; and 
(c)  Evidence why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible and why such efforts were unsuccessful. 
j.  Notarized statement that the applicant and owner shall allow other future personal wireless service companies, including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to co-locate antennae, equipment and facilities on a telecommunications facility unless specific technical constraints prohibit said co-location. 
(3)  Additional information requirements for communication towers. 
a.  Applicants must identify all existing towers and those submitted to the building official located within a one-mile radius of the proposed site. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna. 
b.  The applicant shall quantify the additional communication tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennae. The applicant shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antennae locations. 
(4)  The applicant must provide any other information that may be requested by the building official to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-359. - Appeals. 
(1)  Appeals from any decision of the building official may be taken by any person aggrieved or any official of the city affected by the decision. Such appeal shall be to the zoning board of appeals using procedures established by article VII of this code. 
(2)  Appeals from the decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be made to the superior court within 30 days of the decision. 
(3)  Any decision by the building official or the zoning board of appeals denying a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-360. - Removal of antenna and towers. 
(1)  All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the building official any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the code standards then such he shall seek remedies as provided in the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, as adopted and hereafter amended by the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-361. - Abandoned towers. 
(1)  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 60 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such telecommunications facility shall remove the structure within 60 days of receipt of notice from the building inspection department notifying the owner of such abandonment. If the telecommunications facility is not removed within the 60 days, the governing authority may, in the manner provided by the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code as adopted by the city, remove such telecommunications facility at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single communication tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease to use the communication tower. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-362. - Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any person violating, by act or omission, any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this municipal code. Where such an act or omission is continued in violation of the provisions of this chapter after notice of such violation by the building official, each day during which such act or omission continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-363. - Remedies. 
(1)  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter, the building inspection department or any other appropriate authority, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violations, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the violation in the case of such building, structure, or land. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 23-364. - Legal status provisions. 
(1)  Conflict with other laws. Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width, depth or size of yard or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(2)  Severability. In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
(3)  Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All Resolutions and ordinances or portions thereof in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 98-12-5, § III, 12-7-98) 
APPENDIX A - GEORGIA MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES BENEFIT SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-8-1, adopted Aug. 18, 2003, repealed former App. A in its entirety, and added a new App. A to read as herein set out. Formerly, said appendix pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 90-12-9 § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 1990; as amended. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; certain boards designated, § 2-78. 
State Constitution reference— Municipal retirement systems, art. IX, § II, par. III. 
State Law reference— Municipal retirement systems, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-2(4), 36-35-4(a); Georgia municipal employees benefit system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - MASTER PLAN DOCUMENT 

Sec. 1. - Purpose of plan. 
The Georgia Municipal Employees Retirement System Plan ("Plan") is hereby established by the Board of Trustees as the qualified defined benefit plan to be adopted by Employers in Georgia. 
Any Municipal Corporation accepted by the Board as an Adopting Employer may become a party to the Plan as of the first day of any Plan Year, or such other date specified by the Adopting Employer, by delivering to the Administrator an appropriate Ordinance of the Governing Authority adopting the Plan. Any other Employer accepted by the Board as an Adopting Employer may become a party to the Plan as of the first day of any Plan Year, or such other date specified by the Adopting Employer, by delivering to the Administrator an appropriate Resolution of the Governing Authority adopting the Plan. With the consent of the Board, such organization shall become an Adopting Employer hereunder, as of the specified date, and shall be subject to the terms and provisions of the Plan as then in effect and thereafter amended. 
The Plan document consists of this Master Plan document and the Adoption Agreement of each Employer. The Plan, generally effective as of the date set forth in the Adoption Agreement for each Employer, except as otherwise specifically provided herein, is established for the purpose of providing retirement and other benefits to Participants. Plan provisions designed to comply with Code Section 414(u) are generally amended effective December 12, 1994, in accordance with the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, as amended. Plan provisions designed to comply with or implement certain provisions of the Small Business Job Protection Act of 1996, as amended, are generally amended effective for Plan Years beginning on or after January 1, 1997, unless otherwise specifically provided herein. Plan provisions designed to comply with or implement certain provisions of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 are generally amended effective for Plan Years beginning on and after January 1, 1998. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the Plan establishes the rights and obligations with respect to individuals who are Employees on and after such dates, as applicable, and to transactions under the Plan on and after such dates, as applicable. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the rights and benefits, if any, of individuals who are not Employees on or after such dates, as applicable, shall be determined in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Plan that were in effect on the date that their employment terminated. 
This Plan is intended to be a volume submitter plan, to be used with a completed Adoption Agreement. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
This Article covers all generally applicable definitions used in this Plan, except for definitions related to service, which are in Article III. Except as otherwise provided in the Employer's Adoption Agreement, the definition of terms contained in this Article II and Article III shall govern the meaning of such terms used in the Adoption Agreement. When the initial letter of a word or phrase is capitalized herein, the meaning of such word or phrase shall be as follows, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the content: 

Sec. 1. - Accrued benefit. 
"Accrued Benefit" shall mean, as of any date, the Normal Retirement benefit payable to a Participant at his Normal Retirement Date computed in accordance with the provisions of Article VI and the Adoption Agreement, based upon the Participant's Total Credited Service and his Final Average Earnings (if applicable) as of the date that the Participant's Accrued Benefit is being determined. 
Sec. 2. - Actuarial equivalent. 
"Actuarial Equivalent" shall mean a benefit of approximately equal value when computed on the basis of the actuarial assumptions contained in Article XII. 
Sec. 3. - Actuary. 
"Actuary" shall mean an individual, or firm, appointed or approved by the Board of Trustees to perform actuarial calculations necessary in the funding of the Plan. 
Sec. 4. - Administrator. 
"Administrator" shall mean the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System or its designee. 
Sec. 5. - Adopting employer. 
"Adopting Employer" shall mean an Employer who adopts this Plan through the adoption of the Adoption Agreement. 
Sec. 6. - Adoption agreement. 
"Adoption Agreement" shall mean the Adoption Agreement adopted by an Adopting Employer, which Adoption Agreement contains certain terms of the Plan. 
Sec. 7. - Applicable form. 
"Applicable Form" shall mean the appropriate form as designated and furnished by the Administrator to make the election or provide the notice required by the Plan. In those circumstances where a written election or consent is not required by the Plan or the Code, the Administrator may prescribe an oral, electronic, or telephonic form in lieu of or in addition to a written form. 
Sec. 8. - Board of trustees or board. 
"Board of Trustees" or "Board" shall mean the Board of Trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
Sec. 9. - Child or children. 
"Child" or "Children" shall mean any natural or adopted child of the Participant or Terminated Participant, as applicable, who is younger than age twenty-two (22) as of the date of the Participant's or Terminated Participant's death. The term "adopted child" shall include any child who is legally adopted by the Participant and any child who is a member of the Participant's household if placed with the Participant by an authorized placement agency for legal adoption by the Participant. The term "child" does not include a foster child. 
Sec. 10. - Code. 
"Code" shall mean the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as applicable to governmental plans, as amended from time to time, and the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as applicable to governmental plans. 
Sec. 11. - Code section 415(d) cost of living adjustment. 
"Code Section 415(d) Cost of Living Adjustment" shall mean the cost of living adjustment prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury under Code Section 415(d) for any applicable year. 
Sec. 12. - Contract. 
"Contract" shall mean the entire contents of the Ordinance or Resolution adopting this Plan, the Employer's Adoption Agreement, the Master Plan, the Joint Trust Agreement, and any amendments made hereafter. 
Sec. 13. - Contributions. 
"Contributions" shall mean payments made by Employers (and Employees, if applicable) to GMEBS to provide the benefits specified in the Plan. 
Sec. 14. - Cost of living base figure. 
"Cost of Living Base Figure" shall mean, with respect to Employers who elect in the Adoption Agreement to provide cost-of-living adjustments in benefits received under the Plan, the Current Average Cost-of-Living Index Figure of a Participant as of his actual Retirement date or any subsequent annual adjustment date. The Cost-of-Living Base Figure for beneficiaries receiving survivor benefits shall be the Current Average Cost-of-Living Index Figure beginning on the annual adjustment date following such beneficiary's entitlement to a survivor benefit or any subsequent annual adjustment date. 
Sec. 15. - Covered compensation dynamic break point. 
"Covered Compensation Dynamic Break Point" shall mean, for any calendar year, the average of the maximum amount of earnings for which taxes are payable under the Social Security Act during the period of calendar years: (1) beginning with the later of 1959 or the calendar year thirty-five (35) years before the year for which Social Security Covered Compensation is being computed, and (2) ending with the calendar year preceding the year for which Social Security Compensation is being computed. The amount of Covered Compensation for a Participant shall be determined as of his date of Termination or date of death, whichever is applicable. 
Sec. 16. - Covered compensation table break point. 
"Covered Compensation Table Break Point" shall mean the amount listed in the table below, opposite the year of birth of the Participant: 

 
Sec. 17. - Current average cost-of-living index figure. 
"Current Average Cost-of-Living Index Figure" shall mean, with respect to Employers who elect in the Adoption Agreement to provide cost-of-living adjustments in benefits received under the Plan, the Consumer Price Index figure relative to the United States as a whole for the month of November most recently issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor. 
Sec. 18. - Default beneficiary. 
"Default Beneficiary" shall mean the person(s) to whom a pre-retirement death benefit is payable in the absence of a beneficiary designation by the Participant or in the event there is no Primary or Secondary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary to whom a pre-retirement death benefit is payable, determined in accordance with and subject to Article VIII, Section 6. 
Sec. 19. - Disability. 
"Disability" shall mean, with respect to those Adopting Employers who elect in the Adoption Agreement to provide disability retirement benefits, the following: 
(a)  A physical or mental disability of a Participant who because of such disability becomes entitled to receive disability insurance benefits under the Federal Social Security Act, as amended, provided that the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  Such disability commenced on a specified date during the period of the Participant's employment with the Adopting Employer; and, 
(2)  Such disability was not self-inflicted, incurred in military service, incurred in the commission of a felonious enterprise, or the result of the use of narcotics or drugs or habitual use of alcohol; or 
(b)  A Participant who is not disabled in accordance with the definition under subsection (a) above solely because he lacks the quarters of Social Security coverage required under the federal Social Security Act, as amended, shall qualify for Disability if the Pension Committee determines that the Participant is permanently disabled on the basis of a certificate signed by at least two (2) physicians, (one physician selected and paid by the disabled Participant and one selected and paid by the Employer) stating that: 
(1)  The Participant is permanently disabled as defined in Internal Revenue Code Section 72(m); and 
(2)  Such disability commenced on a specified date during the period of the Participant's employment with the Adopting Employer; and 
(3)  Such disability was not self-inflicted, incurred in military service, incurred in the commission of a felonious enterprise, or the result of the use of narcotics or drugs or habitual alcoholism. 
Sec. 20. - Disability retirement date. 
"Disability Retirement Date" shall mean, with respect to those Adopting Employers who elect to provide Disability retirement benefits in the Adoption Agreement, the first day of the first calendar month in which: (a) a Participant becomes entitled to receive a disability insurance benefit under the Federal Social Security Act, as amended; or (b) the Participant's Disability is determined by the Pension Committee to have commenced, in the case of Disability determinations made by the Pension Committee pursuant to Article II, Section 19(b), as applicable. However, in no event will the Disability Retirement Date be earlier than one (1) calendar month following the date of the Participant's Termination of Employment as a result of Disability. 
Sec. 21. - Early retirement date. 
"Early Retirement Date" shall mean the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the day a Participant qualifies for Early Retirement as specified in the Adoption Agreement, as of which the Participant actually Retires. 
Sec. 22. - Earnings. 
"Earnings" shall mean the total taxable compensation paid to a Participant by the Employer, as reflected in the Employer's W-2 payroll records. Earnings shall also include compensation deferred pursuant to Sections 401(k), 403(b) or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code, compensation redirected pursuant to Section 125 or 132(f)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code, and contributions picked-up under Section 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
The earnings of a Participant for any year taken into account under the Plan for any Plan Year beginning prior to January 1, 1994 shall not exceed Two Hundred Thousand Dollars ($200,000) (as increased by the Cost of Living Adjustment for the year) or for any Plan Year beginning on or after January 1, 1994 shall not exceed One Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars ($150,000) (as increased by the Cost of Living Adjustment for the year, pursuant to Code Section 401(a)(17)). 
Sec. 23. - Effective date. 
"Effective Date" shall mean the original effective date of the Adopting Employer's GMEBS-administered defined benefit plan as specified in the Adoption Agreement. 
Sec. 24. - Eligible employee. 
"Eligible Employee" shall mean any Employee who is designated as an Eligible Employee in the Adoption Agreement and who satisfies any eligibility conditions applicable to the class of Eligible Employees to which he belongs. 
Sec. 25. - Eligible regular employee. 
"Eligible Regular Employee" shall mean any Regular Employee who satisfies the minimum hour and other eligibility conditions applicable to Regular Employees in the Employer's Adoption Agreement. 
Sec. 26. - Employee. 
"Employee" shall mean any person who is regularly employed in the services of the Employer as an employee and shall include elected or appointed members of the Governing Authority and Municipal Legal Officers if they are included as Eligible Employees in the Adoption Agreement. However, notwithstanding any other provision of the Plan to the contrary, the term "Employee" does not include: (a) an individual who is a nonresident alien and who receives no earned income (within the meaning of Code Section 911(d)(2)) from an Employer which constitutes income from sources within the United States within the meaning of Code Section 861(a)(3); (b) a leased employee; or (c) any person treated in good faith by an Employer as an independent contractor, regardless of whether such person is later determined to be a common law employee for tax purposes. 
Sec. 27. - Employer. 
"Employer" shall mean an Employer as defined in O.C.G.A. § 47-5-2(9). 
Sec. 28. - Enrollment date. 
"Enrollment Date" shall mean the date that an Eligible Employee first becomes a Participant under this Plan. Said date shall be established by the Pension Committee on an Applicable Form. 
Sec. 29. - FMLA. 
"FMLA" shall mean the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, as amended from time to time. 
Sec. 30. - Firefighter. 
"Firefighter" shall mean an Eligible Regular Employee of the Adopting Employer who is either certified as a firefighter pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-4 or who would otherwise be required to be certified as a firefighter but who is exempt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-4-12. 
Sec. 31. - Final average earnings. 
"Final Average Earnings" shall mean the arithmetic annual average of the Earnings paid to a Participant by the Adopting Employer for a specified number of consecutive years (12 month periods) of Credited Service preceding the Participant's most recent Termination in which the Participant's Earnings were the highest. The number of years to be used in determining Final Average Earnings shall be designated by the Adopting Employer in the Adoption Agreement. The Administrator shall prescribe a formula for the determination of Final Average Earnings. Calculation of Final Average Earnings shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  If a Participant terminates employment or is on an unpaid leave of absence and he later returns to employment with the Employer, the period(s) prior to and following such absence from employment shall be considered consecutive. 
(b)  If a Participant has not completed the number of consecutive years of Credited Service necessary to compute Final Average Earnings under this Section as of the date of his most recent Termination preceding Retirement, then his Final Average Earnings shall be determined by dividing his total Earnings for his entire period of Credited Service by his total number of years of Credited Service. In computing the number of years of Credited Service for this purpose, incomplete years of Credited Service shall be converted to fractional equivalents of years and included in the computation. 
Sec. 32. - Governing authority. 
"Governing Authority" shall mean the entity named in the Adoption Agreement which is authorized to act for the Adopting Employer. 
Sec. 33. - Ineligible employee. 
"Ineligible Employee" shall mean an Employee of the Adopting Employer who is not an Eligible Employee. 
Sec. 34. - Interest. 
"Interest" shall mean a pro rata share of any and all interest, dividends, and capital gains or losses earned on the invested or reinvested funds of the GMEBS Investment Fund. 
Sec. 35. - Investment fund. 
"Investment Fund" shall mean the total amounts of all Contributions plus Interest, invested or uninvested, held by the Board of Trustees for all GMEBS Employers and their Employees where applicable. 
Sec. 36. - Late retirement date. 
"Late Retirement Date" shall mean the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the day the Participant qualifies for Late Retirement, as specified in Article VI, Section 3, as of which the Participant actually retires. 
Sec. 37. - Military service. 
"Military Service" shall mean, unless otherwise specified in the Adoption Agreement, service performed while on active duty in the Armed Forces of the United States if the Participant was granted an honorable discharge. Except as otherwise required by federal or state law, Military Service shall not include service which is credited toward retirement under any other local, state, or federal retirement or pension plan. 
Sec. 38. - Monthly retirement benefit. 
"Monthly Retirement Benefit" shall mean the monthly benefit as provided in Article VI or any optional benefit payable in lieu thereof as provided in Article VII. 
Sec. 39. - Municipal legal officer. 
"Municipal Legal Officer" shall mean, with respect to those Employers who elect to include municipal legal officers as Eligible Employees, only those municipal legal officers specifically designated in the Adoption Agreement for inclusion as Eligible Employees, provided that such officer otherwise meets the Master Plan's definition of Employee. 
Sec. 40. - Normal retirement date or alternative normal retirement date. 
"Normal Retirement Date" or "Alternative Normal Retirement Date" shall mean the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the date the Participant qualifies for Normal Retirement as specified in the Employer's Adoption Agreement. An Employer may also establish alternative Normal Retirement qualifications in the Adoption Agreement. In such case, the Participant's Alternative Normal Retirement Date shall mean the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the date the Participant meets the alternative Normal Retirement qualifications. 
Sec. 41. - Participant or participating employee. 
"Participant" or "Participating Employee" shall mean any Eligible Employee who is or may become eligible to receive a benefit of any type from the Plan and who has commenced participation in the Plan under Article IV. 
Sec. 42. - Pension committee. 
"Pension Committee" shall mean the committee named in the Adoption Agreement to represent the Adopting Employer in the administration of the Plan. 
Sec. 43. - Plan. 
"Plan" shall mean the provisions of this Master Plan document, along with the Employer's Adoption Agreement, setting forth the Employees to be covered, the benefits to be provided, and the conditions of retirement, and all amendments thereto which may hereafter be made. 
Sec. 44. - Plan representative. 
"Plan Representative" shall mean the Plan Representative designated in the Employer's Adoption Agreement. The Plan Representative must have full authority to represent the Governing Authority in all communications with GMEBS and the Adopting Employer's Employees. The Pension Committee Secretary may serve as the Plan Representative. 
Sec. 45. - Plan year. 
"Plan Year" shall mean a twelve (12) month period specified as such in the Adoption Agreement. 
Sec. 46. - Police officer. 
"Police Officer" shall mean an Eligible Regular Employee employed by the Adopting Employer's Police Department who is either certified or registered as a peace officer pursuant to O.C.G.A. Chapter 35-8. 
Sec. 47. - Post-retirement beneficiary. 
"Post-Retirement Beneficiary" shall mean the person designated by the Participant, in writing and on the Applicable Form, to receive a post-retirement survivor benefit in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Article VII and Article VIII, Section 11. 
Sec. 48. - Primary pre-retirement beneficiary. 
"Primary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary" shall mean the person designated by the Participant, in writing and on an Applicable Form, to receive a pre-retirement death benefit, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Article VIII. 
Sec. 49. - Regular employee. 
"Regular Employee" shall mean any Employee, other than an elected or appointed member of the Governing Authority or Municipal Legal Officer, who is regularly employed in the services of the Adopting Employer. 
Sec. 50. - Resolution. 
"Resolution" shall mean a resolution duly adopted by an Employer. 
Sec. 51. - Retired participant. 
"Retired Participant" shall mean any Participant who has Terminated Employment with the Employer and who is receiving a benefit provided under the Plan. 
Sec. 52. - Retirement or retires. 
"Retirement" or "Retires" shall mean withdrawal from Service with a retirement allowance granted under the provisions of the Plan. 
Sec. 53. - Retirement system, system, or GMEBS. 
"Retirement System," "System," or "GMEBS" shall mean the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System created by O.C.G.A. Section 47-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 54. - Secondary pre-retirement beneficiary. 
"Secondary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary" shall mean the person designated by the Participant, in writing and on the Applicable Form, to receive a pre-retirement death benefit in the event the Primary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary does not survive the Participant, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Article VIII. 
Sec. 55. - Section. 
"Section" shall mean, when not preceded by the word Code or ERISA, a section of the Master Plan document. 
Sec. 56. - Spouse. 
"Spouse" shall mean a person who, as of the date of the Participant's or Terminated Participant's death, as applicable, is lawfully joined with the Participant or Terminated Participant in a marriage which is recognized under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 57. - Terminated participant. 
"Terminated Participant" shall mean any Participant who has Terminated Employment with the Adopting Employer and who has a Vested Benefit under any provision of the Adopting Employer's Plan. 
Sec. 58. - Termination, terminate employment, termination of employment, or terminated. 
"Termination," "Terminate Employment," "Termination of Employment," or "Terminated" shall mean a severance of employment with the Employer, including Retirement, resignation or discharge, lapse of recall rights after layoff, death, or vacation of office by an elected or appointed member of the Governing Authority or a Municipal Legal Officer. Provided, however, that Termination shall not include: (i) absence from active employment which is not treated by the Adopting Employer as a Termination of Employment; (ii) absence due to military service to the extent required under USERRA and Code Section 414(u)(8)(A), (iii) absence due to leave which qualifies as family or medical leave under the FMLA, to the extent required under the FMLA; or (iv) absence due to an authorized leave of absence for any reason if approved by the Adopting Employer. Unless otherwise required by law or unless the terms of the leave otherwise specify, if an Employee on an authorized leave of absence fails to return to active employment upon expiration of the leave of absence, the Employee will be considered terminated as of the date immediately preceding the approved leave period. 
Sec. 59. - Trust fund. 
"Trust Fund" means the total amounts, invested or uninvested, held at any time by the Board in trust for the Employer under the Joint Trust Agreement. 
Sec. 60. - Vested, vesting, vested right, or vested benefit. 
"Vested," "Vesting," "Vested Right," or "Vested Benefit" shall mean the rights of a Terminated Participant as specified in Article IX. 
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE 

Sec. 1. - Current credited service. 
"Current Credited Service" shall mean the number of years and complete months of Service of a Participant with the Adopting Employer from his Enrollment Date to his Termination, which are credited as Current Credited Service for purposes of meeting the Plan's requirements for vesting, retirement and death benefit eligibility, and/or for purposes of computing the amount of benefits payable under the Plan, determined in accordance with and subject to any limitations established in the Master Plan and the Employer's Adoption Agreement. 
Sec. 2. - USERRA Military Service Credit. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits, and service credit with respect to qualified military service shall be provided in accordance with Code Section 414(u). Code Section 414(u) provides that: (i) individuals reemployed under the Uniform Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 ("USERRA") must be treated as not having incurred a break in Service because of qualified military service, (ii) periods of qualified military service must be counted for vesting and benefit accruals, (iii) make-up of contributions up to the maximum the individual could have made if continuously employed must be allowed during the period beginning on reemployment and lasting for the lesser of three (3) times the period of qualified military service or five (5) years, (iv) any accrued benefits contingent on make-up contributions must be made by the Employer, (v) earnings are not required to be credited unless and until after the employee contributes make-up contributions, (vi) allocations of forfeitures to the individual's account are not required during qualified military service, (vii) make-up contributions are based on compensation the individual would have received during the period of qualified military service (if not reasonably certain, compensation for the 12 month period (or, if shorter, the period of employment) immediately preceding qualified military service can be used), and (viii) makeup contributions are subject to the limitations of Code Sections 402(g), 415, and 404(a) for the year to which the contribution relates, not the year in which contribution is made. 
Sec. 3. - Credited past service. 
"Credited Past Service" shall mean the number of years and complete months of Service of a Participant with the Adopting Employer prior to his Enrollment Date which are treated as Credited Past Service under the Employer's Adoption Agreement for purposes of meeting the Plan's requirements for participation, vesting, retirement and death benefit eligibility, and/or or for purposes of computing the amount of benefits payable under the Plan, subject to any limitations established in the Master Plan or the Adoption Agreement. 
Sec. 4. - Prior governmental service. 
"Prior Governmental Service" shall mean government service preceding the Eligible Employee's employment or reemployment date with the Adopting Employer, for an entity other than the Adopting Employer, which the Employer elects to treat as Credited Service for certain purposes, as provided and subject to any limitations contained in the Adoption Agreement. 
Sec. 5. - Prior military service. 
"Prior Military Service" shall mean Military Service not covered by Article III, Section 2 which the Employer elects to treat as Credited Service for certain purposes, as provided and subject to any limitations contained in the Adoption Agreement. 
Sec. 6. - Service. 
"Service" shall mean regular service rendered as an Eligible Employee of the Adopting Employer. Service may include absence from active employment with the Adopting Employer under conditions which are not treated by the Employer as a Termination of Employment, subject to Article IV concerning leaves of absence and any other conditions or limitations specified in the Master Plan and Adoption Agreement. For those Employers who elect in the Adoption Agreement to include elected or appointed members of the Governing Authority or Municipal Legal Officers as Eligible Employees, Service also means any tenure of office held by an elected or appointed member of the Governing Authority or a Municipal Legal Officer, provided that such tenure of office does not include any calendar period during which any elected or appointed member of the Governing Authority or Municipal Legal Officer is also in the regular service of the Employer as an Eligible Employee in another capacity. No Participant may receive credit for more than one (1) year of Service in any twelve (12) month period. 
Sec. 7. - Total credited service. 
"Total Credited Service" shall mean the sum of the Participant's Current Credited Service, Credited Past Service, Prior Military Service, and Prior Governmental Service, as specified in this Article and covered per the Employer's Adoption Agreement, subject to any limitations imposed under the Master Plan or the Employer's Adoption Agreement. The term Total Credited Service includes any Service required to be included in Total Credited Service by USERRA, or any other applicable federal or state law. Full months of Total Credited Service shall be treated as fractions of one (1) year. Partial months shall not be included in the calculation. The Employer may specify in the Adoption Agreement a maximum number years that may be included as Total Credited Service. If an Employer elects in its Adoption Agreement to require Employee Contributions, Total Credited Service shall not include any period of time for which the Employee is required but fails to make such Employee Contributions to the Plan. 
An Employee excluded from participation because of age shall receive credit for all Service as required by law. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELIGIBILITY, QUALIFICATION AND PARTICIPATION 

Sec. 1. - Classes of eligible employees. 
The Employer shall designate in the Adoption Agreement the class(es) of Employees which are eligible to participate in the Plan. Provided, however, that if a person does not meet the definition of "Employee" or contained in Article II, he or she may not be included in any Eligible Employee class. 
Sec. 2. - Qualifications for participation. 
(a)  Minimum Service Requirement. With respect to each class of Eligible Regular Employees, the Employer may specify in the Adoption Agreement a minimum number of hours per week and/or a minimum number of months per year which are required to be scheduled and worked in order to establish and maintain one's status as an Eligible Employee. It shall be the responsibility of the Adopting Employer to determine whether these requirements are and continue to be satisfied. In determining whether said requirements are satisfied, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  If an Employee is otherwise includable in an Eligible Regular Employee class, but he does not meet the minimum service requirements established by the Employer for said class pursuant to subsection (a) above, he or she shall not be considered an Eligible Employee, unless and until he satisfies such requirements. If an Eligible Regular Employee who has not yet become a Participant no longer meets said minimum service requirement, but he remains an Employee of the Employer, he or she shall no longer be considered an Eligible Regular Employee, unless and until he again satisfies the minimum requirement. 
(2)  No period of employment during which an Employee fails to satisfy the Employer's minimum service requirement and no leave of absence granted to such Employee shall be counted in determining whether any waiting period for participation established by the Employer pursuant to subsection (b) below has been satisfied. However, provided the Employee remains continuously employed by the Employer, such periods shall not be considered a break in Service under subsection (b)(1) below for purposes of satisfying said waiting period. 
(b)  Waiting Period. Unless otherwise specified by the Adopting Employer in an addendum to the Adoption Agreement, Eligible Regular Employees shall be required to complete one (1) year of continuous, uninterrupted Service with the Adopting Employer in order to commence participation in the Plan. In determining whether this waiting period has been satisfied, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Breaks in Service. If an Eligible Regular Employee has a break in Service prior to satisfying the waiting period for participation and later becomes reemployed by the Adopting Employer, he shall be required to again satisfy the waiting period in order to be eligible to participate in the Plan. Service rendered prior to said break in Service shall not be taken into account in determining whether the waiting period has been satisfied. 
(2)  Employed on Effective Date; Waiting Period Satisfied. If an Eligible Regular Employee is employed by the Adopting Employer on the Effective Date of the Plan and he has completed a period of continuous, uninterrupted Service as an Eligible Employee immediately prior to the Effective Date equal to or exceeding the length of the required waiting period, then he shall be considered to have satisfied the waiting period and he shall be eligible to commence participation in the Plan on the first day of the month immediately following or coinciding with the Effective Date of the Plan. 
(3)  Employed on Effective Date; Waiting Period Not Satisfied. If an Eligible Regular Employee is employed by the Adopting Employer on the Effective Date of the Plan, but he has not completed a period of continuous, uninterrupted Service as an Eligible Regular Employee immediately prior to the Effective Date equal to or exceeding the length of the required waiting period, then he shall be eligible to commence participation in the Plan on the first day of the month immediately following or coinciding with the date that he completes the minimum period of continuous, uninterrupted Service as an Eligible Regular Employee necessary to satisfy the required waiting period. 
(4)  Employed After the Effective Date. If an Eligible Regular Employee is initially employed by the Adopting Employer after the Effective Date of the Plan, he shall be eligible to commence participation in the Plan on the first day of the month immediately following or coinciding with the date that he completes the minimum period of continuous, uninterrupted Service as an Eligible Regular Employee necessary to satisfy the required waiting period. 
(5)  Treatment of Leaves of Absence. For purposes of determining whether the waiting period for participation has been satisfied, Service shall include any period of absence from employment which is required to be taken into account for such purpose under USERRA, the FMLA, or any other applicable federal or state law. Unless otherwise required by law or unless the terms of the leave otherwise specify, an authorized leave of absence granted to an Eligible Regular Employee by the Adopting Employer shall be counted as Credited Service for purposes of determining whether the waiting period for participation has been satisfied. However, unless otherwise required by law or unless the terms of the leave otherwise specify, if an Eligible Regular Employee on an authorized leave of absence fails to return to active employment upon expiration of the leave of absence, the Eligible Regular Employee shall be considered to have incurred a break in Service for purposes of meeting the waiting period for participation as of the date preceding the approved leave period. 
(6)  Treatment of Service as an Ineligible Employee. If an Employee of the Adopting Employer who is not an Eligible Employee becomes an Eligible Regular Employee while remaining continuously employed by the Adopting Employer, said Eligible Employee shall become eligible to commence participation on the first day of the month immediately following or coinciding with the date he meets the eligibility requirements for participation under this Article. For purposes of satisfying any waiting period imposed by the Adopting Employer, and unless otherwise specified in the Adoption Agreement, the Eligible Regular Employee's prior period of employment as an Ineligible Employee shall be credited in the same manner as Service as an Eligible Regular Employee, provided that during said prior period of service as an Ineligible Employee, he satisfied any minimum service requirement established by the Employer pursuant to Article IV, Section 2(a). Unless otherwise specified in the Adoption Agreement, if an Eligible Regular Employee becomes an Ineligible Employee prior to satisfying the waiting period for participation in the Plan, his service as an Ineligible Employee shall be credited in the same manner as Service as an Eligible Regular Employee for purposes of satisfying said waiting period, provided that the Ineligible Employee satisfies the applicable minimum service requirements established for Eligible Employees pursuant to Article IV, Section 2(a). However, in no event will an Ineligible Employee be permitted to become a Participant in the Plan unless and until he has satisfied the waiting period and has again become an Eligible Employee. For purposes of satisfying the waiting period, leaves of absence granted to an Ineligible Employee shall be treated in the same manner as leaves of absence for Eligible Regular Employees under subsection (5) above. 
(7)  Prior Participation in Another GMEBS Plan. An Eligible Regular Employee who is hired after the Effective Date of the Plan shall be eligible to become a Participant on the first day of the month immediately following or coinciding with the date on which he is employed by the Adopting Employer, regardless of any waiting period requirement established by the Employer, provided that: (i) his immediate prior employment was with another employer in the GMEBS; (ii) he was a Participant in the previous employer's GMEBS Plan; and (iii) he satisfies any minimum service requirement established by the Adopting Employer pursuant to Article IV, Section 2(a) for his class. 
Sec. 3. - Establishing participation in the plan. 
(a)  Mandatory vs. Optional Participation. Participation in the Plan shall be considered mandatory for all classes of Eligible Employees unless, with respect to a particular class, the Employer specifies in the Adoption Agreement that participation is optional for members of said class. 
(b)  Mandatory Participation. If participation is mandatory for a class of Eligible Employees, then all Eligible Employees in the class shall become Participants in the Plan on the first day of the month immediately following or coinciding with the date they satisfy the applicable waiting period and any other eligibility requirements for participation. Eligible Employees shall provide to the Pension Committee on an Applicable Form such participation enrollment information as shall be required by the Pension Committee, which shall include the Eligible Employee's acceptance of the terms and conditions of the Plan. Notwithstanding an Eligible Employee's failure to complete the Applicable Form, the Eligible Employee shall become a Participant as specified in the Adoption Agreement. 
(c)  Optional Participation. The Employer may specify in the Adoption Agreement that participation is optional for certain classes of Eligible Employees, including Employees in the following categories: elected or appointed members of the Governing Authority, Municipal Legal Officers, City Manager, and Department Heads. If participation is optional for an Eligible Employee, then the Eligible Employee may elect to become a Participant at his option by filing with the Pension Committee, on an Applicable Form, such information as shall be required to enroll in the Plan, which shall include the Eligible Employee's acceptance of the terms and conditions of the Plan. The election to participate must be made within 120 days after the later of: the date the Eligible Employee commences employment with the Adopting Employer, the date the Eligible Employee is elected or appointed to office, or the date participation in the Plan is first permitted for members of a class to which he belongs. The election to participate shall be irrevocable, and the failure to make an election within the 120-day time limit specified above shall be deemed an irrevocable election not to participate in the Plan. If Employee contributions are required under the Adopting Employer's Plan, then Eligible Employees who apply for participation within the 120 day period may be required to make retroactive contributions in order to receive credit under the Plan for creditable Service prior the date they apply to participate in the Plan. 
(d)  Participation in the Plan shall not give any Eligible Employee the right to be retained in the employ of the Adopting Employer nor, upon dismissal, to have any right or interest in the Trust Fund other than as herein provided. 
Sec. 4. - Change in employment status. 
(a)  Transfer to Ineligible Status. Unless otherwise specified by the Employer in the Adoption Agreement, if a Participant's employment status changes such that he becomes an Ineligible Employee, he shall cease to accrue benefits under the Plan for any purpose and his interest under the Plan, if any, shall be only such as existed immediately before he became an Ineligible Employee, unless and until he again becomes a Participant. In no event will his service or earnings as an Ineligible Employee be taken into account for purposes of meeting the Plan's minimum service requirements for vesting, retirement eligibility, death benefit eligibility, or for purposes of computing the amount of any benefit payable under the Plan. However, said period of service as an Ineligible Employee shall not be considered a break in Service under Article IV, Section 7, provided the Ineligible Employee remains continuously employed by the Adopting Employer. If the Ineligible Employee does not again become a Participant prior to Retirement or Termination of Employment, his Vested Benefit, if any, shall be paid as provided in Article IX. 
(b)  Transfer Back to Eligible Status. If an Ineligible Employee described in subsection (a) above remains continuously employed by the Adopting Employer and he has another change in employment status such that he again becomes a Participant, he shall thereafter be entitled to accrue benefits in accordance with the terms of the Plan as in effect as of the date of the subsequent change in employment status. In no event, however, shall such a Participant receive a greater benefit under the Plan than that which the Participant would have received had the Participant not had a change in employment status. 
Sec. 5. - Participant leaves of absence. 
(a)  USERRA, FMLA Leave. Notwithstanding any provision of this Plan to the contrary, if any period of absence is required to be counted under USERRA, the FMLA or any other applicable federal or state law as Current Credited Service for the purpose of computing the amount of any benefit payable under the Plan, or for purposes of meeting the Plan's minimum service requirements for vesting, retirement or death benefit eligibility, then said period of absence shall be counted as such in accordance with and subject to the requirements of such law. 
(b)  Other Leaves of Absence. Unless otherwise required by law or unless the terms of the leave otherwise specify, an authorized leave of absence granted to a Participant by the Adopting Employer will be counted as Current Credited Service for the purpose of computing the amount of any benefit payable under the Plan, and for purposes of meeting the Plan's minimum service requirements for vesting and benefit eligibility. However, if the Participant does not return to active employment upon expiration of the authorized leave period, then subsection (c) shall apply. 
(c)  Failure to Return to Service. Unless otherwise required by law or unless the terms of the leave otherwise specify, if a Participant does not return to active employment with the Employer upon expiration of a leave of absence, his interest under the Plan, if any, including his Current Credited Service for the purpose of computing the amount of any benefit payable under the Plan, and for purposes of meeting the Plan's minimum service requirements for vesting and any minimum service requirements for retirement or death benefit eligibility, will be limited to that accrued as of the date preceding the approved leave period. 
(d)  Unused Leave. The Adopting Employer may elect in the Adoption Agreement to credit certain unused leave at termination or retirement as Credited Service, subject to the terms and limits specified in the Adoption Agreement. 
Sec. 6. - Non-vested participant breaks in service. 
Except as otherwise provided in the Adoption Agreement, this Section shall apply only to Participants who are Eligible Regular Employees. If a non-vested Participant experiences a break in Service, the Participant's Current Credited Service shall not include any Service rendered prior to the break in Service, unless the Participant returns to employment with the Adopting Employer and performs the lesser of: Service equal to the break in Service, or Service equal to one (1) year. The following limitations shall apply in administering the break in Service rule: 
(a)  Absence of Less Than One (1) Year. If a Participant terminates employment with the Adopting Employer and returns to employment with the Adopting Employer within one (1) year after said termination, the Participant shall not be deemed to have incurred a break in Service. Except as otherwise required under this Section, however, the time he was absent shall not be taken into account for any purpose under the Plan. 
(b)  Interim Employment with Another GMEBS Employer. If a Participant terminates employment with the Adopting Employer and returns to employment with the Adopting Employer after having spent the interim period in the continuous employment of another Employer in the GMEBS, he shall not be deemed to have incurred a break in Service. The time he was absent may be taken into account for purposes of determining whether the Participant has met the minimum Service requirements for vesting and retirement eligibility under the Adopting Employer's Plan, as provided by and subject to the provisions of Article IX, Section 5 concerning portability. However, in no event shall the time he was absent from the Adopting Employer be taken into account for the purpose of computing the amount of any benefit payable under the Adopting Employer's Plan. 
(c)  Treatment of Leaves of Absence. No leave of absence or other period of absence from employment shall be considered a break in Service if it is not permitted to be treated as such under USERRA, the FMLA, or any other applicable federal or state law. Unless otherwise required by law or unless the terms of the leave otherwise specify, any other authorized leave of absence granted to a Participant shall not be deemed a break in Service, provided the Participant was regularly employed by the Employer immediately prior to his leave of absence and the Participant is reemployed by the Employer upon expiration of the leave of absence. Unless otherwise required by law or unless the terms of the leave otherwise specify, if a Participant does not return to active employment upon expiration of the approved leave period, he will be considered to have incurred a break in Service under this Section as of the date immediately preceding the approved leave period. 
(d)  Transfer to Ineligible Employee Status. Unless otherwise specified by the Employer in the Adoption Agreement, if a Participant's employment status changes such that he becomes an Ineligible Employee pursuant to Section 5 above, the period of time spent as an Ineligible Employee shall not be considered a break in Service under this Section, provided the Participant remains employed by the Adopting Employer. Unless otherwise specified by the Adopting Employer, leaves of absence granted to an Ineligible Employee will not be considered a break in Service under this Section, provided the Ineligible Employee returns to active employment with the Employer upon expiration of the approved leave period and the requirements of subsection 7(c) above are otherwise satisfied with respect to such leave of absence. 
(e)  Graduated Vesting. If the Adopting Employer has established a graduated vesting schedule in the Adoption Agreement, then a break in Service shall not affect that percentage of the Retirement Benefit in which a Participant is Vested prior to the break. 
(f)  Repeated Breaks in Service. If a non-vested Participant has a break in Service, returns to employment with the Adopting Employer, and experiences one or more additional breaks in Service prior to satisfying the one (1) year Service requirement necessary to work off the initial break, then the Participant's Current Credited Service shall not include any Service rendered prior to the most recent break in Service, unless upon the Participant's return to employment with the Employer following the most recent break in Service he performs Service for a period equal to one (1) year. 
ARTICLE V. - RETIREMENT ELIGIBILITY 

[Sec. 1. - Retirement prerequisites.] 
(a)  The Retirement prerequisites of a Participant under this Plan are contingent upon the type of Retirement offered by the Employer in the Adoption Agreement and selected by the Participant: that is, Normal Retirement, Alternative Normal Retirement, Early Retirement, Late Retirement, or Disability Retirement, as applicable. The provision of an Alternative Normal Retirement benefit or the designation of an Alternative Normal Retirement Date in the Adoption Agreement shall not be construed to establish an Alternative Normal Retirement Age or Alternative Normal Retirement Date for purposes of the definition of Accrued Benefit under Article II, Section 1, for purposes of computing death benefits under Article VIII, or for purposes of applying the actuarial equivalent conversion provisions of Article XII. The minimum age and service requirements and other prerequisites associated with each type of Retirement for each class of Eligible Employees shall be as specified in the pertinent sections of the Adoption Agreement. Except as otherwise provided in the Adoption Agreement with respect to in-service distributions for those who remain in service after their Normal Retirement Date, receipt of Retirement benefits shall also be contingent upon Termination of Employment. 
(b)  Provided a Participant is otherwise eligible to receive a Retirement benefit under the Plan, Retirement is contingent upon the satisfactory completion of the Applicable Form provided for such purpose and the acceptance of the Applicable Form by the Pension Committee. 
(c)  Retirement applications shall be prepared and submitted at such time as to reach the office of GMEBS no earlier than ninety (90) days and no later than thirty (30) days prior to a Participant's effective Retirement Date. A Participant's effective Retirement date shall be the first day of the month coinciding with or following the date he has satisfied all of the prerequisites for Retirement as specified in this Article V, and actually Retires. 
ARTICLE VI. - RETIREMENT BENEFITS 

Sec. 1. - Normal retirement benefit. 
(a)  A Participant, upon Retirement on or after his Normal Retirement Date (or Alternative Normal Retirement Date, as applicable), shall receive a Monthly Retirement Benefit under which payments shall commence on the last day of the month in which his effective Retirement Date and shall be payable on the last day of each month thereafter during his lifetime. However, if directed by the Employer, Normal Retirement Benefits may be paid retroactively to the last day of the month following the month in which the Participant's Termination occurs (or, if the Participant's Termination occurs on the first of the month, the last day of said month) or if later, the last day of the month in which his Normal Retirement Date occurs. The amount of the Monthly Retirement Benefit shall be determined based upon the applicable benefit formula specified in the Adoption Agreement and in effect at the Participant's Termination. 
(b)  No interest shall be paid on the retroactive payment of Normal Retirement benefits. 
Sec. 2. - Early retirement benefit. 
(a)  A Participant, upon Retirement on or after his Early Retirement Date and before his Normal Retirement Date or Alternative Normal Retirement Date, shall receive a Monthly Retirement Benefit under which payments shall commence on the last day of the month in which his effective Retirement Date occurs and shall be payable on the first day of each month thereafter during the lifetime of the Participant. The amount of such Monthly Retirement Benefit shall be computed in the same manner as for a Normal Retirement Benefit, but reduced on an Actuarially Equivalent basis in accordance with the actuarial table contained in Article XII, Section 1. An Adopting Employer may adopt via an addendum to the Adoption Agreement an alternative early retirement actuarial reduction table for one or more classes of Eligible Employees, provided the adoption of such table satisfies the requirements of Code Section 401(a)(25). 
(b)  Provided the Employer has elected in the Adoption Agreement to provide Disability benefits, a Participant who is otherwise eligible for an Early Retirement Benefit may apply for and receive an Early Retirement benefit while a Disability benefit determination is pending. Upon a determination that the Participant is entitled to receive a Disability benefit, the Participant's benefit will be changed to a Disability Benefit (if greater), retroactive to the Disability Retirement Date. However, no change in the form of benefit payment or designation of the Post-Retirement Beneficiary may be made, and no Post-Retirement Beneficiary may be named if one had not been previously named. 
(c)  Retroactive payment of Early Retirement benefits to the Participant's Early Retirement Date or date of Termination is not permitted. 
Sec. 3. - Late retirement benefit. 
A Participant may retire from the active Service of the Adopting Employer on the first day of any month after his Normal Retirement Date, in which case the Participant shall receive a Late Retirement Benefit. The Late Retirement Benefit shall be calculated in the same manner as the Normal Retirement Benefit. However, the Employer may elect in the Adoption Agreement to provide for an increased Late Retirement Benefit, in which case the Late Retirement Benefit shall be calculated in the same manner as the Normal Retirement Benefit, but increased as provided in the Adoption Agreement. 
Sec. 4. - Disability benefit. 
(a)  Provided the Employer has elected in the Adoption Agreement to provide Disability benefits, a Participant who becomes Disabled and is otherwise entitled to receive a Disability Retirement Benefit shall receive such benefit in accordance with this Section. Payments shall commence on the first day of the month coinciding with the Participant's Disability Retirement Date and shall be payable on the first day of each month thereafter during the Participant's Disability. No Disability benefit shall be payable unless application for such benefit is made within one (1) year after employment is terminated as a result of such Disability, except when the delay is caused by the pendency of a Disability determination by the Social Security Administration or the Pension Committee, as applicable. The amount of the monthly Disability Retirement Benefit shall be determined as provided in the Adoption Agreement. The Adopting Employer may elect in the Adoption Agreement to specify another method for calculation of the benefit, and require an offset against the monthly Disability Retirement Benefit for other types of payments received by the Participant. Upon Retirement, the Participant shall receive the monthly Disability Retirement Benefit provided in this Section 4, or any other Monthly Retirement Benefit granted under the Plan for which he is eligible if such benefit is greater than the aforesaid monthly Disability Retirement Benefit. However, under no circumstances shall any Retired Participant be entitled at one time to more than one type of Retirement benefit granted under the Plan. 
(b)  No interest shall be paid on the retroactive payment of Disability benefits. 
Sec. 5. - Cost of living adjustment. 
(a)  An Employer may elect in the Adoption Agreement to provide for a variable annual cost-of-living adjustment in the amount of benefits payable under the Plan to Participants or their Beneficiaries. In such event, the amount of benefits payable under the Plan shall be adjusted by the Current Average Cost-of-Living Index Figure as defined in Article II, Section 17. 
(b)  The Current Average Cost-of-Living Index Figure shall be ascertained as of January 1 in each year. 
(c)  Each Monthly Retirement Benefit then being received by Participants who terminate after the date specified in the Adoption Agreement and their Beneficiaries shall thereupon be adjusted as follows: 
(1)  Each Monthly Retirement Benefit shall be increased by the percentage the Current Average Cost-of-Living Index Figure increased over each recipient's Cost-of-Living Base Figure. If the Current Average Cost-of-Living Index Figure is less than the Average Cost-of-Living Index Figure determined on January 1 of the previous calendar year, no reduction in the Monthly Retirement Benefit shall be effected. Increased benefits are payable at the end of the month in which the adjustment is made. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no increase in the amount of a Monthly Retirement Benefit due to changes in the Current Average Cost-of-Living Index Figure effective at any annual adjustment date (January 1) shall be in excess of a certain percentage of the amount of the Monthly Retirement Benefit payable immediately prior to each Participant's or Beneficiary's applicable adjustment date. Said percentage limit shall be designated by the Employer in the Adoption Agreement. 
(d)  An Adopting Employer may implement one-time or ad-hoc cost-of-living adjustments by adopting an addendum to the Adoption Agreement to effect said increase. 
(e)  In lieu of the variable cost-of-living adjustment referred to in subsections (a)-(c) above, the Employer may elect in the Adoption Agreement to provide for a fixed annual cost-of-living adjustment. 
Sec. 6. - Suspension of benefits 
(a)  General Rule. Unless otherwise provided in this Section and in the Adoption Agreement, if a Retired Participant returns to Service as an Eligible Employee with an Adopting Employer from whose Trust Fund the Retired Participant is receiving a Monthly Retirement Benefit, said Monthly Retirement Benefit shall be suspended as of the date of said return to Service. The Adopting Employer may engage on a retainer or fee basis any person receiving benefits hereunder and such engagement will not terminate or suspend such benefits. In such case, said person will not accrue benefits or service credit for any purpose under the Plan during said period of reemployment. 
(b)  Re-Computation of Benefit in Case of Suspension. In any case where the payment of a Participant's Retirement benefit shall have been suspended, the Retirement benefit payable on his re-retirement (whether before or after his Normal Retirement Date) shall be the benefit computed in accordance with this Article on the basis of his aggregate Total Credited Service at the time of his subsequent re-retirement, but reduced by the Actuarial Equivalent of any Retirement benefits received by him prior to his return to Service as an Eligible Employee, and by any actuarial factors used in calculating the benefit payable at the time of his previous Retirement. For purposes of this subsection, the term "Actuarial Equivalent" shall mean an amount equal to the value of Retirement benefits received, determined as of the date of the Participant's re-retirement and computed on the basis of the actuarial assumptions contained in Article XII, Section 7. In no event shall the resulting benefit be less than the benefit payable at the time of his previous Retirement. A Retired Participant who is reemployed as an Eligible Employee shall not be authorized to change his form of benefit payment on his subsequent re-retirement, or to change his Post-Retirement Beneficiary, or to name a Post-Retirement Beneficiary if one had not been previously named. For the purposes of this Section 6, any such Participant's Credited Service subsequent to his reemployment by the Employer as an Eligible Employee shall commence as of the date of his reemployment as an Eligible Employee. 
(c)  Reemployment After Normal Retirement Date; In-Service Distribution. Notwithstanding the requirement for suspension of benefits upon reemployment under subsection (a) above, an Employer may elect in the Adoption Agreement to permit Retired Participants or certain classes of Retired Participants to continue receiving Retirement benefits if they return to Service with the Adopting Employer as an Eligible Employee on or after their Normal Retirement Date. The Employer may also elect to permit Retired Participants or certain classes of Retired Participants to continue receiving Retirement benefits if they return to Service with the Adopting Employer as an Eligible Employee on or after their Alternative Normal Retirement Date. If the Employer has made such an election in the Adoption Agreement, then Retired Participants who are designated in the Adoption Agreement as eligible to receive in-service distributions may continue to receive their Monthly Retirement Benefit if they return to Service with the Adopting Employer as an Eligible Employee on or after their Normal Retirement Date or Alternative Normal Retirement Date, as applicable. Upon said Participants' subsequent re-retirement, their Monthly Retirement Benefit shall be computed in accordance with this Article on the basis of their aggregate Total Credited Service at the time of re-retirement, but it shall be reduced by the Actuarial Equivalent of any Retirement benefits received prior to re-retirement, and by any actuarial factors used in calculating the benefit payable at the previous Retirement. For purposes of this subsection, the term "Actuarial Equivalent" shall mean an amount equal to the value of Retirement benefits received, determined as of the date of the Participant's re-retirement and computed on the basis of the actuarial assumptions contained in Article XII, Section 7. In no event shall the resulting benefit be less than the benefit payable at the time of the previous Retirement. A Retired Participant who returns to Service as an Eligible Employee shall not be authorized to change his form of benefit payment, or to change his Post-Retirement Beneficiary on his subsequent re-retirement, or to name a Post-Retirement Beneficiary if one had not been previously named. 
(d)  Reemployment Prior to Normal Retirement Date; In-Service Distribution Upon Attaining Normal Retirement Date. This subsection shall apply only if an Employer has elected in the Adoption Agreement to permit in-service distribution of benefits upon reemployment after the Normal Retirement Date (or Alternative Normal Retirement Date, as applicable) pursuant to subsection (c) above, and if the Retired Participant belongs to a class for which in-service distributions are permitted under the Adoption Agreement. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e) below, if a Retired Participant returns to Service as an Eligible Employee with the Adopting Employer before his Normal Retirement Date, his Retirement benefit payments shall be suspended in accordance with subsections (a) and (b) above. However, if after becoming reemployed said Participant remains employed until his Normal Retirement Date (or Alternative Normal Retirement Date, as applicable), and if the Participant is otherwise eligible to receive a Normal Retirement Benefit, the Participant may apply for and receive a Monthly Retirement Benefit on or after his Normal Retirement Date (or Alternative Normal Retirement Date, as applicable), notwithstanding his continued Service with the Employer. Said Monthly Retirement Benefit shall be computed in accordance with this Article, based upon the Participant's Total Credited Service through the date he recommences receipt of his Monthly Retirement Benefit pursuant to this subsection, but it shall be reduced by the Actuarial Equivalent of any Retirement benefits received by the Participant prior to his return to Service, and by any actuarial factors used in calculating the benefit payable at the time of his previous Retirement. For purposes of this subsection, the term "Actuarial Equivalent" shall mean an amount equal to the value of Retirement benefit payments received, determined as of the date the Participant recommences receipt of his Monthly Retirement Benefit, and computed on the basis of the actuarial assumptions contained in Article XII, Section 7. In no event shall the resulting Monthly Retirement Benefit be less than the Participant's initial Monthly Retirement Benefit. Upon the Participant's subsequent re-retirement, his Monthly Retirement Benefit shall be re-computed in accordance with this Article on the basis of his aggregate Total Credited Service at the time of his re-retirement, reduced by the Actuarial Equivalent of any Retirement benefits received by him prior to his re-retirement. For purposes of this subsection, the term "Actuarial Equivalent" shall mean an amount equal to the value of Retirement benefit payments received, determined as of the date of the Participant's re-retirement and computed on the basis of the actuarial assumptions contained in Article XII, Section 7. In no event shall the resulting Monthly Retirement Benefit be less than the prior Monthly Retirement Benefit. The Participant shall not be authorized under this subsection to change his form of benefit payment, or to change his Post-Retirement Beneficiary, or to name a Post-Retirement Beneficiary if one had not been previously named. 
(e)  Reemployment After Early Retirement Date; In-Service Distribution. An Employer may elect in the Adoption Agreement to permit Retired Participants or certain classes of Retired Participants who are receiving an Early Retirement benefit to continue receiving said benefit if they return to Service with the Employer as an Eligible Employee at any time on or after their Early Retirement Date. If the Employer has made such an election, and if a Retired Participant belongs to a class for which such in-service distributions are permitted, then upon the Retired Participant's return to Service with the Employer as an Eligible Employee after his Early Retirement Date, the Retired Participant may continue to receive his Monthly Retirement Benefit during the period of his reemployment. However, this provision shall apply only if the Participant's previous Retirement was in good faith and the Participant does not return to Service as an Eligible Employee following his initial effective Retirement date for a minimum period designated by the Employer in the Adoption Agreement which shall not be less than six (6) months. Upon the Participant's subsequent re-retirement, his Monthly Retirement Benefit shall be computed in accordance with this Article on the basis of his aggregate Credited Service at the time of his re-retirement, but it shall be reduced by the Actuarial Equivalent of any Retirement benefits received by him prior to his re-Retirement, and by any actuarial factors used in calculating the benefit payable at his previous Retirement. For purposes of this subsection, the term "Actuarial Equivalent" shall mean an amount equal to the value of Retirement benefits received, determined as of the date of the Participant's re-retirement and computed on the basis of the actuarial assumptions contained in Article XII, Section 7. In no event shall the resulting benefit be less than the benefit payable at the time of his previous Retirement. Such a Participant shall not be authorized to change his form of benefit payment on his subsequent re-retirement, or to change his Post-Retirement Beneficiary, or to name a Post-Retirement Beneficiary if one had not been previously named. 
(f)  Death in Service After Reemployment. If a Retired Participant returns to Service with an Adopting Employer as an Eligible Employee and he dies during the period of his reemployment and before re-retirement, then his Post-Retirement Beneficiary, if any, shall be entitled to receive the greater of: (1) the monthly post-retirement survivor benefit payable, if any; or (2) the monthly in-service death benefit, if any, payable for the class of Eligible Employees to which the Participant belongs as of his date of death, reduced by the Actuarial Equivalent of any Retirement benefits received by the Participant prior to his death. This provision shall not be interpreted to permit payment to a Pre-Retirement Beneficiary in the event of a Retired Participant's death during reemployment. 
(g)  Suspension of Disability Benefits. Any Disability Retirement Benefit payable under the Plan to any Participant shall be suspended as of the first day of the month coinciding with or following the date his Disability ceases. A Participant's Disability shall be considered to have ceased upon the earliest of the following dates: (1) with respect to Participants whose entitlement to a Disability benefit is based upon receipt of disability insurance benefits under the Federal Social Security Act, the date as of which the Social Security Administration determines that the Participant is no longer disabled; or (2) with respect to Participants whose entitlement to a Disability benefit is based upon a determination by the Pension Committee, the date as of which the Pension Committee determines that the Participant is no longer disabled as defined under Code Section 72(m), based upon an examination by a physician chosen by the Pension Committee. With respect to those Participants whose entitlement to a Disability benefit is based upon receipt of disability insurance benefits under the Federal Social Security Act, the Pension Committee shall have the right to require the Participant to prove at any time, as a condition for continued receipt of Disability benefits under the Plan, continued eligibility for receipt of disability insurance benefits under the Federal Social Security Act, as amended. With respect to Participants whose entitlement to a Disability benefit is based upon a determination of Disability by the Pension Committee, the Pension Committee shall have the right to require, as a condition for continued receipt of Disability benefits, that the Participant be examined at any time by a physician chosen by the Pension Committee. In the event that any Participant fails or refuses to submit to a physical examination or to obtain and provide other information requested by the Pension Committee to confirm continuation of a Disability, then the Participant's Disability benefits shall be suspended as of the first day of the month following expiration of the 90-day period following the Pension Committee's request for such examination or information, unless the Pension Committee determines in its discretion that the failure to comply was due to circumstances beyond the Participant's control. 
(h)  Suspension of Disability Benefit; Right to Other Benefits. In any case where the payment of a Participant's Disability Retirement benefit is suspended, the period of absence from employment due to such Disability shall be treated as a leave of absence without pay, except that such period of absence shall not be counted as Credited Service. Any Participant who shall have retired or been retired for Disability and who dies or who has been or shall be subsequently declared ineligible for a Disability Retirement Benefit because of the cessation of said Disability shall have a right to any benefit afforded under any other provision of this Plan to which he or his Beneficiary might otherwise be entitled. In such case, any Disability Retirement payments made prior to the date as of which his Disability ceases or as of which it is declared to no longer exist shall be retained by the Retiree and disregarded in computing any other benefit payable under the Plan. 
ARTICLE VII. - OPTIONAL FORMS OF RETIREMENT INCOME 

Sec. 1. - Election of optional benefits. 
A Participant may elect, or may revoke a previous election and make a new election, at any time prior to his effective Retirement Date, to have his Retirement benefit payable under one of the options hereinafter set forth in lieu of the lifetime monthly Retirement benefit he is otherwise entitled to receive under Article VI. The benefit shall be paid in accordance with and subject to the terms of such option elected. Election of any option shall be made by the Participant in writing on the Retirement Application, and shall be subject to approval by GMEBS. 
Sec. 2. - Designation of post-retirement beneficiary. 
If the Participant elects Option A or Option A1 (Joint and Survivor Options) or Option B (Period Certain and Life Option) in Section 3 below, he shall designate a Post-Retirement Beneficiary to receive a survivor benefit in accordance with and subject to the terms of such Option. Designation of a Post-Retirement Beneficiary may be revoked or changed by the Participant by submitting a new completed Retirement Application at any time prior to the Participant's effective Retirement date. Only the last such designation of a Post-Retirement Beneficiary shall have effect, and any new designation of a Post-Retirement Beneficiary shall invalidate, supersede, and revoke any prior designation. 
Sec. 3. - Description of options. 
The amount of any optional benefit set forth below shall be the Actuarial Equivalent of the amount of benefit that would otherwise be payable to the Participant under Article VI, Section 1. 
OPTION A: Joint and Survivor Option. A decreased retirement benefit which shall be payable during the lifetime of the Participant and, if his designated Post-Retirement Beneficiary should survive him, shall continue after his death during the lifetime of his Beneficiary in the same amount (100 percent) or in such smaller amount (75 percent, 50 percent, or 25 percent) as the Participant may designate. This option shall be known as Option A. The Participant's retirement benefit under Option A shall be calculated in accordance with Article XII, Section 2(a)(1) or 2(a)(2), whichever is applicable. 
OPTION A1: Joint and Survivor Option with Pop-Up. A retirement benefit computed and paid in the same manner as OPTION A above, but with a further decrease in the retirement benefit to account for the pop-up benefit provided under this Option A1. If the Participant elects Option A1, then in the event that the Participant's Post-Retirement Beneficiary dies before the Participant and after Retirement benefit payments have commenced, and provided the Participant furnishes GMEBS with proper proof of the Beneficiary's death within one (1) year after such death, the requirement for a reduction in the Participant's monthly retirement benefit on account of his election of an optional form of benefit payment shall no longer apply, effective as of the first day of the month following the Post-Retirement Beneficiary's death. Effective with respect to monthly payments made on and after such date, the amount of the Participant's monthly retirement benefit shall be increased to equal the monthly amount that would have otherwise been payable to the Participant under Article VI, had the Participant not elected an optional form of benefit payment. However, if the Participant fails to furnish the Plan with proper proof of the Post-Retirement Beneficiary's death within the one (1) year period referred to above, then said increase shall not become effective until the first day of the month following the date such proof is submitted to GMEBS. If the Post-Retirement Beneficiary does not survive the Participant, all payments shall cease at the death of the Participant and no further benefits will accrue to his estate or to other persons. 
OPTION B: Period Certain and Life Option. A decreased benefit payable monthly to the Participant during his lifetime and, in the event of his death within a period of specified years, either five (5), ten (10), fifteen (15), or twenty (20) years after his benefit commencement, the same monthly amount shall be payable for the balance of such period to the Post-Retirement Beneficiary designated by him. If the Post-Retirement Beneficiary does not survive the Participant, all payments shall cease at the death of the Participant and no further benefits will accrue to his estate or to other persons except as provided in Article VIII. This option shall be known as Option B. The Retirement benefit under Option B shall be calculated in accordance with Article XII, Section 3. 
OPTION C: Social Security Option. An increased Retirement benefit, determined as of the Participant's Early Retirement Date, payable to him during his lifetime until the Participant is eligible for reduced benefits under the Federal Social Security Act, and a decreased Retirement benefit payable thereafter for life in order to have a more level retirement income when such decreased retirement benefit is added to his primary benefits under the Federal Social Security Act. At the death of the Participant all payments will cease and no further benefits will accrue to the estate of the Participant or to other persons. This option shall be known as Option C. The Actuarial Equivalent factors to be applied in calculating benefits under Option C shall be those contained in Article XII, Section 4(a) or 4(b), whichever is applicable. 
Sec. 4. - Cancellation of election. 
The election by a Participant of any option in Section 3 of this Article VII shall be null and void if either the Participant or his designated Post-Retirement Beneficiary dies before the Participant's effective Retirement date. 
Sec. 5. - Rule for small benefits. 
Effective January 1, 2002 the present value of a Plan benefit shall be distributed to the Participant, Terminated Participant, or Pre-Retirement Beneficiary, as applicable, if the benefit payable to the recipient does not exceed the Internal Revenue Code Section 411(a)(11)(A) limit on the date of distribution. The value of said Plan benefit shall be determined in accordance with Article XII. 
Sec. 6. - Distributions. 
(a)  Distributions payable as of any date shall be made on or as soon as administratively feasible after that date. 
(b)  In a contributory plan, interest shall be paid on any refund of employee contributions only as specified in the Adoption Agreement. 
Sec. 7. - Compliance with internal revenue section 401(a)(9). 
All distributions shall be made in compliance with Article X. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEATH BENEFITS 

Sec. 1. - Death in service prior to retirement. 
In the event a Participant's employment or term of office is Terminated by reason of his death prior to his Retirement, there shall be paid to his Pre-Retirement Beneficiary (Primary, Secondary, or Default Beneficiary, as applicable), the in-service death benefit elected by the Employer in the Adoption Agreement, provided the requirements of this Article are satisfied. 
Sec. 2. - Actuarial reserve in-service death benefit. 
An Employer may elect in the Adoption Agreement to provide the Actuarial Reserve In-Service Death Benefit for one or more classes of Eligible Employees. In such case, the Employer shall designate in the Adoption Agreement the minimum Service and other eligibility requirements a Participant must satisfy in order to be entitled to receive such benefit. Provided a Participant satisfies such requirements, then in the event the Participant's employment with the Adopting Employer is terminated by reason of his death prior to his Retirement, there shall be paid to his Pre-Retirement Beneficiary a lifetime monthly death benefit actuarially equivalent to the reserve required for the Participant's anticipated Normal Retirement benefit. In calculating the Normal Retirement benefit under the provisions of this Section, the following assumptions shall be used: 
(1)  The Participant's age at the time of his death is equal to the Normal Retirement Age as specified by the Employer in the Adoption Agreement, or his attained age if his attained age is greater than the Normal Retirement Age; and, 
(2)  The Participant's Total Credited Service shall include the amount of Total Credited Service accrued prior to the date of the Participant's death. The Employer may elect in the Adoption Agreement to include additional imputed Credited Service in the calculation, but in no event shall the amount of Total Credited Service used in the calculation exceed the sum of actual Service performed plus ten (10) calendar years. The death benefit under this Section shall be calculated using the factors contained in Article XII, Section 5. 
Sec. 3. - Auto A in-service death benefit. 
An Employer may elect in the Adoption Agreement to provide the Auto A in-service death benefit for one or more classes of Eligible Employees. In such case, the Employer shall designate in the Adoption Agreement the minimum Service and other eligibility requirements a Participant must satisfy in order to be entitled to such benefit. Provided a Participant satisfies such requirements, then in the event that the Participant's employment with the Adopting Employer is terminated by reason of his death prior to his Retirement, there shall be paid to his Pre-Retirement Beneficiary a lifetime monthly death benefit, as follows: 
(a)  Monthly Death Benefit Payable to Spouse. If the Pre-Retirement Beneficiary to whom the in-service death benefit is payable under this Section (Primary, Secondary, or Default Pre-Retirement Beneficiary, as applicable) is the Participant's Spouse, then the lifetime monthly death benefit payable to said Spouse shall commence on the first day of the month coinciding with or immediately following the date of the Participant's death. Alternatively, the Spouse may elect to defer benefit payment commencement until the first day of any month up to and including the date the Participant would have attained Normal Retirement Age as defined in the Employer's Adoption Agreement. For purposes of this Section, the term "Spouse" or "Spouse Beneficiary" shall be as defined in Article II, Section 56. A Spouse shall be considered to have deferred benefit payment commencement until the first day of the month following the date the Spouse makes application for payment of death benefits. If the Pre-Retirement Beneficiary to whom the in-service death benefit is payable under this Section (Primary, Secondary, or Default Pre-Retirement Beneficiary, as applicable) is not the Spouse of the Participant, then the lifetime monthly death benefit payable to said Beneficiary shall commence on the first day of the month coinciding with or immediately following the date of the Participant's death. 
(b)  Computation of Monthly Death Benefits. Benefits under this Section shall be computed as of the date of the Participant's death, based upon the applicable benefit formula in effect on said date, as follows: 
(1)  Participant Death Before Early Retirement Age; Payment Before Early Retirement Age. If a Participant dies before attaining Early Retirement Age as defined in the Employer's Adoption Agreement, and if benefit payments commence to a Pre-Retirement Beneficiary (Primary, Secondary, or Default Beneficiary, as applicable) before the Participant would have attained Early Retirement Age, then the monthly death benefit payable to said Beneficiary shall be the Actuarial Equivalent of the monthly Retirement benefit amount that would have otherwise been payable to the Participant, assuming the Participant: (i) terminated employment on his date of death; (ii) survived until Normal Retirement Age as defined in the Adoption Agreement; and (iii) elected to retire upon attaining Normal Retirement Age with the optional form of Retirement payment designated in Article VII, Section 3 as Option A at 100 percent, and then died. Said benefit shall be calculated in accordance with the actuarial assumptions specified in Article XII, Section 7. 
(2)  Participant Death Before Early Retirement Age; Deferred Payment by Spouse Until After Early Retirement Age. If the Participant dies before attaining Early Retirement Age as defined in the Employer's Adoption Agreement and a Spouse who is eligible to receive the in-service death benefit hereunder defers payment until a date which is on or after the date the Participant would have attained Early Retirement Age, then the monthly death benefit payable to the Spouse Beneficiary shall be the monthly Retirement benefit that would have otherwise been payable to the Participant, assuming that the Participant: (i) terminated employment on the date of death; (ii) survived until the date upon which the deferred benefit payments commence in accordance with the Spouse Beneficiary's selected benefit commencement date; and, (iii) elected to retire on the benefit commencement date with the optional form of Retirement payment designated in Article VII, Section 3 as Option A at 100 percent, and then died. 
(3)  Participant Death After Early Retirement Age; Payment Upon Death. If the Participant dies after attaining Early Retirement Age as defined in the Employer's Adoption Agreement, and if benefit payments commence to a Beneficiary (Primary Beneficiary, Secondary Beneficiary, or Default Beneficiary, as applicable) on the first day of the month coinciding with or immediately following the date of the Participant's death, then the monthly death benefit payable to said Beneficiary shall be the monthly benefit that would have otherwise been payable to the Participant, assuming the Participant: (i) retired on the date of death, and (ii) elected the optional form of Retirement payment designated in Article VII, Section 3 as Option A at 100 percent, and then died. 
(4)  Participant Death After Early Retirement Age; Deferred Payment by Spouse. If the Participant dies after attaining Early Retirement Age as defined in the Employer's Adoption Agreement, and if a Spouse who is eligible to receive the in-service death benefit hereunder defers payment in accordance with this Section, then the monthly benefit payable to the Spouse Beneficiary shall be the monthly Retirement benefit that would have otherwise been payable to the Participant, assuming that the Participant: (i) terminated employment on his date of death; (ii) survived until the date upon which the deferred benefit payments commence in accordance with the Spouse Beneficiary's selected commencement date, and (ii) elected to retire on the benefit commencement date with the optional form of Retirement payment designated in Article VII, Section 3 as Option A at 100 percent, and then died. 
Sec. 4. - Designation of primary and secondary pre-retirement beneficiary. 
Upon completing the minimum Service and other eligibility requirements to be entitled to a pre-retirement in-service death benefit, a Participant may designate, on an Applicable Form provided for that purpose, one person as his Primary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary. The Primary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary shall receive the monthly pre-retirement death benefit elected by the Employer in the Adoption Agreement in the event that the Participant's employment with the Employer is terminated by reason of the Participant's death prior to his Retirement, provided the Primary Beneficiary survives the Participant by at least 32 days in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 47-1-15. The Participant may additionally designate, on an Applicable Form provided for that purpose, one person as his Secondary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary. The monthly death benefit otherwise payable to the Primary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary hereunder shall be payable to the Participant's designated Secondary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary in the event that: (1) the Participant's employment with the Employer is terminated by reason of the Participant's death prior to his Retirement; (2) the Primary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary does not survive the Participant by at least thirty-two (32) days; and (3) the Secondary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary survives the Participant by at least thirty-two (32) days. 
Sec. 5. - Change of beneficiary. 
Designation of a Primary or Secondary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary may be changed by the Participant in writing on an Applicable Form provided for that purpose at any time prior to Retirement. Only the last such designation prior to Retirement shall have effect and any new designation of a Primary or Secondary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary invalidates, supersedes, and revokes any prior designation. 
Sec. 6. - Default beneficiary. 
In the absence of a designation by the Participant, or if there is no Primary or Secondary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary to whom a pre-retirement death benefit is payable under this Article, then the pre-retirement death benefit shall be paid to the Participant's surviving Default Beneficiary in accordance with this Section. For purposes of this Section, the Participant's Default Beneficiary(ies) shall be as follows: (a) the Participant's surviving Spouse; or (b) if there is no surviving Spouse, the Participant's surviving Children; or (c) if there is no surviving Spouse or Children, the Participant's surviving Parent(s). For purposes of this Section, the term "surviving" shall mean surviving the Participant by at least thirty-two (32) days. For purposes of this Section, the term "Spouse" shall be as defined in Article II, Section 56. The term "Child" or "Children" shall be as defined in Article II, Section 9. The term "Parent" shall be as defined in O.C.G.A. §19-11-3(7), determined as of the date of the Participant's death. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, if a death benefit becomes payable to more than one Child of the Participant under this Section 6, then such benefit shall be paid to each such Child and calculated in a manner to provide each Child with an equal monthly benefit which ceases on the date such child reaches age twenty-two (22). Such benefit shall be calculated using the factors contained in Article XII, Section 7. If a death benefit is payable to more than one surviving Parent of the Participant under this Section, then such benefit shall be calculated in a manner to provide each such Parent with the same monthly benefit amount for his or her lifetime. If a child who is receiving a monthly benefit hereunder reaches age twenty-two (22) or if a child or Parent receiving a monthly benefit hereunder dies, this shall not affect the monthly benefit amount any other child or Parent is receiving. 
Sec. 7. - Actuarial reserve in-service death benefit; payment to estate. 
With respect to the Actuarial Reserve in-service death benefit only, if there is no Primary, Secondary or Default Pre-Retirement Beneficiary to whom a death benefit is payable under Article VIII, Section 6, then the Actuarial Equivalent of the Participant's vested Accrued Retirement Benefit shall be paid to the Participant's estate in lieu of the lifetime monthly benefit which would otherwise be payable to a Pre-Retirement Beneficiary. Such Actuarial Equivalent shall be determined as if the Participant had terminated employment on the date immediately preceding his date of death and received a lump sum distribution of his benefit under Article VII, Section 5, determined without reference to the maximum cash-out limits of said Section. 
Sec. 8. - Terminated vested death benefits. 
If the Employer elects in the Adoption Agreement to provide a death benefit for Terminated Participants or for certain classes of Terminated Participants, then in the event such a terminated vested Participant dies before his effective Retirement Date, there shall be paid to his Pre-Retirement Beneficiary (Primary, Secondary, or Default Pre-Retirement Beneficiary, as applicable) the terminated vested death benefit specified in the Adoption Agreement, provided the requirements of this Article are satisfied. 
Sec. 9. - Terminated vested auto a death benefit. 
The Employer may elect in the Adoption Agreement to provide the Auto A Death Benefit for one or more classes of Terminated Participants. In such case, the Employer shall designate in the Adoption Agreement the minimum Service and other eligibility requirements a Terminated Participant must satisfy in order to be entitled to such benefit. Provided a Terminated Participant satisfies such requirements, then in the event that the Terminated Participant dies prior to his effective Retirement date, his Pre-Retirement Beneficiary may apply to receive a lifetime monthly death benefit subject to the provisions of this Section. If the Terminated Participant's Pre-Retirement Beneficiary is the Terminated Participant's Spouse, then the lifetime monthly death benefit payable to the Spouse Beneficiary under this Section shall commence on the first day of the month coinciding with or immediately following the date of the Terminated Participant's death. Alternatively, the Spouse Beneficiary may elect to defer benefit payment commencement until the first day of any month up to and including the date the Participant would have attained Normal Retirement Age as determined under the Employer's Adoption Agreement. For purposes of this Section, the term "Spouse" or "Spouse Beneficiary" shall be as defined in Article II, Section 56. A Spouse Beneficiary shall be considered to have deferred benefit payment commencement until the first day of the month following the date the Spouse makes application for payment of death benefits. If the designated and surviving Pre-Retirement Beneficiary is not the Spouse of the Terminated Participant, then the lifetime monthly death benefit payable to the Beneficiary under this Section shall commence on the first day of the month coinciding with or immediately following the date of the Terminated Participant's death. Benefits under this Section shall be computed as follows: 
(a)  Terminated Participant Death Before Early Retirement Age; Payment Before Early Retirement Age. If a Terminated Participant dies before attaining Early Retirement Age as defined in the Adoption Agreement, and if benefit payments commence to a Spouse Beneficiary or non-spouse Beneficiary before the Terminated Participant would have attained Early Retirement Age, then the monthly death benefit payable to the Beneficiary shall be the Actuarial Equivalent of the monthly Retirement benefit amount that would have otherwise been payable to the Terminated Participant, assuming: (i) the Terminated Participant survived until Normal Retirement Age; and (ii) the Terminated Participant elected the optional form of Retirement payment designated herein as Option A at 100 percent, and then died. Said benefit shall be calculated in accordance with the actuarial assumptions specified in Article XII, Section 7. 
(b)  Terminated Participant Death Before Early Retirement Age; Deferred Payment by Spouse Until After Early Retirement Age. If the Terminated Participant dies before attaining Early Retirement Age as defined in the Adoption Agreement and a Spouse Beneficiary defers payment until a date which is on or after the date the Terminated Participant would have attained Early Retirement Age, then the monthly death benefit payable to the Spouse Beneficiary shall be the monthly Retirement benefit that would have otherwise been payable to the Terminated Participant, assuming that: (i) the Terminated Participant survived until the date upon which the deferred benefit payments commence in accordance with the Spouse Beneficiary's selected benefit commencement date; and, (ii) the Terminated Participant elected on such date to retire with the optional form of Retirement payment designated herein as Option A at 100 percent, and then died. 
(c)  Terminated Participant Death After Early Retirement Age; Payment Upon Death. If the Terminated Participant dies after attaining Early Retirement Age as defined in the Adoption Agreement, and if benefit payments commence to a Spouse Beneficiary or non-spouse Beneficiary on the first day of the month coinciding with or immediately following the date of the Terminated Participant's death, then the monthly death benefit payable to the Beneficiary shall be the monthly benefit that would have otherwise been payable to the Terminated Participant, assuming: (i) the Terminated Participant retired on the date of death, and (ii) the Terminated Participant elected the optional form of Retirement payment designated herein as Option A at 100 percent, and then died. 
(d)  Terminated Participant Death After Early Retirement Age; Deferred Payment by Spouse. If the Terminated Participant dies after attaining Early Retirement Age, and if a Spouse Beneficiary defers payment in accordance with this Section, then the monthly benefit payable to the Spouse Beneficiary shall be the monthly Retirement benefit that would have otherwise been payable to the Terminated Participant, assuming that: (i) the Terminated Participant survived until the date upon which the deferred benefit payments commence in accordance with the Spouse Beneficiary's selected commencement date, and (ii) the Terminated Participant elected to retire on such date with the optional form of Retirement payment designated herein as Option A at 100 percent, and then died. 
(e)  Calculation of Benefits. Benefits under this Section shall be calculated taking into account only the Participant's Total Credited Service and Final Average Earnings (where applicable) as of the date of his Termination of Employment with Adopting Employer, and the applicable benefit formula in effect on the date of said Termination. 
Sec. 10. - Accrued retirement benefit. 
The Employer may elect in the Adoption Agreement to provide a death benefit consisting of the Accrued Retirement Benefit for one or more classes of Terminated Participants. In such case, the Employer shall designate the minimum Service and other eligibility requirements a Terminated Participant must satisfy in order to be entitled to such benefit. Provided a Terminated Participant satisfies such requirements, then in the event that the Terminated Participant dies prior to his effective Retirement date, his Pre-Retirement Beneficiary may apply to receive a lifetime monthly death benefit subject to the provisions of this Section. Said benefit shall commence on the first day of the month coinciding with or immediately following the date of the Terminated Participant's death. The monthly death benefit payable to the Participant's Pre-Retirement Beneficiary shall be the Actuarial Equivalent of the Terminated Participant's death, taking into account the Participant's Total Credited Service, Final Average Earnings, and the benefit formula in effect as of the date of the Participant's Termination. 
Sec. 11. - Designation of terminated vested pre-retirement beneficiary. 
The Primary and Secondary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary designated by the Participant to receive in-service death benefits under this Article VIII, Section 4 shall automatically be considered the Participant's Primary and Secondary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary for purposes of payment of terminated vested pre-retirement death benefits, if any, under the Employer's Plan. If the Participant changes his beneficiary designation in accordance with Section 5, his designation under this Section shall be considered changed as well to reflect the new designation. In the absence of a designation by the Participant, or if there is no Primary or Secondary Pre-Retirement Beneficiary to whom a terminated vested pre-retirement death benefit is payable upon the Participant's death, then the terminated vested pre-retirement death benefit otherwise payable, if any, shall be paid to the Participant's Default Beneficiary in accordance with Article VIII, Section 6. 
Sec. 12. - Participant death after retirement benefit commencement. 
Upon the death of a Retired Participant subsequent to his Retirement, there shall be payable to the Participant's designated Post-Retirement Beneficiary, a benefit to be determined as follows: 
(a)  If the Participant has not elected an optional form of payment, as provided in Article VII, or if he has elected an optional form of payment and his designated Post-Retirement Beneficiary does not survive him, no further payment of any kind whatsoever shall be made at the death of the Participant. 
(b)  If the Participant has elected an optional form of payment, as provided in Article VII, and his designated Post-Retirement Beneficiary survives him, benefits shall be payable to the Post-Retirement Beneficiary as provided by the option elected, commencing the month following the Participant's last benefit payment month. 
ARTICLE IX. - TERMINATION BEFORE RETIREMENT; VESTING 

Sec. 1. - Vesting requirement for deferred retirement benefit. 
An Employer may establish different vesting requirements for different classes of Eligible Employees in the Adoption Agreement. A Participant whose employment is terminated for any reason other than death or Retirement shall be entitled to a Vested right in his Accrued Benefit only if he meets the Qualifications for a deferred Vested Retirement benefit specified in the Adoption Agreement. Payment of such Vested Retirement Benefit shall commence on the last day of the month in which his effective Retirement Date occurs and shall be payable on the last day of each month thereafter during the lifetime of the Participant, unless the Participant elects an optional form of benefit payment under Article VII. The amount of such Monthly Retirement Benefit shall be computed in the manner prescribed for Normal or Early Retirement in Article VI, as applicable, but based upon the Participant's Final Average Earnings (if applicable) and Total Credited Service up to the Participant's date of Termination of Employment with the Adopting Employer. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Plan to the contrary, if a Participant has satisfied the requirements for Normal Retirement, the Participant shall be 100 percent Vested in his Normal Retirement benefit. 
Sec. 2. - Termination of tenure of office before retirement. 
Unless otherwise specified by the Employer in the Adoption Agreement, a Participant who is an elected or appointed member of the Governing Authority or a Municipal Legal Officer, and who vacates office for any reason other than death or Retirement shall be entitled to a Vested right in his Accrued Benefit only if he meets the Qualifications for a deferred Vested Retirement benefit applicable to elected or appointed members of the Governing Authority and Municipal Legal Officers as specified in the Adoption Agreement. A Participant who is an elected or appointed member of the Governing Authority or a Municipal Legal Officer and who has Credited Service as an Eligible Regular Employee of the Adopting Employer, shall have a Vested Right to his Credited Service both as an Eligible Regular Employee and as an elected or appointed member of the Governing Authority or a Municipal Legal Officer, provided he has completed the minimum service requirement for Vesting applicable to Eligible Regular Employees designated by the Employer in the Adoption Agreement. If his Total Credited Service is less than said minimum, the Participant's Vested Right shall be determined based only on his Total Credited Service as an elected or appointed member of the Governing Authority or his tenure of office as a Municipal Legal Officer and the vesting schedule applicable to Eligible Employees in said class. 
Sec. 3. - Immediate vesting in disability retirement benefit. 
If the Employer elects in the Adoption Agreement to provide Disability benefits, and unless otherwise specified in the Adoption Agreement, a Participant who is Disabled and otherwise meets the Plan's eligibility requirements for payment of a Disability Retirement Benefit shall be considered 100 percent Vested in such benefit. 
Sec. 4. - Involuntary termination without cause. 
Notwithstanding any more restrictive vesting requirement imposed by the Employer in the Adoption Agreement, a Participant whose employment is terminated involuntarily and without cause shall be entitled to a Vested Benefit if he has completed five (5) years of Total Credited Service. For the purpose of this condition, "cause" for dismissal shall mean negligence or inefficiency in performing the duties of the position held, unfitness to perform assigned duties, insubordination, or misconduct reflecting discredit on the Adopting Employer or upon the Governing Authority. 
Sec. 5. - Portability between adopting employers. 
(a)  This Section applies to a Participant, other than an elected or appointed member of the Governing Authority or Municipal Legal Officer, whose employment is terminated either voluntarily or involuntarily for any reason other than death or Retirement, after participation in the Plan. 
(b)  In determining whether a Participant has satisfied the minimum service requirements for Vesting and the Service requirements for Retirement eligibility under the Adoption Agreement of any GMEBS Adopting Employer, the Participant's Total Credited Service with all other of the Participant's past and future Adopting Employers shall be taken into account. In no event, however, shall service with one GMEBS Employer be used to calculate the benefit amount due the Participant from another GMEBS Employer. Except as otherwise provided in Article IV, Section 2(b)(7) concerning immediate participation for Participants who transfer from one GMEBS Employer to another, Service with one GMEBS Adopting Employer may not be used to establish participation in another Adopting Employer's plan. 
Sec. 6. - Fraud, embezzlement, theft, and dismissal for cause. 
(a)  In the event the Adopting Employer shall receive, prior to a Participant's actual Retirement date, written confession by such Participant, or proof satisfactory to the Governing Authority that such Participant has committed or has been convicted of having committed an act of fraud, embezzlement, or theft in connection with his duties or in the course of his employment with the Adopting Employer, or in connection with the Plan, his participation in the Plan shall be forthwith terminated, and the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. Section 47-1-20 et seq. set forth in paragraph (b) shall govern. 
(b)  As required by Georgia State Law, if a public employee first or again becoming a public employee after July 1, 1985 commits a public employment related crime in the capacity of a public employee and is convicted for the commission of such crime, such employee shall forfeit all rights and benefits under and membership in any public retirement system in which the employee is a member, effective on the date of final conviction. Any such public employee shall not at any time after such final conviction be eligible for membership in any public retirement system. Any employee contributions made by any such public employee to a public retirement system during membership in the public retirement system shall be reimbursed, without interest, to the public employee within 60 days after the date of final conviction for the commission of a public employment related crime. 
(c)  For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  "Employee contribution" means the part of compensation of a public employee which is paid by the employee or by the employer on the employee's behalf to a public retirement system as a requirement for membership in the public retirement system. 
(2)  "Final conviction" means a conviction which has been upheld after the convicted person has exhausted all appeals of the conviction. 
(3)  "Political subdivision" means any county, municipality, or local school district. 
(4)  "Public employee" means elected and appointed officials and employees of the state or any branch, department, board, bureau, commission, authority, or other agency of the state and elected and appointed officials and employees of any political subdivision or authority or other agency of a political subdivision. 
(5)  "Public employment related crime" generally means any one or more of the following crimes: 
(i)  theft by an officer or employee of a government in breach of duties as such officer or employee; 
(ii)  any felony related to abuse of governmental office; 
(iii)  making false statements or concealing facts in matters within the jurisdiction of the state or a political subdivision; 
(iv)  conspiracy to defraud the state or a political subdivision; 
(v)  stealing, altering, or concealing public records; and 
(vi)  selling offices or dividing fees. 
(6)  "Public retirement system" means any retirement or pension system created by or pursuant to the authority of Georgia law or the Constitution of Georgia which has public employees as members of the retirement or pension system, including this Plan. 
Sec. 7. - Forfeitures. 
Forfeitures arising from Termination of Employment, withdrawal or any other reason may not be applied to increase the benefits any individual would otherwise receive under the Plan. However, forfeitures will remain Trust assets, and as such, may be used to reduce an Adopting Employer's contribution. 
ARTICLE X. - DISTRIBUTION AND ROLLOVER RULES 

Sec. 1. - Distribution rules imposed by federal law. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Plan to the contrary, any distribution under the Plan shall be made in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(9) and the regulations promulgated thereunder and shall comply with the following rules: 
(a)  In any event, where distributions have not yet begun, the entire interest, if any, of a Participant under the Plan shall be distributed within five (5) years after the death of the Participant, unless the Participant's benefits are payable to the beneficiary or joint beneficiaries designated by the Participant over a period not to exceed the life expectancy or joint life expectancies of such beneficiary or beneficiaries. In such a case, the distribution of benefits under this Section shall begin (i) in the case of a non-spouse beneficiary, no later than one (1) year following the date of death of the Participant, or (ii) in the case of a surviving spouse, no later than the date on which the Participant would have attained age seventy and one-half (70-½). 
(b)  Unless a Participant elects otherwise, the payment of his benefits under the Plan must begin not later than the 60th day after the end of the Plan Year in which occurs the latest of: (i) the Participant's sixty-fifth (65th) birthday, (ii) the tenth (10th) anniversary of the Plan Year in which the Participant began participation in the Plan, or (iii) the Participant's Termination of Employment or Retirement. 
(c)  To the extent required by Code Section 401(a)(9) and the regulations promulgated thereunder, payment of the Accounts of a Participant shall begin not later than the "required beginning date." For purposes of this Section, "required beginning date" means April 1 of the calendar year following the later of (i) the calendar year in which the Participant reaches age seventy and one-half (70-½), or (ii) the calendar year in which the Participant Retires. 
(d)  A Participant's election of the form of benefit payment shall be restricted to assure compliance with the minimum distribution and incidental death benefit requirements of Code Section 401(a)(9). As part of that compliance, a distribution shall not be made over a period extending beyond: (i) the life of the Participant; (ii) the life of the Participant and his designated beneficiary; (iii) a period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the Participant; or (iv) a period certain not extending beyond the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the Participant and his designated beneficiary. If distribution of the Participant's benefit has commenced before the Participant's death, the remaining interest shall be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used as of the date of the Participant's death. 
(e)  With respect to distributions under the Plan made for calendar years beginning on or after January 1, 2002, the Plan shall apply the minimum distribution requirements of Code Section 401(a)(9) in accordance with the regulations under Code Section 401(a)(9) that were proposed on January 17, 2001, notwithstanding any provision of the Plan to the contrary. The preceding sentence shall continue in effect until the end of the last calendar year beginning before the effective date of final regulations under Code Section 401(a)(9) or such other date as may be specified in guidance published by the Internal Revenue Service. 
Sec. 2. - Rollover of distributions. 
Notwithstanding any provision of the Plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a Distributee's election under this Section, a Distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Administrator, to have any portion of an Eligible Rollover Distribution paid directly to an Eligible Retirement Plan specified by the Distributee in a Direct Rollover. The following definitions shall apply to this Section: 
(a)  An "Eligible Rollover Distribution" is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the Distributee, except that an Eligible Rollover Distribution does not include: (i) any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the Distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the Distributee and the Distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten (10) years or more; (ii) any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Code Section 401(a)(9); or (iii) the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income. 
(b)  An "Eligible Retirement Plan" is an individual retirement account described in Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in Code Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in Code Section 403(a), or a qualified trust described in Code Section 401(a), that accepts the Distributee's Eligible Rollover Distribution; provided, however, in the case of an Eligible Rollover Distribution to the surviving spouse, an Eligible Retirement Plan is only such an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. 
(c)  A "Distributee" includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's surviving spouse is a Distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse. 
(d)  A "Direct Rollover" is a payment by the Plan to the Eligible Retirement Plan specified by the Distributee. 
(e)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), if an Eligible Rollover Distribution is expected to total less than Two Hundred Dollars ($200) during a year, such payment may not be directly rolled over. 
ARTICLE XI. - LIMITATIONS ON BENEFITS 

Section 1. - General 415 limits. 
The Plan shall be administered so as to comply with the limitations of Code Section 415. 
Sec. 2. - Limitation on annual benefit. 
(a)  A Participant's annual benefit for a calendar year (the "limitation year") shall not exceed a dollar amount established in Code Section 415(b)(1)(A), which is adjusted for inflation based on Section 215(i)(2)(A) of the Social Security Act. If a Participant's total annual benefits are not in excess of $10,000.00, this Section will not apply. Furthermore, if the Participant retires before age 62, the limit shall be actuarially reduced in accordance with paragraph (b) below. 
(b)  To the extent required by Code Section 415(b), in no event shall the aggregate annual benefit provided under all defined benefit plans of the Employer for any Participant exceed an amount equal to $90,000.00 as adjusted pursuant to Code Section 415(d)(1)(A). If the retirement income benefit under the Plan begins before age 62, the determination as to whether the $90,000 limitation has been satisfied shall be made by reducing the $90,000.00 limitation so that such limitation (as so reduced) equals an annual benefit (beginning when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a $90,000.00 annual benefit beginning at age 62. The age reduced dollar limit shall be the lesser of the equivalent amount computed using the actuarial table in Article XII, Section 1 of the Plan for actuarial equivalence for early retirement benefits, and the amount computed using five percent interest and the applicable mortality table (to the extent that the mortality decrement is used prior to age 62). The reduction under this paragraph (b) shall not reduce the $90,000.00 limitation below (i) $75,000.00 if the benefit begins at or after age 55, or (ii) if the benefit begins before age 55, the equivalent of the $75,000.00 limitation for age 55. If the retirement income benefit under the Plan begins after age 65, the determination as to whether the $90,000.00 limitation has been satisfied shall be made by increasing the $90,000.00 limitation so that such limitation (as so increased) equals an annual benefit (beginning when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a $90,000 annual benefit beginning at age 65. The age increased dollar limit shall be the lesser of the equivalent amount computed using the actuarial table in Article XII, Section 6 of the Plan to determine the actuarial equivalent of late retirement benefits, and the amount computed using five percent interest and the applicable mortality table. 
(c)  For distributions made in any form other than a straight life annuity or a joint and 50 percent survivor annuity, such benefit shall be adjusted to a straight life annuity, beginning at the same age, which is the actuarial equivalent of such benefit. Prior to the first day of the first limitation year beginning in 1995, in order to determine the actuarial equivalence of different forms of benefit payment, the interest rate assumptions shall not be less than the greater of five percent or the rate specified in the Plan for determining actuarial equivalence for the particular form of retirement benefit. For limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 1995 (and for employers who have elected to treat these rules as being effective on an earlier date that is on or after December 31, 1994), the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity for purposes of applying the limitations under Code Section 415(b) to benefits is equal to the greater of the equivalent annual benefit computed using the interest rate and mortality table, or tabular factor, specified in the Plan for actuarial equivalence for the particular form of benefit payable, and the equivalent annual benefit computed using a five percent interest rate assumptions and the applicable mortality table. 
(d)  Limitations on benefits under Code Section 415(b) shall not apply where the total annual benefits payable to a Participant under this Plan and all other qualified defined benefit plans of the Employer do not exceed $10,000.00 in the aggregate. This minimum limitation is not applicable for a Participant whose Employer maintains or has maintained a defined contribution plan in which such Participant participated. 
(e)  The $10,000.00 minimum limitation, if provided, must be reduced where a Participant has less than ten years of service with the Employer at the time the Participant begins to receive retirement benefits under the Plan, and the maximum dollar limitation must be reduced where a Participant has less than ten years of participation when retirement benefits under the Plan commence. These adjustments are made by multiplying the applicable limitations by the appropriate fraction: 
i.  For the $10,000.00 minimum limitation—Years of service with the employer as of and including, the current limitation year/10 
ii.  For the maximum dollar limitation—Years of participation with the employer as of and including, the current limitation year/10 
Sec. 3. - Limitation on annual additions. 
(a)  Effective for Plan Years beginning on and after January 1, 1995, to the extent required under Code Section 415(c), in no event shall the "annual addition" for a Participant for any calendar year, exceed the lesser of: 
(1)  $30,000.00 as adjusted; or 
(2)  25 percent of the "compensation," of such Participant received from an Adopting Employer during the Plan Year. For purposes of this Section, "compensation" means all of a Participant's wages as defined in Code Section 3401(a) for the purposes of income tax withholding at the source but determined without regard to any rules that limit the remuneration included in wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services performed (such as the exception for agricultural labor in Code Section 3401(a)(2)); provided, however, for Plan Years beginning after December 31, 1997, compensation shall also include the amount of any elective deferrals, as defined in Code Section 402(g)(3), and any amount contributed or deferred by the Adopting Employer at election of the Employee and which is not includable in the gross income of the Employee by reason of Code Section 125, 132(f)(4), or 457. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, "annual addition" means the sum of the following amounts credited to a Participant's accounts for the limitation year under this Plan and any other plan maintained by an Employer: (i) employer contributions; (ii) employee contributions; (iii) forfeitures; and (iv) allocations under a simplified employee pension plan. Amounts allocated after March 31, 1984, to an individual medical account, as defined in Code Section 415(1)(2), which is part of a pension or annuity plan maintained by an Employer are treated as annual additions to a defined contribution plan. Also, amounts derived from contributions paid or accrued after December 31, 1985, in taxable years ending after such date, which are attributable to post-retirement medical benefits, allocated to the separate account of a key employee, as defined in Code Section 419A(d)(3), under a welfare benefit fund, as defined in Code Section 419(e), maintained by an Employer are treated as an annual additions to a defined contribution plan. 
(c)  If the annual addition for a Participant under the Plan would be greater than the annual addition for such Participant as limited by paragraph (a), then the excess, if due to contributions based on estimated annual compensation, the allocation of forfeitures, or a reasonable error in determining the amount of elective deferrals under Code Section 402(g)(3), shall be reduced, to the extent necessary to satisfy such limitation by distributing to the Participant any excess employee contributions, as adjusted for any gains or losses thereto. 
Sec. 4. - Code section 415(e) limits. 
(a)  For limitation years beginning prior to January 1, 2000, notwithstanding anything in this Section to the contrary, to the extent required under Code Section 415(e), in any case in which a Participant is a participant in both a defined benefit plan and a defined contribution plan maintained by an Employer, the sum of the "defined benefit plan fraction," as defined in paragraph (1) below, and the "defined contribution plan fraction," as defined in paragraph (2) below, for any Plan Year shall not exceed one. 
(1)  For purposes of this paragraph, "defined benefit plan fraction" means a fraction, the numerator of which is the sum of the participant's projected annual benefits under the plan (determined as of the close of the year) and the denominator of which is the lesser of (i) one and twenty-five one hundredths (1.25) multiplied by the dollar limitation determined for the limitation year under Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) (as adjusted for the Cost of Living Adjustment), or (ii) one and four tenths (1.4) multiplied by the amount which may be taken into account under Code Section 415(b)(1)(B) with respect to the participant under the plan for such year. Notwithstanding the above, if the participant was a participant as of the first day of the first limitation year beginning after December 31, 1986, in one or more defined benefit plans maintained by an employer which were in existence on May 6, 1986, the denominator of this fraction will not be less than one and twenty-five one hundredths (1.25) multiplied by the sum of the annual benefits under such plans which the participant had accrued as of the close of the last limitation year beginning before January 1, 1987, disregarding any changes in the terms and conditions of the plan or cost of living increases occurring after May 5, 1986. The preceding sentence applies only if the defined benefit plans individually and in the aggregate satisfied the requirements of Code Section 415 for all limitation years beginning before January 1, 1987. 
(2)  For purposes of this paragraph, "defined contribution plan fraction" means a fraction, the numerator of which is the sum of the annual additions to the participant's accounts as of the close of the year and the denominator of which is the sum of the lesser of the following amounts determined for such year and for each prior year of service with the employer: (i) one and twenty-five one hundredths (1.25) multiplied by the dollar limitation in effect under Code Section 415(c)(1)(A) (as adjusted for the Cost of Living Adjustment and determined without regard to Code Section 415(c)(6)), or (ii) one and four tenths (1.4) multiplied by the amount which may be taken into account under Code Section 415(c)(1)(B) (or Code Section 415(c)(7), if applicable) with respect to such participant under such plan for such year. 
(b)  If the sum of such defined benefit plan fraction and such defined contribution plan fraction for a Participant determined without regard to the limitation of Code Section 415(e) would have been greater than such fraction as limited by Code Section 415(e), then the annual benefit under the Plan for such Participant shall be reduced to the extent necessary to satisfy the limitations under Code Section 415(e), unless the annual benefit, as defined in Code Section 415(b)(2), of the Participant under another defined benefit plan, or the annual additions, as defined in Code Section 415(c)(2), of the Participant under a defined contribution plan is reduced to the extent necessary to satisfy the limitations under Code Section 415(e). 
(c)  The numerator of the defined benefit fraction shall include all defined benefit plans, whether or not terminated, of the employer. The numerator of the defined contribution fraction shall include all annual additions under all the defined contribution plans, whether or not terminated, maintained by the employer for the current and all prior limitation years, including annual additions attributable to the participant's voluntary contributions, or mandatory employee contributions, as defined in Code Section 411(c)(2)(C), to this and all other defined benefit plans maintained by the employer. 
(d)  For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2000, any benefit limitations applied pursuant to Code Section 415(e) shall no longer apply for employees or former employees who are Participants with an accrued benefit under the Plan on or after January 1, 2000. 
Sec. 5. - Interpretation of this article. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article to the contrary, to the extent permitted under Code Section 415, the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982, the Tax Reform Act of 1986, or the Technical and Miscellaneous Revenue Act of 1988, or any subsequently enacted federal law, the annual additions and annual benefit of a Participant shall be adjusted so as to produce the maximum annual benefit and maximum annual additions for such Participant under Code Section 415. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section and subject to Code Section 415(h), all defined benefit plans of an Adopting Employer, whether or not terminated, are to be treated as a single defined benefit plan, and all defined contribution plans of an Adopting Employer are to be treated as a single defined contribution plan. However, Adopting Employers shall be considered as separate Employers in accordance with State law. 
(c)  The accrued benefit of any Participant which exceeds the benefit limitations under Code Section 415 as amended by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 ("TRA '86") (including the protected current accrued benefit, as described in Q & A 12 of Notice 87-21) is reduced, as of the first day of the first limitation year beginning after December 31, 1986, to the level permitted under TRA '86. 
ARTICLE XII. - ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT CONVERSION TABLES 

Sec. 1. - Early retirement reduction table. 

 
*Interpolate for whole months. 
_____
Sec. 2. - Option A tables. 
(a)  Standard Joint and Survivor Factors. 
(1)  Participant Same Age Or Older—The following table is to be used for a Participant who is the same age or older than his Beneficiary: 

 
*Factor for 20 year age difference minus extrapolation factor below times number of years in excess of 20 that Participant's age exceeds his Beneficiary's age. 

 
(2)  Standard Factors; Participant Younger - The following table is to be used for a Participant who is younger than his Beneficiary: 

 
(b)  Option A1 Pop-Up Factors. 
(1)  Participant Same Age or Older—The following table is to be used for a Participant who is the same age or older than this Beneficiary: 

 
*Factor for 20 year age difference minus extrapolation factor below times number of years in excess of 20 that Participant's age exceeds his Beneficiary's age. 

 
(2)  Pop-Up Factors; Participant Younger—The following table is to be used for a Participant who is younger than his Beneficiary: 

 
Sec. 3. - Option B table. 

 
Sec. 4. - Option C tables. 
(a)  The following table is to be used when the benefits under the Social Security Option are payable for life: 

 
(b)  The following table is to be used when the benefits under the Social Security Option cease at age 62: 

 
Sec. 5. - Life annuity factors to be used in computing actuarial reserve death benefit. 

 
Sec. 6. - Late retirement actuarial increase factors. 

 
Figure factor using years and months. Divide difference between next highest age factor and age factor lower, by 12, then multiply by number of months. Add this onto age for years factor to arrive at correct factor. (Round off to 4 decimals). Note: If normal retirement age differs from 65, factors must be supplied by Actuary. 
_____
Sec. 7. - Other annuity forms. 
Conversion factors for other annuity forms shall be computed by an enrolled Actuary on an actuarially equivalent basis assuming that the Participant is retiring at age 65 and using the UP-1984 Mortality Table without age setback with interest at 8%, regardless of the actual age and sex of any Participant or Beneficiary. If appropriate, such factors may vary by the difference between the Participant's age and the Beneficiary's age. The value of Retirement benefits received by a Participant for purposes of Article VI, Section 6 shall be determined using the UP-1984 Mortality Table without age setback with interest at eight percent. 
Sec. 8. - Lump sum payments. 
Effective January 1, 2001, a single sum distribution of benefits payable under Article VII, Section 5, or upon plan termination, or if required for compliance with Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code, shall be computed on the basis of the actual age of the Participant and/or Beneficiary at the time of distribution and under the following actuarial assumptions: 
(a)  Interest: The applicable interest rate established by the Internal Revenue Service under Code Section 417(e)(3) and accompanying regulations, as in effect for the month of September preceding the calendar year during which the distribution is paid. 
(b)  Mortality: The applicable mortality table established by the Internal Revenue Service pursuant to IRC Section 417(e)(3) and accompanying regulations. 
(c)  Age at Which Payments Begin: The greater of the Normal Retirement Date or the age at the time of distribution of the Participant and/or Beneficiary. 
ARTICLE XIII. - CONTRIBUTIONS 

Sec. 1. - Adopting employer contributions 
The Adopting Employer shall make the necessary Contributions to fund the Plan. The amount of these Contributions shall be based upon the actuarial assumptions adopted by the Board of Trustees, the benefits provided in the Plan, and the number of Participants and their respective ages, Earnings, and lengths of Creditable Service and such other factors as the Board of Trustees shall deem appropriate to assure proper funding of the Plan. Contributions by the Adopting Employer shall be applied as necessary to assure the payment of Accrued Benefits to Participants and Beneficiaries. Employer Contributions received by GMEBS by the last day of any month shall accrue Interest from the first day of the following month. 
Sec. 2. - Employee contributions. 
Participants or certain classes of Participants may be required to make Contributions to the Plan as specified in the Adoption Agreement. Unless otherwise specified by the Adopting Employer, Employee Contributions shall accrue interest at the same rate and in the same manner as Employer Contributions. When elected by the Adopting Employer to be picked-up, the Adopting Employer shall pick-up and pay contributions in accordance with Code Section 414(h)(2) as follows: 
(a)  The contributions, although designed as Employee contributions, are being paid by that Adopting Employer in lieu of contributions by the Employee, and 
(b)  The Employee must not be given the option of receiving the amounts directly instead of having them paid to the Plan. 
Sec. 3. - Withdrawal of employee contributions. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in the Adoption Agreement, if a non-vested Participant's employment is terminated for any reason other than death, he shall request that his Employee Contributions plus interest, if any, be withdrawn. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified in the Adoption Agreement, if a vested Participant's employment is terminated for any reason other than death or Retirement, he may request that his Employee Contributions plus interest be withdrawn, unless he chooses to claim his vested benefit, in which case his Employee Contributions shall not be withdrawn. 
(c)  Upon the Participant's termination, the Pension Committee shall provide notice to the Participant of his opportunity to withdraw his Employee Contributions, and the Participant shall have sixty (60) days after receipt of such notice to submit a request for withdrawal on an Applicable Form provided for that purpose. Failure to make such a request within this sixty (60) day period shall result in the forfeiture of a vested Participant's right to request withdrawal upon termination and shall result in forfeiture of a non-vested Participant's right to the accrual of further interest. Unless otherwise specified in the Adoption Agreement, upon withdrawal of Participant Contributions pursuant to this Section, the Participant shall forfeit for himself, his heirs and assigns all his rights, title, and interest in the Plan, except as provided in subsection (d) below. Employee Contributions shall be returned to the Participant within ninety (90) days of the receipt of the Participant's request. A Participant may not withdraw his Participant contributions as long as he remains in the employment of the Adopting Employer and he may not borrow against Employee Contributions at any time. A partial withdrawal of Employee Contributions is not permitted. 
(d)  If a Participant withdraws his Employee Contributions in accordance with this Section, and if he later resumes employment with the Adopting Employer in an Eligible Employee class, then any service credit or benefit amount he forfeited by virtue of his withdrawal may be reinstated upon his reemployment with the Adopting Employer, provided: (1) he repays during said period of reemployment all amounts previously withdrawn plus interest at a rate determined by the Board, compounded annually from the date of return of contributions through the date of repayment; and (2) provided the amount due is paid in full in accordance with any time limits and other requirements established by the Board for repayment of said Employee Contributions. 
Sec. 4. - Cessation of contributions without penalty. 
The Employer may provide in the Adoption Agreement that Participants who have met certain retirement benefit eligibility requirements shall no longer be required to make contributions to the Plan. 
Sec. 5. - Continued contributions during leave of absence. 
Subject to the applicable limits of Code Section 415(c), if the terms of an authorized leave of absence permit the Participant to continue accumulating Credited Service during said leave of absence, the Participant shall be required to continue making Employee Contributions in the same amount and at the same rate as immediately prior to the commencement of the leave of absence. 
Sec. 6. - Return of contributions upon failure to exhaust. 
If a Retired Participant does not elect an optional form of Retirement benefit payment, or if the Participant elects the Option C form of benefit payment, and if upon the death of the Participant the sum of all benefits paid to him does not equal or exceed the amount of the Participant's Employee Contributions plus interest posted thereon, then a lump sum payment in the amount of the difference shall be paid to the Retired Participant's estate. If a Retired Participant elects an optional form of retirement benefit payment other than Option C, and upon the death of the Retired Participant, or if later the death of his Post-Retirement Beneficiary, the sum of all benefits paid does not equal or exceed the amount of the Participant's Employee Contributions plus interest posted thereon, then a lump sum payment in the amount of the difference shall be paid to the Retired Participant's estate, unless the Post-Retirement Beneficiary dies after he has begun receiving survivor benefit payments, in which case said lump sum payment shall be paid to the Post-Retirement Beneficiary's estate. If a Participant dies in the Service of an Adopting Employer before he satisfies the eligibility requirements for an in-service death benefit, his Employee Contributions plus interest posted thereon shall be paid to the Participant's estate. In the event the sum of all pre-retirement benefits paid to a Pre-Retirement Beneficiary(ies) by virtue of the death of a Participant or Terminated Participant, as applicable, do not equal or exceed the amount of the Participant's or Terminated Participant's Employee Contributions plus interest posted thereon, a lump sum payment in the amount of the difference shall be paid to the estate of the Pre-Retirement Beneficiary (or last surviving Pre-Retirement Beneficiary as applicable). For purposes of this Section, the amount of "interest posted" shall be determined as of the date that the lump sum payment payable under this Section is distributed. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PENSION COMMITTEE 

Sec. 1. - Creation and composition. 
There shall be a Pension Committee for each Adopting Employer. Unless otherwise specified in the Adoption Agreement, the Pension Committee shall be composed of the following: 
For Municipal Corporations: 
(a)  City Attorney or other attorney appointed by the Governing Authority. 
(b)  City Clerk and City Manager. 
(c)  Two (2) Employee representatives elected annually by the Participants. 
(d)  Two (2) appointed members of the Governing Authority. 
For Other Adopting Employers: 
(a)  Attorney appointed by the Governing Authority. 
(b)  Executive Director. 
(c)  Two (2) Employee representatives elected annually by the Participants. 
(d)  Two (3) appointed members of the Governing Authority. 
Sec. 2. - Responsibilities. 
The Pension Committee shall have the following responsibilities: 
(a)  In its dealings with GMEBS or its duly appointed representatives, the Pension Committee shall: 
(1)  Furnish all information with respect to enrollment of Eligible Employees, including elected or appointed members of the Governing Authority and Municipal Legal Officers if they are designated as Eligible Employees in the Adoption Agreement. 
(2)  Assure the collection and remittance to GMEBS of all required Contributions. 
(3)  Furnish GMEBS, in accordance with its rules and regulations, all reports and other records required to administer the Plan. 
(4)  Notify GMEBS, in accordance with its rules and regulations, of all benefit elections made by Participants under the Plan and all matters regarding payment of benefits. 
(5)  Notify GMEBS of the termination of Participating Employees, and, if they are permitted in the Adoption Agreement to participate in the Plan, the vacation of office by elected or appointed members of the Governing Authority and Municipal Legal Officers. 
(b)  In dealing with those persons participating or eligible to participate in the Plan, the Pension Committee shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for the enrollment of Eligible Employees, including elected or appointed members of the Governing Authority and Municipal Legal Officers if they are included as Eligible Employees in the Adoption Agreement. 
(2)  Handle distribution of all reports to Participants. 
(3)  Handle arbitration between the Adopting Employer and Participants in all matters regarding the Plan. 
(4)  Handle any notices of eligibility, benefits, available options, and any other notices required by this Plan, Contract, or rules and regulations of GMEBS. 
(c)  The Pension Committee is not authorized to interpret the Master Plan document, or matters of State and federal law as they relate to interpretation of the Master Plan document. These matters are reserved for the sole discretion of the Board. 
Sec. 3. - Secretary. 
The Pension Committee shall designate, in writing, a secretary or other representative who shall have full authority to represent the Committee in all communications with GMEBS and the Adopting Employer's Employees, including elected or appointed members of the Governing Authority and Municipal Legal Officers. A copy of such written designation shall be forwarded to GMEBS. 
Sec. 4. - Legal assistance. 
The City Attorney or other attorney appointed by the Governing Authority shall furnish legal advice to the Pension Committee with respect to the Plan and the Committee's assigned responsibilities hereunder. 
Sec. 5. - Plan representative. 
The Adopting Employer shall designate in the Adoption Agreement an individual to serve as Plan Representative. The Plan Representative shall have full authority to represent the Governing Authority in all communications with GMEBS and the Adopting Employer's Employees. The Pension Committee Secretary may serve as the Plan Representative. 
ARTICLE XV. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Sec. 1. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, "Act" refers to the Act of the General Assembly creating the Board of Trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System (O.C.G.A. Section 47-5-1 et seq.), as amended. 
Sec. 2. - Powers. 
The powers of the Board of Trustees as fixed by the Act are hereby incorporated as part of the Plan. The Adopting Employer agrees that, in the administration of the Plan, it will comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Trustees under its authority as granted by the Act. 
Sec. 3. - Composition and election. 
The composition of the Board of Trustees and the election of its members shall be as provided by the Act and as may be provided in the bylaws of the Board of Trustees. 
Sec. 4. - Officers. 
The election of officers by the Board of Trustees shall be conducted as may be prescribed by the Act and as may be provided in the bylaws of the Board of Trustees. 
Sec. 5. - Notice of elections. 
The Board of Trustees shall provide through its bylaws for the giving of notice of elections, notice of any vacancy on the Board, the method or manner in which votes may be cast, and any other matter necessary or incident to the election of members of the Board. The Board may also provide for a proxy vote, and may determine how, when, and in what manner voting by proxy may be had in accordance with the Act and as may be provided in the bylaws of the Board of Trustees. 
Sec. 6. - Voting. 
Each Adopting Employer shall be entitled to vote in any election or other matter placed before the membership as provided in the bylaws of the Board of Trustees. 
Sec. 7. - Voting representative for the adopting employer. 
The secretary or other designated representative of the Pension Committee shall be the official representative of the Adopting Employer to cast the Adopting Employer's vote in any election of members of the Board of Trustees and in any other matters which the membership has the authority and responsibility for resolving, unless the Adopting Employer notifies GMEBS to the contrary in writing. 
Sec. 8. - Qualified public accountant. 
The Administrator may engage on behalf of all Participants an independent qualified public accountant to conduct such an examination of any financial statements of the Plan, and of other books and records of the Plan, as the qualified public accountant may deem necessary to enable him to form an opinion as to whether the financial statements and schedules required to be included in the annual report of the Plan are presented fairly in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles as applicable to a governmental plan, applied on a basis consistent with that of the preceding Plan Year and who shall perform such other services for the Plan as the Administrator may require. 
Sec. 9. - Fiduciary insurance. 
The Board of Trustees may purchase fiduciary liability insurance for any of its fiduciaries, or for itself, to cover liability or losses occurring by reason of the act or omission of a fiduciary. 
ARTICLE XVI. - JOINT TRUST AGREEMENT 

[Sec. 1. - Agreement.] 
The Adoption Agreement shall specify the representative of the Adopting Employer who is authorized to enter into and execute on behalf of the Adopting Employer the Joint Trust Agreement with the Board of Trustees. All contributions under the Plan shall be transferred to the Trust to be held, managed, invested, and distributed as part of the Trust Fund by the Board in accordance with the provisions of the Plan. All benefits under the Plan shall be distributed solely from the Trust Fund. 
The Board shall distribute the corpus and income of the Trust Fund to the Participants and their Beneficiaries in accordance with applicable state and federal law and the Plan. At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to Participants and their Beneficiaries shall any part of the corpus or income be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than the exclusive benefit of the Participants and their beneficiaries. 
ARTICLE XVII. - CLAIMS AND LITIGATION 

Sec. 1. - Disputes. 
In the event of disagreement between a Participant and the Adopting Employer with respect to any rights, claims, or responsibilities under the Plan which cannot be resolved by the Pension Committee as provided under Article XV, the Participant may make an appeal regarding such rights, claims, or responsibilities to the Governing Authority. In the event that any such rights, claims, or responsibilities result in a suit or other legal action by a Participant or Beneficiary, such action shall be defended in the same manner as other suits against the Adopting Employer. Any legal action on behalf of the Adopting Employer with regard to the Plan shall be first authorized by the Governing Authority and shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by the Governing Authority. GMEBS shall have no responsibility to defend or pursue legal action arising under the Plan. 
Sec. 2. - Disputes involving federal or state law compliance. 
In the event there is a dispute involving federal or state law compliance, between a Participant or Beneficiary and the Governing Authority or the Trustees, or between an Adopting Employer and the Trustees, GMEBS is a necessary party to any such dispute, or suit, settlement, or release arising therefrom. 
Sec. 3. - Failure to act. 
GMEBS shall not be responsible for the failure of the Adopting Employers to perform any of their obligations under the Plan, including the duty to remit payments to GMEBS, to provide necessary records concerning Participants and their Earnings to GMEBS, or to perform any other functions required of the Adopting Employers by applicable law, the Master Plan, the Adoption Agreement, the Joint Trust Agreement, or by the rules and regulations of GMEBS. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION 

Sec. 1. - Amendment of the plan by an adopting employer. 
The Governing Authority shall have the right at any time, and from time to time, to amend, in whole or in part, any or all of its elections in the Adoption Agreement; provided, however, that no such amendment shall: 
(a)  Reduce the previously accrued benefits of any Participant or Beneficiary; or, 
(b)  Authorize or permit any part of the Trust Fund held by the Board to be diverted to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of Participants and their Beneficiaries; or, 
(c)  Operate to deprive any Participant or Beneficiary of any rights or benefits irrevocably Vested in him under the Plan prior to such amendment, except that the Governing Authority may make any and all changes or modifications to the Adoption Agreement necessary to qualify the Plan or to keep the Plan qualified under the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder, or any amendment thereto; or, 
(d)  Become effective until approved by the Board. In order to be approved by the Board, any amendment must comply with all applicable state and federal laws and the Master Plan. If the Board does not approve an amendment, the Board shall continue to administer the Plan as if such amendment had not been made. 
In no event may an Adopting Employer amend the Master Plan or the Joint Trust Agreement. 
Sec. 2. - Amendment of plan by GMEBS. 
The Board hereby reserves the right to amend the Master Plan or the elective provisions of the Adoption Agreement in its sole discretion. Any modification, alteration, or amendment made in accordance with this Section may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate. A certified copy of the resolution of the Board making such amendment shall be delivered to the Administrator and the Adopting Employers. The Plan shall be amended in the manner and effective as of the date set forth in such resolution, and the Adopting Employers, Employees, Participants, Beneficiaries, the Administrator, and all others having any interest under the Plan shall be bound thereby. 
Sec. 3. - Amendment for qualification of plan. 
It is the intent of the Board that the Plan shall be and remain qualified for tax purposes under the Code. The Administrator shall promptly submit the Master Plan for approval under the Code and all expenses incident thereto shall be borne by the GMEBS Investment Fund. The Board may make any modifications, alterations, or amendments to the Master Plan or Adoption Agreement necessary to obtain and retain approval of the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate as may be necessary to establish and maintain the status of the Plan as qualified under the provisions of the Code or in compliance with other federal legislation, as now in effect or hereafter enacted, and the regulations issued thereunder. Any modification, alteration, or amendment of the Plan, made in accordance with this Section, may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate. A certified copy of the resolution of the Board making such amendment shall be delivered to the Administrator and the Adopting Employers, and the Plan shall be amended in the manner and effective as of the date set forth in such resolution, and the Adopting Employers, Employees, Participants, beneficiaries, Administrator, and all others having any interest under the Plan shall be bound thereby. 
Sec. 4. - Termination of adopting employer. 
(a)  The Adopting Employer expects the Plan to be continued indefinitely but, of necessity, reserves the right to terminate its Plan and Contributions thereunder at any time by action of the Governing Authority, subject to the Board's approval. Such termination shall be accomplished by the adoption of an ordinance by the Governing Authority terminating the Plan. Such ordinance shall conform to the rules and regulations of the Board governing Plan termination. 
(b)  Upon termination, all Eligible Employees shall be deemed to be Participants, and the Accrued Benefits of such Participants shall be Vested. The Pension Committee shall notify Participants, Terminated Participants, Retired Participants, and Beneficiaries of the termination of the Plan, and shall provide a copy of such notice and the names and address of the persons notified to the Board. 
(c)  Upon termination, the Adopting Employer shall provide to the Administrator current Participant information necessary to calculate Accrued Benefits. Upon receipt of such information, the Administrator shall prepare a list of all the Adopting Employer's Retired Participants, Terminated Participants, and Beneficiaries, showing for each the present value of his Accrued Benefit, as determined by the GMEBS Actuary as of the date of termination. 
(d)  The Board, in accordance with its current rules and regulations, shall cause to be prepared, an audit of the GMEBS Investment Fund in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices to determine the value of the Adopting Employer's Trust Fund as of the termination date. All mandatory Employee Contributions, if any, plus interest, shall be paid from the Trust Fund to the Participants. The Board shall then deduct from the Trust Fund the total expenses incurred or to be incurred by GMEBS in terminating the Plan. The Board, pursuant to its rules and regulations, shall then allocate the remaining assets for distribution of the present value of Accrued Benefits in lump sums to the classes listed below. The benefits of each class shall be satisfied before proceeding to the next class. If at any time the remaining Plan assets would be insufficient to provide the present value of Accrued Benefits for the group in question, the remaining assets shall be applied on a pro rata basis within that group, and all subsequent groups shall receive no benefit. 

 
Payment of benefits to Retired Participants, Beneficiaries, and Participants by the Administrator as a result of a Plan termination shall be limited solely to the assets available in the Trust Fund. 
(e)  In its termination ordinance, the Governing Authority shall instruct the Administrator as to the distribution of excess assets, if any, remaining after the satisfaction of Accrued Benefits for the classes enumerated herein. In the absence of such instructions, any excess assets shall be distributed to the Adopting Employer. 
(f)  Upon distribution of the assets as specified above, the Adoption Agreement, Master Plan, and Joint Trust Agreement shall be regarded as terminated as to that Adopting Employer and no Participant or Beneficiary shall have any further rights or claim herein. 
Sec. 5. - Amendment of the plan to transfer assets; termination of joint trust agreement. 
(a)  The Adopting Employer may amend the Adoption Agreement so as to provide for the transfer of assets to successor trustees and to terminate the existing Joint Trust Agreement between the Adopting Employer and the Board. Any such ordinance shall comply with Section 1 of this Article and with the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Board regarding amendment and transfer of Plan assets. 
(b)  In addition to other requirements, such ordinance shall: 
(1)  Designate a new trustee or trustees to replace the Board; 
(2)  Establish a termination date, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board, which shall be used for purposes of the final audit; and 
(3)  State that the existing retirement rights of Employees, Participants, and Beneficiaries shall not be impaired. 
(c)  The Board, in accordance with its current rules and regulations, shall cause to be prepared, an audit of the GMEBS Investment Fund in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices to determine the value of the Adopting Employer's Trust Fund as of the termination date. The Board shall then deduct from that Trust Fund the total expenses incurred or to be incurred by the Administrator in terminating the Adopting Employer's Plan. Distribution of assets to the successor trustees shall then occur within the time limits specified in the Joint Trust Agreement. 
Sec. 6. - Involuntary termination. 
(a)  The Board may involuntarily terminate the Plan as to an Adopting Employer in the event of any of the following occurrences: 
(1)  Failure of the Employer to comply with the terms of the Master Plan and Adoption Agreement, including, but not limited to, failure to pay required Contributions in a timely manner; 
(2)  Receipt of written notice from an Adopting Employer's Governing Authority of its intent to discontinue further Contributions; 
(3)  Insistence by the Employer on enforcing an amendment to the Adoption Agreement which the Board has disapproved; or 
(4)  Failure of the Adopting Employer to maintain qualification status under Code Sections 401(a) and 414(d). 
(b)  The rights, benefits, and entitlements under the Plan of any Participant, including those of his Beneficiary, any other provision of the Plan notwithstanding, before or after Retirement, death, or other termination of employment shall, upon the failure of the Adopting Employer to pay and to continue to pay its required contributions, be limited as specified in this Article. 
(c)  In the event of an involuntary termination, the members of the Governing Authority shall become successor trustees for the Plan. 
(d)  The Board shall notify the Governing Authority, Participants, and Beneficiaries in writing of an involuntary termination and the reasons therefore. Said notice shall also fix a termination date. Payment of benefits to Retired Participants and Beneficiaries shall become the responsibility of the Governing Authority, as successor trustees, as of the termination date. 
(e)  The Board, in accordance with its rules and regulations, shall cause to be prepared, an audit of the GMEBS Investment Fund in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices to determine the value of the Adopting Employer's Trust Fund as of the termination date. The Board shall then deduct from the Trust Fund the total expenses incurred or to be incurred by the Administrator in terminating the Plan. Distribution of assets to the Governing Authority, as successor trustees, shall then occur within the time limits specified in the Joint Trust Agreement. 
Sec. 7. - Termination of the master plan by the board. 
The Board reserves the right to completely terminate the Master Plan and the Joint Trust Agreement. In such an event, the provisions of Section 4 shall be applied to each Adopting Employer. 
ARTICLE XIX. - NON-ALIENATION OF BENEFITS 

[Sec. 1. - Non-alienation of benefits.] 
None of the benefits, payments, proceeds or distributions payable under the Plan shall be subject to the claim of any creditor of any Participant or to the claim of any creditor of any Beneficiary hereunder, or to any legal process of levy or attachment by any creditor of any such Participant or Beneficiary; and no such benefits shall be in any manner liable for or subject to the debts, liabilities, engagements, or torts of any Participant or Beneficiary; and neither any such Participant or Beneficiary shall have any right to alienate, commute, anticipate, transfer, encumber, pledge, or assign any of the benefits, payments, proceeds, or distributions under the Plan. 
ARTICLE XX. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 1. - Construction. 
(a)  Words used in this Plan in the masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine gender where appropriate, and words used in this Plan in the singular or plural shall be construed as being in the plural or singular where appropriate. 
(b)  The Plan shall be construed, enforced, and administered and the validity thereof determined in accordance with the Code, and, when not inconsistent with the Code, the laws of the State of Georgia and the bylaws of the Board. 
(c)  In resolving any conflict between provisions of the Plan and in resolving any other uncertainty as to the meaning or intention of any provision of the Plan, the interpretation that (i) causes the Plan to constitute a qualified governmental retirement plan under the provisions of Code Sections 401 and 414(d) and the Trust as exempt from tax under Code Sections 501 and 115, and (ii) causes the Plan to comply with all applicable requirements of the Code and federal law shall prevail over any different interpretation. 
(d)  In resolving any conflict between the Plan and any policy or contract issued under the Plan, the provisions of the Plan shall prevail. 
(e)  The headings and subheadings in the Plan are inserted for convenience of reference only and are not to be considered in the construction of any provision of the Plan. 
(f)  Neither the establishment nor maintenance of the Plan nor any amendment thereof, nor any act or omission under the Plan or resulting from the operation of the Plan shall be construed: 
(1)  as conferring upon any Participant, beneficiary, or any other person a right or claim against the GMEBS Investment Fund, the Trust Fund, the Trustees, the Adopting Employer, or the Administrator, except to the extent that such right or claim shall be specifically expressed and provided in the Plan; 
(2)  as a contract or Agreement between the Adopting Employer and any Participant or other person; 
(3)  as being consideration for, or an inducement or condition of, employment of any Participant or other person, or as affecting or restricting in any manner or to any extent whatsoever the rights or obligations of the Adopting Employer or any Participant or other person to continue or terminate the employment relationship at any time; or 
(4)  as giving any Participant the right to be retained in the service of the Adopting Employer or to interfere with the right of the Adopting Employer to discharge any Participant or other person at any time. 
Sec. 2. - Non-diversion. 
(a)  The assets of the Plan shall never inure to the benefit of an Adopting Employer and shall be held for the exclusive purposes of providing benefits to Participants in the Plan and their beneficiaries and defraying reasonable expenses of administering the Plan, except in the case of a contribution which is made by an Adopting Employer under a mistake of fact as determined solely by the Administrator. Such contribution shall be returned to the Adopting Employer, upon demand, and shall be reduced for any loss incurred but unadjusted for any gains earned during the time the mistaken contribution was part of the Trust Fund. 
(b)  Trust assets shall be managed in compliance with Code Section 503(b). 
Sec. 3. - Legally incompetent. 
Any Participant or Beneficiary receiving or claiming benefits under the Plan shall be conclusively presumed to be mentally competent and of age until the Plan Representative receives a written notice, in a form and manner acceptable to it, that such person is incompetent or a minor, and that a guardian or other person legally vested with the care of his estate has been appointed. In the event a guardian of the estate of any person receiving or claiming benefits under the Plan shall be appointed by a court of competent jurisdiction, payments shall be made to such guardian provided that proper proof of appointment is furnished in a form and manner suitable to the Plan Representative. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of liability therefore under the Plan. 
Sec. 4. - Benefits supported only by trust fund. 
Any person having any claim under the Plan shall look solely to the assets of the Trust Fund for satisfaction. In no event shall the Adopting Employer, or any of its employees or agents, be liable in their individual capacities to any person whomsoever, under the provisions of the Plan or of the Joint Trust Agreement. 
Sec. 5. - Non-discrimination. 
The Adopting Employer, through the Pension Committee, shall administer the Plan in a uniform and consistent manner with respect to all Participants. 
Sec. 6. - Limitation of liability; legal actions. 
(a)  It is expressly understood and agreed by each Employee who becomes a Participant hereunder that, except for willful neglect or fraud, neither the Adopting Employer, the Plan Representative, nor the Board of Trustees shall be in any way subject to any suit or litigation, or to any legal liability, for any cause or reason or thing whatsoever, in connection with the Plan or its operation, and each such Participant hereby releases the Adopting Employer, all its employees and agents, the Plan Representative, and the Board of Trustees from any and all liability or obligation. 
(b)  The Adopting Employer and the Plan Representative shall be the only necessary parties to any action or proceeding involving any rights under the Plan or the proper administration thereof, and no Participant, Beneficiary, or other persons having or claiming to have an interest in the Plan shall be entitled to any notice of process. Any final judgment which is not appealed or appealable that may be entered in any such action or proceeding shall be binding and conclusive on the parties hereto and all persons having or claiming to have an interest in the Plan. 
Each fiduciary under the Plan shall be responsible only for the specific duties assigned under the Plan and shall not be directly or indirectly responsible for the duties assigned to another fiduciary. Any person or a group of persons may serve in more than one (1) fiduciary capacity with respect to the Plan. 
Sec. 7. - Claims. 
Any payment to a Participant or Beneficiary, or to their legal representatives, in accordance with the provisions of the Plan, shall to the extent thereof be in full satisfaction of all claims hereunder against the Plan Representative or the Adopting Employer, either of which may require such Participant, Beneficiary, or legal representative, as a condition precedent to such payment, to execute a receipt and release therefore in such form as shall be determined by the Plan Representative or the Adopting Employer. 
Sec. 8. - Errors in benefits. 
Any overpayments or underpayments from the Trust Fund to a Retired Participant or to a Beneficiary caused by administrative errors shall be corrected with interest compounded annually from the date of the miscalculated payment. The rate applied shall be the actuarial assumption rate utilized by the plan actuary for estimating future plan investment earnings as of the date of the correction. Overpayments shall be charged against Retirement payments next succeeding the correction. Underpayments shall be made up from the Adopting Employer's Trust Fund. 
No single deduction may exceed 50 percent of the amount of payment from which the deduction is made or the Retiree or Beneficiary shall be liable to repay a sum equal to the amount so received by him as determined by the Board. 
Sec. 9. - Notice. 
Any notice given under the Plan shall be sufficient if given to: (1) the Board if addressed to the Administrator at its office; (2) the Adopting Employer if addressed to the address of the Governing Authority indicated in the Adoption Agreement; or (3) a Participant or Beneficiary, when addressed to the Participant at his or her address as it appears in the records of the Administrator or the Adopting Employer. 
Sec. 10. - Right of recovery. 
If the Administrator makes any payment that according to the terms of the Plan and the benefits provided hereunder should not have been made, the Administrator may recover that incorrect payment, whether or not it was made due to the error of the Administrator, from the person to whom it was made, or from any other appropriate party. If any such incorrect payment is made directly to a Participant, the provisions of Section 8 apply. 
Sec. 11. - Evidence of action. 
Any action by any Adopting Employer pursuant to any of the provisions of the Plan shall be evidenced by ordinance or resolution of its governing body, and the Administrator and the Board shall be fully protected in acting in accordance with such resolution or ordinance so certified to it. All orders, requests, and instructions to the Administrator by an Adopting Employer or by any duly authorized representative, shall be in writing and the Administrator shall act and shall be fully protected in acting in accordance with such orders, requests, and instructions. 
Sec. 12. - Reliance. 
The Administrator or Board shall not incur any liability in acting upon any notice, request, signed letter, telegram, or other paper or document believed by the Administrator or Board to be genuine or to be executed or sent by an authorized person. 
Sec. 13. - Entire plan. 
The Plan document and the documents incorporated by reference herein shall constitute the only legally governing documents for the Plan. No statement by the Trustees, Adopting Employer, or Administrator shall be used in any claim unless in writing, signed by the party against whom the claim is being made. 
The terms of the foregoing Master Defined Benefit Plan Document are hereby adopted and agreed to. 
APPENDIX B - UNIFIED LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings, ch. 5; planning and development, ch. 16; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, ch. 20; utilities, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE ROME CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF ROME, GEORGIA, AND TO PROVIDE FOR THE CREATION OF A UNIFIED LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE OF FLOYD COUNTY AND THE CITY OF ROME; TO PROVIDE FOR THE REGULATION OF THE USE OF LAND, THE LOCATION AND USE OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER SITE IMPROVEMENTS, AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC FACILITIES AND PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS RELATED TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF LAND; TO SET FORTH PROVISIONS FOR THE APPLICABILITY AND INTERPRETATION OF THIS ORDINANCE; TO SET FORTH THE PURPOSE AND INTENT OF THIS ORDINANCE; TO PROVIDE FOR PROCEDURES FOR ZONING CHANGES, LAND DEVELOPMENT, DEVELOPMENT PERMITS, TEXT AMENDMENTS AND APPEALS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE CREATION AND ADOPTION OF AN OFFICIAL ZONING MAP; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS; TO ESTABLISH PERMITTED USES WITHIN ZONING DISTRICTS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF LOT SIZE, DENSITY, SETBACKS AND HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF RESTRICTIONS REGARDING PARTICULAR USES; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF PROHIBITED USES, RESTRICTIONS AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SIGN REGULATIONS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SUBDIVISION AND PROJECT STANDARDS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT AND DEVELOPMENT PLANS FOR SUBDIVISIONS; TO PROVIDE FOR FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL; TO PROVIDE FOR DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS AND OFF-STREET PARKING; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF INTER-PARCEL ACCESS REQUIREMENTS; TO PROVIDE FOR STREET ACCESS CONTROL; TO PROVIDE FOR REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES AND SEQUENCING; TO PROVIDE FOR STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL, AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF BUFFERS, LANDSCAPING, TREE CONSERVATION AND THE PROTECTION OF NATURAL WATERS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF THIS ORDINANCE; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DEFINITIONS FOR THIS ORDINANCE; TO REPEAL PART III, CHAPTER 10; TO REPEAL PART III, CHAPTER 16, ARTICLES II AND VI; TO REPEAL PART III, CHAPTER 21; TO REPEAL PART III, CHAPTER 23, ARTICLES I, II, III, IV, VI, VII AND VIII OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF ROME; AND TO REPEAL CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 

1.1. - Title and authority. 
1.1.1. - Title.This Ordinance regulates the use of land, the location and use of buildings and other site improvements, and the construction of public facilities and private improvements related to the development of land. This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as "The Unified Land Development Code of Floyd County and the City of Rome, Georgia" or, for brevity, "The Rome-Floyd County Development Code." 
1.1.2. - Authority.This Ordinance is adopted under authority of Article 9, Section 2, Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and pursuant to the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. §§ 36-66-1 et seq.) and other applicable laws enacted by the General Assembly. 
(Ord. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
1.2. - Adoption. 
1.2.1. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances.All conflicting ordinances or parts of ordinances are hereby repealed to the extent of their conflict. Where this Ordinance and another overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
1.2.2. - Severability.If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance or any amendment to it is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Development Code or an amendment to it. 
1.2.3. - Effective date.This Ordinance shall take effect for each jurisdiction upon its adoption by, respectively, the City Council and the Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
1.3. - Purpose and intent. 
a.  The purpose of this Ordinance is: To promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public, and is intended: 
(1)  To promote the orderly and beneficial development and expansion of the city and county; 
(2)  To provide adequate access to natural light and air; 
(3)  To provide adequate water, sewerage, and surface drainage; 
(4)  To prevent undesirable overcrowding of population; 
(5)  To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
(6)  To promote the orderly and desirable subdivision of land; 
(7)  To insure the orderly and desirable development of streets; 
(8)  To promote the orderly and desirable development of public and private utilities and services; and, 
(9)  To insure proper legal description and recordation of all subdivided land. 
b.  In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
c.  This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any valid easement, covenant or deed restriction duly recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
(Ord. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
1.4. - Applicability. 
1.4.1. - General applicability. 
a.  Use of land or structures. 
(1)  No structure or land shall hereafter be used, located, extended, converted or structurally altered except in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(2)  No part of a yard, buffer or off-street parking spaces required in connection with any use or structure for the purpose of complying with this Ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, buffer or off-street parking spaces required for any other use or structure, unless specifically allowed under the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(3)  Street rights-of-way shall not be considered a part of a lot or front yard setback for the purpose of meeting the minimum requirements of this Ordinance. 
b.  Acceptance of public streets. The Governing Body shall not accept a public street unless such street substantially corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a preliminary subdivision plat approved under the provisions of this Ordinance. 
c.  Recordation and transfer of property. 
(1)  A properly approved plat must be filed and recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court on any division of a property into two or more lots as required by this Ordinance. 
(2)  No construction permit shall be issued on any parcel for which a plat has not been properly filed and recorded with the Clerk of the Supe 
rior Court; provided further, that the description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring such land shall not exempt the transaction from the requirements of this Ordinance. 
d.  No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected at any lot unless the street giving access to such lot shall be accepted, opened and maintained as a public street prior to that time; shall be guaranteed to be completed, as provided in Article 6.4.6; shall otherwise be maintained by the City or County; or shall have been designated by the City or County as a private street. 
e.  One principal dwelling on a lot. With respect to single-family detached dwellings, only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may be erected on any one lot except that in the A-R and S-R districts two single-family dwelling units may be permitted on one lot if they are served by on-site sewage disposal as permitted by the Floyd County Health Department. 
f.  Any yard or lot existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any other subsequent amendment thereto may be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements as set forth in this ordinance, subject to approval of the building official and planning director and/or their respective designee(s). Yards or lots created by subdivision after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance. 
1.4.2. - Exemptions. 
a.  Previously issued permits. The provisions of this Ordinance and any subsequent amendments shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and effective building or development permit if: 
(1)  The development activity or building construction authorized by the permit has been commenced prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or the amendment, or will be commenced after such effective date but within six months of issuance of the permit; and 
(2)  The development activity or building construction continues without interruption (except because of war or natural disaster) until the development or construction is complete. If the permit expires, any further development or construction on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Ordinance in effect on the date of the permit expiration. 
b.  Governmental bodies. All governmental bodies and authorities generally, legally exempt from regulation under the police power of Floyd County or the City of Rome shall not be exempt from the regulations contained in this Ordinance. 
1.4.3. - Nonconforming development.Lawful nonconforming uses, structures, lots and signs are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with land uses, structures, lots and signs that conform to the requirements of the zoning districts in which the nonconformity exists. 
a.  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  To avoid undue hardship, the lawful but nonconforming use of any structure or land at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment may be continued even though the use does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance, except that the nonconforming use: 
(a)  Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(b)  Shall not be re-established after its removal from the property or its discontinuance for 12 months or more. 
(c)  Shall not be repaired, rebuilt or altered after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction. 
(d)  Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increased its nonconformity if the structure or land is located in the city. 
(e)  Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity if the structure or land is located in the county unless the nonconforming use shall comply with all applicable building codes, setback requirements, lot size requirements and public safety issues that exist for the least restrictive zoning district in which the current use would normally be allowed. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
(a)  The strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health, shall be allowed upon order of such official. 
(b)  A nonconforming single-family detached, duplex or triplex may be repaired, rebuilt or replaced after damage exceeding 50 percent by approval as a special use, in accordance with the procedures of Article 2; provided, however, that a triplex dwelling constructed prior to adoption of this Code may be repaired, rebuilt or replaced after damage exceeding 50 percent; and may be re-established after its removal from the property or its discontinuance for 12 months or more as a use permitted by right in the D-R Duplex Residential zoning district. 
(c)  A use that was lawfully established prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Ordinance, but which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment now requires approval as a Special Use in the zoning district where the use is located, shall not be considered a nonconforming use under the provisions of this Ordinance, and, therefore is not subject to the prohibitions on enlargement or alteration of an existing use. 
(d)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of deteriorated elements such as roofs, foundations, windows, walls, fixtures and systems (plumbing, electrical, HVAC) shall be allowed if such maintenance, repair or replacement will not expand, enlarge or alter the use or structure in a way that increases its non-conformity; and if such maintenance will not exceed 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure at the time. 
b.  Nonconforming structures. 
(1)  A nonconforming structure may continue to be occupied and used, except that the nonconforming structure: 
(a)  Shall not be repaired, rebuilt or altered after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction. 
(b)  Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
(a)  The strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health, shall be allowed upon order of such official. 
(b)  A nonconforming single-family detached, duplex or triplex dwelling may be repaired, rebuilt or replaced after damage exceeding 50 percent by approval as a Special Use, in accordance with the procedures of Article 2; provided, however, that a triplex dwelling constructed prior to adoption of this Code may be repaired, rebuilt or replaced after damage exceeding 50 percent; and may be re-established after its removal from the property or its discontinuance for 12 months or more as a use permitted by right in the D-R Duplex Residential zoning district. 
(c)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of deteriorated elements such as roofs, foundations, windows, walls, fixtures and systems (plumbing, electrical, HVAC) shall be allowed if such maintenance, repair or replacement will not expand, enlarge or alter the structure in a way that increases its non-conformity; and if such maintenance will not exceed 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure at the time. 
c.  Nonconforming lots. 
(1)  Where the owner of a legal lot of record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance [July 16, 2001] does not own sufficient land to conform to the minimum lot size or lot width requirement of this Ordinance, such lot may nonetheless be used as a building site provided that access to a public street is provided directly or through a recorded easement, and further provided that the minimum building setbacks are not reduced below the minimum specified in this Ordinance. 
d.  Nonconforming signs. 
(1)  Permanent signs. A nonconforming sign that is permanently affixed to the ground or to a building may continue to be used, except that the nonconforming sign: 
(a)  Shall not be replaced except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Shall not be repaired, rebuilt or altered after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction. 
(c)  Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  Temporary signs. Any sign that is temporary in nature and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building, such as a streamer or pennant, shall be removed within one year of the date of adoption of this Code [July 16, 2001]. 
(Ord. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 02-6-2, §§ I, II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 02-9-2, § V, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 2003-10-11, § I, 10-20-03; Ord. No. 06-10-3, § I, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 2018-8-7, § I, 8-27-18) 
1.5. - Interpretation. 
1.5.1. - Responsibility for interpretation. 
a.  The chief building official shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions or any other provision of this Ordinance. 
b.  Interpretations of the chief building official may be appealed under the provisions of Article 2 relating to appeals. 
1.5.2. - Use of figures.Figures associated with defined terms or regulatory paragraphs in this Ordinance are provided for illustration only and do not limit or change the meaning of the term as defined or the requirements of the regulation as written. 
1.5.3. - Use of words and phrases.For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following shall apply to the use of words and phrases: 
a.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular tense include the plural tense, and words used in the plural tense include the singular tense. The masculine person "he" or "his" also means "her" or "hers." 
b.  Use of the capitalized word "City" refers to the government of the City of Rome, Georgia, while the lower case word "city" refers to its incorporated geographical area. 
c.  Use of the capitalized word "County" refers to the government of Floyd County, Georgia, while the lower case word "county" refers to its unincorporated geographical area. 
d.  References to the "City" and to the City Commission and any public officials or appointed bodies of the City not otherwise named by political jurisdiction or defined in this Ordinance shall always mean the City of Rome, Georgia, and its governing body, appointed or employed officials, and appointed bodies as named. 
e.  References to the "County" and to the County Commission and any public officials or appointed bodies of the County not otherwise named by political jurisdiction or defined in this Ordinance shall always mean Floyd County, Georgia, and its governing body, appointed or employed officials, and appointed bodies as named. 
f.  References to public officials, departments or appointed bodies of jurisdictions other than Floyd County or the City of Rome shall always mean such persons or bodies having jurisdiction over or relative to Floyd County or the City of Rome, Georgia. These may include one or more of the following: 
(1)  The Clerk of the Superior Court of Floyd County, Georgia. 
(2)  The Floyd County Health Department. 
(3)  Rome/Floyd County Historic Preservation Commission. 
(4)  The Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(5)  The Coosa Valley Regional Development Center. 
(6)  The Georgia Departments of Natural Resources and Transportation. 
(7)  The United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Environmental Protection Agency, the Natural Resource Conservation Service. 
g.  The word "person" is intended to include any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
h.  The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory and not discretionary, while the word "may" is permissive. 
i.  The word "and" indicates that all of the conditions, requirements or factors so connected must be met or fulfilled, while the word "or" indicates that at least one condition, requirement or factor so connected must be met. 
j.  The term "such as" is intended to introduce one or more examples in illustration of a requirement or point, and is intended to mean "including but not limited to the following." 
k.  The verbs "zone" and "rezone" have the same meaning and refer to the act of amending the Official Zoning Map through the process established by this Ordinance. 
l.  The nouns "zone," "zoning district" and "district" have the same meaning and refer to the zoning districts established under this Ordinance. 
m.  The word "day" shall mean a calendar day unless otherwise specified. 
1.5.4. - Meaning of words and phrases. 
a.  All words and phrases shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence, paragraph, section and article in which they occur. 
b.  Words and phrases defined in this Ordinance shall be interpreted as defined without regard to other meanings in common or ordinary use, unless the context of the word or phrase indicates otherwise. Words and phrases not defined in this Ordinance shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined by a contemporary dictionary. 
(Ord. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
ARTICLE 2. - PROCEDURES 

2.1. - Generally. 
2.1.1. - Purpose of article 2.This Article describes the process through which a zoning change may be approved on a property, the approval process for construction of land development projects, the procedures for amendments to the text of this Development Code, and the process for appeals from an administrative decision, for a special exception or for hardships. 
2.1.2. - Overview—Land development.The following presents a summary of the plans and procedures involved in the land development approval and construction. 
a.  Zoning changes. All applications for rezoning or a special use permit for a multi-family or non-residential use must be filed with the Rome/Floyd County Planning Department. 
b.  Multi-family and non-residential projects. 
(1)  Project Approval is granted by the Planning Department upon review and approval of a Site Plan for the project. 
(2)  A Development Permit is issued by the Chief Building Inspector based on review and approval of development plans for construction of the project. 
(3)  The Chief Building Official, based on review and approval of architectural plans, issues a Building Permit. Buildings falling under the authority of the State Fire Marshall shall be approved by the Fire Department prior to issuance of the building permit. 
(4)  Receipt by the Public Works Department of accurate surveys of the as-built condition of all public improvements is required in order to authorize permanent water and sanitary sewer service. 
(5)  The Chief Building Official, based on final inspection and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, authorizes permanent electric power and occupancy of the building. 
c.  Single-family residential projects. Single-family residential projects shall follow the process outlined in Article 6 for the review and approval of preliminary and final subdivision plats and development permits. 
d.  City-County coordination. In order to assure full coordination between all affected departments and agencies and to increase efficiency in the processing of permits, all applications for a rezoning or special use approval shall be submitted to the Planning Department for handling. All applications for a development permit or flood area permit shall be submitted to the Building Inspection Department for handling. 
(Ord. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
2.2. - Zoning changes. 
The Official Zoning Map be amended from time to time and the Governing Body under the procedures in this section, may approve special uses for specific properties. In addition, the Governing Body, following the procedures in this section, may also approve changes in the conditions of approval pertaining to a specific rezoning or conditional use approval. All of these types of actions are referred to as "zoning changes" and must be filed with the Rome/Floyd County Planning Department. 
2.2.1. - Initiation. 
a.  An application for a zoning change for any property or properties may be initiated by the Governing Body, by the Planning Commission, or by the owner of the property. Unless initiated by the Governing Body or the Planning Commission, the owner of a majority interest in the property affected shall initiate all such applications. 
b.  All applications shall be submitted to the Planning Department on the Department's application forms. A non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the Governing Body shall accompany all applications. A fee shall not be charged if the Government Body or the Planning Commission has initiated the application. 
c.  The Planning Department shall review the application for completeness within five business days of submission. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. 
d.  An application for a zoning change affecting the same property shall not be considered by the Governing Body more often than once every 12 months; provided, however, that the Governing Body may approve a reduction in the waiting period to no less than six months. 
2.2.2. - Sketch plan. 
a.  An application for a rezoning or Special Use Permit approval, related to any use other than a single-family residence, shall be accompanied by a sketch plan if any new construction is proposed, or alteration of the site is required under the site development design standards of this Unified Land Development Code (Article 6). A plat drawing may be submitted in lieu of a sketch plan, if the purpose of the rezoning request is to market the property. 
b.  All sketch plans shall be considered binding when made a condition of approval of the rezoning or special use by the respective Governing Body. 
c.  The applicant, a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a landscape architect, a land planner, or any other person familiar with land development activities may prepare a sketch plan. 
d.  The sketch plan shall be drawn to approximate scale on a boundary survey of the tract or on a property map showing the approximate location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract. 
e.  The sketch plan shall show the following, as appropriate to the zoning or special use requested: 
(1)  Name and address of the property owner. 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, if different from the owner. 
(3)  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(4)  Proposed use of the property, if known. 
(5)  Location (Land District and Land Lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
(6)  Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
(7)  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries if they cross the property. 
(8)  Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
(9)  The proposed project layout including the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas and driveways. 
(10)  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
(11)  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. 
(12)  The approximate location of proposed storm water detention facilities. 
(13)  Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
2.2.3. - Process for zoning changes.Before the Governing Body may take final action on a proposed zoning change, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. 
a.  Public notice. 
(1)  Notification to the general public. 
(a)  At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. The Planning Department shall prepare such notice, which shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(b)  A zoning change initiated by a party other than the Governing Body or the Planning Commission shall be heard at a public hearing only upon: 
1)  The published notice, in addition to the requirements above, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property or the special use requested; and 
2)  At least 15 days prior to the public hearing, the Planning Department shall post a sign or signs of not less than 6 square feet stating "Zoning Action Pending. For further information please contact the Rome-Floyd County Planning Department at (phone number) or (e-mail address)." One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the property for which the zoning change has been requested. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. 
(2)  Notice to surrounding property owners. All adjacent property owners are to be notified of any proposed zoning change without regard for who the applicant is for a zoning change. 
(a)  Notice shall be given to all surrounding property owners as follows: At least five days prior to the Planning Commission public hearing, the Planning Department shall cause a notice to be mailed to all persons owning property located adjacent to or across the street from the property that is the subject matter of the zoning change. 
(b)  The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearings. The written notice shall be mailed to the property owners as such names and addresses appear on the County's ad valorem tax records. 
b.  Planning commission public hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(1)  The Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson, or the Planning Commission's designee, who shall act as the Presiding Official, shall convene the public hearing at the scheduled time and place. 
(2)  The Presiding Official shall call for each proposed zoning change to be presented to the Planning Commission. 
(3)  No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. Upon rising to speak each person recognized shall state his or her name and home address. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed from presentation of the proposed zoning change. No less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking in support of a zoning change and no less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. If reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the public may speak at a hearing. However, the applicant and nearby property owners shall be afforded the first opportunity to speak. Each side shall be afforded an equal minimum time period for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion. 
(4)  The applicant shall be allowed to speak first in order to present the application. Others in support of the application may then speak, followed by those in opposition to the application. The applicant will then be allowed time for rebuttal provided they have not used all their allotted time during the presentation. Rebuttal must be limited to points or issues raised by opponents to the application at the hearing. 
(5)  During the public hearing, the Planning Commission members may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
(6)  Following the public hearing on each zoning change, the Planning Commission at that time shall make its recommendation or take such other action as may be appropriate. 
(a)  A motion to recommend approval that receives an affirmative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded to the Governing Body as a recommendation for approval. A motion to recommend approval that receives a negative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded as a recommendation for denial. 
(b)  A motion to recommend denial that receives an affirmative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded to the Governing Body as a recommendation for denial. A motion to recommend denial that receives a negative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded as a recommendation for approval. 
(c)  A tie vote on a motion will be forwarded to the Governing Body as no recommendation with the actual vote transmitted. 
(d)  If no action is taken on an application, it will go forward to the Governing Body with no recommendation. 
(e)  A motion to postpone that receives an affirmative vote from a majority of the voting members present will result in action on the zoning change being deferred for a period of time as specified by the members of the Planning Commission. However, where the governing body has initiated a zoning change, the Planning Commission shall act on the zoning change by the date specified by the governing body. At the discretion of the chair, a postponed zoning change request may be considered at a specially called meeting. 
c.  Governing Body public hearing. 
(1)  The Governing Body shall conduct a public hearing to consider an application for a zoning change within its jurisdiction. Said public hearing shall be held no later than the second regular meeting of the Governing Body following the public hearing of the Planning Commission. At a regular meeting prior to its public hearing, the Governing Body shall have a first reading of any proposed rezoning or Special Use ordinance. 
(2)  The Chairperson of the Governing Body or another person designated by the Governing Body shall act as Presiding Official. 
(3)  The Presiding Official shall call for each proposed zoning change to be presented to the Governing Body. As each application for a zoning change is called for consideration, the Presiding Official shall have the recommendation of the Planning Department read and shall present such other documentation as may be deemed pertinent. 
(4)  No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. Upon rising to speak each person recognized shall state his or her name and home address. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the proposed zoning change. No less than ten minutes shall be provided for all those speaking in support of a zoning change and no less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. If reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the public may speak at a hearing. However, the applicant and nearby property owners shall be afforded the first opportunity to speak. Each side shall be afforded and equal minimum time period for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion. 
(5)  The applicant shall be allowed to speak first in order to present the application. Others in support of the application may then speak, followed by those in opposition. The applicant will then be allowed time for rebuttal provided they have not used all their allotted time during the presentation. Rebuttal must be limited to points raised by opponents to the application at the hearing. 
(6)  During the public hearing, the members of the Governing Body may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
(7)  Following the public hearing on the zoning change (or upon second reading), action shall be considered by vote of the Governing Body. 
(a)  A motion to approve or deny an application must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least a quorum of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
(b)  If a motion to approve an application fails, the application is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an application fails, another motion would be in order. 
(c)  A tie vote on a motion for approval of an application shall be deemed a denial of the application. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(d)  If no action is taken on an application, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the Governing Body. 
(8)  In taking action on an application, the Governing Body may: 
(a)  Either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposal; or, 
(b)  Allow withdrawal if so requested by the applicant (with or without imposing a six-month period during which another zoning change on the property may not be considered); or, 
(c)  Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or, 
(d)  Refer the application back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
d.  Referral to Planning Commission for further consideration. If the Governing Body refers an application back to the Planning Commission for further study: 
(1)  The Planning Department shall give public notice of the Planning Commission's hearing for further consideration in the same manner as described above, and the Planning Commission shall conduct its additional public hearing and take action as described above. 
(2)  After the Planning Commission's rehearing and recommendation on the referred application, the Governing Body shall follow the same procedures set forth above to consider the application. 
e.  Rezoning of areas to be annexed into the city. An area proposed for annexation into the city shall first be considered for rezoning prior to its annexation. Consideration of the rezoning shall be subject to the same procedures, standards, and requirements for any zoning change as contained in this section, except as modified below: 
(1)  If the property to be annexed is to continue to have the same zoning district classification for which the property was zoned immediately prior to annexation, the City requires no further action and the existing zoning on the property shall continue in full force and effect. 
(2)  If the property to be annexed is proposed or requested to be rezoned, upon or following the date of notice to the County of the proposed annexation as required under O.C.G.A. § 36-36-6, the City Commission shall initiate the rezoning of the property to be annexed or consider an application for a zoning change submitted by or on behalf of the owner of such property under the provisions of this Section. 
(3)  The Planning Commission and the Governing Body shall conduct their public hearings on the zoning change prior to the annexation of the land into the City. Notice of such hearing shall be provided under the provisions of this Section, provided further that the notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the County. 
(4)  Following its public hearing on a zoning change for a property proposed to be annexed, the governing body may take action on the zoning change or it may table such action pending action on the proposed annexation. In any event, the zoning change shall become effective on the later of: 
(a)  The date the zoning is approved by the governing body; or, 
(b)  The date that the annexation becomes effective under O.C.G.A. § 36-36-2. 
(5)  Disputes between the City and County concerning annexation shall be resolved in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-26-110 et seq. 
a.  Zoning map amendments (rezoning). The Planning Commission and the Governing Body shall consider the following standards in considering any zoning proposal that would result in a change in the boundary of a zoning district, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(1)  Is the proposed use or development consistent with the stated purpose of the zoning district? 
(2)  Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
(3)  Will the proposed use not adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
(4)  Is the proposed use compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
(5)  Are there substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently zoned? 
(6)  Will the proposed use not cause an excessive or burdensome use of public facilities or services, including but not limited to streets, schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection? 
(7)  Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the Comprehensive Plan or reflected in the existing zoning on the property or surrounding properties? 
(8)  Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and the right to unrestricted use of property? 
b.  Special uses. A special use otherwise permitted within a zoning district shall be considered to be compatible with other uses permitted in the district, provided that due consideration is given to the following objective criteria as applicable to the specific use proposed: 
(1)  Is the proposed special use consistent with the stated purpose of the zoning district? 
(2)  Is or will the type of street providing access to the use be adequate to serve the proposed special use? 
(3)  Is or will access into and out of the property be adequate to provide for traffic and pedestrian safety, the anticipated volume of traffic flow, and access by emergency vehicles? 
(4)  Are or will public facilities such as schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection be adequate to serve the special use? 
(5)  Are or will refuse, service, parking and loading areas on the property be located or screened to protect other properties in the area from such adverse effects as noise, light, glare or odor? 
(6)  Will the hours and manner of operation of the special use have no adverse effects on other properties in the area? 
(7)  Will the height, size or location of the buildings or other structures on the property be compatible with the height, size or location of buildings or other structures on neighboring properties? 
c.  Change in Conditions of Approval. Any application that proposes a change in the conditions of approval previously established by the Governing Body through action on a zoning change shall be reviewed in light of the standards set forth in this Section for a map amendment or special use, as appropriate. 
2.2.5. - Withdrawal.Any applicant wishing to withdraw a proposed zoning change prior to final action by the Governing Body shall file a written request for withdrawal with the Director of Planning. 
a.  If the request for withdrawal is received prior to the publication of notice for the public hearings, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the Director of Planning without restriction on the re-filing of a proposed zoning change on the property in the future. 
b.  If notice has been published but the application has not been heard by the Planning Commission, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the Director of Planning upon receipt of a written request. An application for a zoning change on the property may then be resubmitted by the applicant, without waiting for a period of six months. 
If a second application for rezoning is withdrawn within 6 months of withdrawal of an application for rezoning of the same property, a third application for rezoning of the property may not be resubmitted for 6 months. 
c.  Should any request for withdrawal be made by the applicant at or following the Planning Commission hearing, the application shall remain on the Governing Body's public hearing agenda and the withdrawal request shall be considered for approval or denial, with or without prejudice, by the Governing Body. 
2.2.6. - Developments of regional impact. 
a.  Any application for rezoning, Special Use Permit, or development or building permit that would result in an activity or project that meets or exceeds any of the State of Georgia thresholds shall be considered a Development of Regional Impact. 
(1)  Office: greater than 400,000 gross square feet. 
(2)  Commercial: greater than 300,000 gross square feet. 
(3)  Wholesale and Distribution: greater than 500,000 gross square feet. 
(4)  Hospitals and Health Care Facilities: greater than 300 new beds; or generating more than 375 peak hour vehicle trips per day. 
(5)  Housing: greater than 400 new lots or units. 
(6)  Industrial: greater than 500,000 gross square feet; or employing more than 1,000 workers; or covering more than 125 acres. 
(7)  Hotels: greater than 400 rooms. 
(8)  Mixed Use: Total gross square feet greater than 400,000; or covering more than 120 acres. 
(9)  Airports, all new airports, runways and runway extensions. 
(10)  Attractions & Recreation Facilities: greater than 1,500 parking spaces; or a seating capacity of more than 6,000. 
(11)  Post-Secondary School: new school with a capacity of more than 2,400 students; or expansion by at least 25 percent of capacity. 
(12)  Waste Handling Facilities: new facility or expansion of use of an existing facility by 50 percent; and located within one-half mile of a jurisdictional boundary. 
(13)  Quarries, Asphalt & Cement Plants: new facility or expansion of existing facility by more than 50 percent; and located within one-half mile of a jurisdictional boundary. 
(14)  Wastewater Treatment Facilities: new facility or expansion of existing facility by more than 50 percent; and located within one-half mile of a jurisdictional boundary. 
(15)  Petroleum Storage Facilities: storage greater than 50,000 barrels if within 1,000 feet of any water supply; otherwise, storage capacity greater than 200,000 barrels; and located within one-half mile of a jurisdictional boundary. 
(16)  Water Supply Intakes/Reservoirs: new facilities. 
(17)  Intermodal Terminals: new facilities. 
(18)  Truck Stops: a new facility with more than three (3) diesel fuel pumps; or containing a half acre of truck parking; or 10 truck parking spaces. 
(19)  Any other development types not identified above (includes parking facilities): 1,000 parking spaces. 
b.  Any Development of Regional Impact (DRI) shall be submitted by the applicant to the Coosa Valley Regional Development Center (RDC) prior to submission of the application to the Planning Department. Once the RDC has accepted the completed form, and has made an official determination that the project is a DRI (within five-calendar days), the 30-day review period officially begins. 
c.  The Governing Body shall not take final action to approve a Development of Regional Impact until either: 
(1)  A report has been received from the Coosa Valley RDC reflecting its findings and recommendations, if any; or, 
(2)  Said report is not received within 30 days of submittal of the application to the RDC. 
2.2.7. - Effect. 
a.  Approval of a zoning change shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the Governing Body, except that: 
b.  Approval of a zoning change on a property that is being annexed into the city shall become effective on the later of: 
c.  The date the rezoning is approved by the City Commission; or, 
(1)  The date that the annexation becomes effective pursuant to state law under O.C.G.A. § 36-36-2. 
d.  For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a zoning change affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed under the provisions for Nonconforming Development in Article 1 of this Development Code. 
e.  Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a zoning change affecting the property may continue to completion as though no change had occurred and, upon completion, shall be governed under the provisions for nonconforming development in Article 1 of this Development Code, as applicable. 
(Ord. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 02-6-2, § III, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 02-11-6, § I, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 03-7-13, § I, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 03-10-6, § I, 10-6-03; Ord. No. 04-4-3, § I, 4-5-04; Ord. No. 05-2-11, § I, 2-21-05; Ord. No. 05-8-5, § I, 8-1-05; Ord. No. 06-10-4, § I, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 2007-9-1, § I, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 2009-9-3, §§ I, II, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 2010-6-8, § I, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 2011-11-3, § I, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 2016-04-07, § I, 4-25-16) 
2.3. - Land development project approval. 
The Planning Department must first approve the site plan for development of a multi-family or non-residential project prior to the issuance of a development permit or initiation of any land disturbing or construction activities. 
a.  The Chief Building Official is responsible for administering the review and approval process for site plans. The Chief Building Official shall forward a copy of the project approval application to appropriate City or County Departments, the Georgia Department of Transportation, or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. The Chief Building Official shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, who shall work with each City or County Department or other agency as necessary to resolve all issues. 
b.  A professional engineer, registered land surveyor or landscape architect registered to practice in the State of Georgia may prepare a site plan. 
a.  An application for project approval may be processed independently or in conjunction with an application for issuance of a development permit. 
b.  The property owner or their authorized representative shall submit an application for project approval to the Building Inspection Department. The application shall include: 
(1)  A properly completed application form, as furnished by the Building Inspection Department, requesting review for project approval. 
(2)  Copies of the site plan showing the entire ownership drawn to the specifications of this Section, in a number as required by the Building Inspection Department. 
(3)  Payment of all applicable application and review fees, as established by the Governing Body from time to time. 
c.  The Building Inspection Department shall review the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
d.  Within two weeks following receipt of the application, the Building Inspection Department shall return to the applicant, on the drawing or in writing, all comments related to compliance with this Development Code. 
e.  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments. 
f.  The Building Inspection Department may not approve any site plan whereon is shown a lot or situation that would clearly require a variance to order to be reasonably usable, whether due to the presence of flood plain, unusual configuration, zoning compliance, lack of public utilities, or for any other reason. 
g.  When the Building Inspection Department has determined that the site plan is in compliance with the requirements, purpose and intent of this Development Code, it shall be approved. The Chief Building Official or his designee shall sign and date the Certificate of Project Approval stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the site plan. One copy of the approved drawing shall be transmitted to the applicant and one copy shall be retained by the Building Inspection Department. 
h.  The Certificate of Project Approval shall remain in effect for a period of six consecutive months after which time it shall become null and void and a new Certificate may be required if either no permit has been issued or a permit has been issued but no development activity has begun. 
a.  The proposed name of the development shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other development in the city or county. If shown to the contrary, the Building Inspection Department may refuse to accept such. 
b.  The site plan shall be prepared on a boundary survey of the entire tract to be subdivided or developed showing the location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract to be developed. 
c.  The site plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of 100 feet or less to one inch. The recommended maximum dimensions of the sheet size is 36 inches by 48 inches and the minimum dimensions of 17 inches by 22 inches; however, the Chief Building Official may approve other sheet sizes and scales as appropriate. 
d.  For property of over 100 acres, a smaller scale may be used where, in the judgment of the Chief Building Official, presentation of detailed data is not necessary to evaluate the entire project. It is the intent of this provision that in all cases sufficient information shall be provided for an adequate evaluation of the public and private improvements. 
a.  Proposed name of development. 
b.  Name and address of the property owner and developer. 
c.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
d.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
e.  Proposed use of the property. 
f.  Location (Land District and Land Lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
g.  Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well known landmarks such as arterial streets, railroads or others. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
h.  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
i.  Delineation of required buffers, landscape areas, tree protection areas, and river corridor buffers, as applicable. 
j.  Rezoning or conditional use application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. Variances obtained on the property by application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. 
k.  Recorded deed names of adjoining property owners. 
l.  Natural features within, affecting or affected by the property, including wetlands, drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all watercourses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year flood plain and wetlands, if any, shall be outlined. The location of the site within a protected groundwater recharge area shall be noted if applicable. 
m.  Manmade features within and adjacent to the property, including street right-of-way and pavement widths, names of existing streets, all easements, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location and dimensions of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features. 
n.  The proposed project layout including: 
(1)  For multifamily and nonresidential development site plans, the outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas, driveways, curb cuts, and designated fire lanes. 
o.  The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
p.  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
q.  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. For those properties that will not be served by a public sanitary sewerage system, written approval by the Floyd County Health Department shall be submitted. 
r.  The approximate location of proposed storm water detention facilities. 
s.  Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate evaluation of the development activity proposed in the application. 
2.3.5. - Evidence of project approval.Each site plan shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped on the plat. 
a.  Signed approval from the County Health Department (if septic tanks will be allowed by the Governing Body). 
b.  Certificate of Project Approval, to read as follows: 

 
(Ord. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
2.4. - Development plans. 
2.4.1. - General requirements. 
a.  Persons seeking to undertake development activity shall not commence or proceed until development plans are approved and the Chief Building Inspector issues a Development Permit. The process for approval of a development permit is presented in Section 2.5 below. 
b.  The development plans for a project shall conform in all respects with the requirements of this Development Code, and shall contain each of the plans in this section as appropriate to the project, including: 
(1)  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
(2)  Grading Plan. 
(3)  Stormwater Management Plan. 
(4)  Street Improvement Plan. 
(5)  Buffer/Landscaping/Tree Conservation Plan. 
(6)  Public Utility Plan. 
c.  All development plans and supporting studies shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a professional engineer registered in Georgia. 
2.4.2. - Erosion and sediment control plan. 
a.  Plans must be prepared to meet the erosion and sedimentation control requirements of Section 6 of this Development Code or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia; or through the use of alternate design criteria that conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The erosion and sediment control plan shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
b.  Data Required for Erosion and Sediment Control Plan: 
(1)  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
(2)  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
(3)  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner and the developer. 
(4)  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sediment controls. 
(5)  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
(6)  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters that "the installation of erosion and sediment control measures shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
(7)  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
(8)  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
(9)  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(10)  Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sediment control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sediment control measures will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection." 
c.  Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying or erosion and sediment control. The certified plans shall contain: 
(1)  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
(2)  Vicinity map showing location of project and existing streets. 
(3)  Boundary line survey. 
(4)  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
(5)  Existing and planed contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
(6)  Spot elevations: 
(a)  For sites smaller than one acre in size, show the direction of drainage and spot elevations at all breaks in grade and along drainage channels or swales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
(b)  For sites of 1 acre and larger with slopes of less than two percent, show contours at intervals of not more than two feet and spot elevations at all breaks in grade along drainage channels and swales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
(7)  Adjacent areas and features such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
(8)  The limits of the 100-year flood plain and the floodway. 
(9)  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
(10)  The limits of any required greenway adjacent to state waters. 
(11)  Delineate the 100-foot horizontal greenway along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
(12)  Location of erosion and sediment control measures using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
d.  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sediment control measures, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
2.4.3. - Grading plan. 
a.  Grading plans shall identify existing and proposed topographic contour lines at the interval required for erosion and sediment control plans, above. 
b.  Grading plans shall outline any area that is required to remain undisturbed, such as a natural buffer (see "buffers" under Article 6) or greenway (see "greenways" under Article 6) and shall identify and describe the protective fencing or staking to be placed surrounding such area. 
c.  If the property contains any area of special flood hazard (the 100-year floodplain), grading plans in and around the flood plain shall be designed in conformance to all requirements relating to flood damage prevention under Article 6 of this Development Code. 
2.4.4. - Buffer plan.A buffer plan shall be prepared for any structural buffer required in accordance with the specifications and standards contained in Article 6 of this Development Code. Plans shall not be required for natural buffers, which are to be shown on the grading plan. The buffer plan shall show: 
a.  All grading and construction details for earthen berms, walls and fences that are proposed as part of the visual screen. 
b.  A planting plan showing the location and type of proposed plant materials. 
c.  Typical cross-sections of the buffer illustrating the improvements proposed and typical location of vegetation. At least one cross-section shall be provided for each. 
(Ord. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
2.5. - Development permit. 
2.5.1. - Responsibility. 
a.  No person shall conduct any pre-construction, land-disturbing and/or development activity involving more than 0.4 acres without first obtaining a development permit from the Chief Building Official to perform such activity, unless exempted under other sections of this code. (See Article 6.13.) 
b.  Any person proposing development shall first submit to the Building Inspection Department an application for a development permit, including all civil design and construction drawings required by this Development Code. 
c.  The Building Inspection Department is responsible for administering and coordinating the review process for issuance of development permits. The Building Inspection Department shall forward a copy of the development permit application, including the civil design and constructions drawings for the project, to the Planning Department, Public Works Department and other departments, the Soil and Water Conservation District, the Georgia Department of Transportation or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. The Building Inspection Department shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, and shall issue the development permit when all requirements of this Development Code are met. 
d.  Approval of plans by the City or County shall not imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture or any other profession, from the professional, corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
e.  The completion of inspections and authorization for work continuation shall not transfer responsibility for the quality of the work performed or materials used from the owner, nor imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for project design or engineering from the professional, corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
f.  No development permit shall be interpreted to relieve any owner of the responsibility of maintaining full compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and other regulations. Any development permit issued in error or in contradiction to the provisions of this Development Code shall be considered to have been null and void upon its issuance. 
g.  Liability. 
(1)  The approval of an erosion and sediment control plan or other plans under the provisions of this Development Code, the issuance of a development permit, or the compliance with the any other provisions of this Development Code shall not relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the governing body or the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation Commission District for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that any activity for which a development permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Development Code or the terms of the development permit. 
2.5.2. - Development activities authorized.A development permit shall be issued to authorize all activities associated with development activity regulated by this Code, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading and the construction of such improvements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, storm water drainage facilities, sidewalks, or other structures permanently placed on or in the property except for buildings, signs, or other structures requiring the issuance of a building permit. 
2.5.3. - Process for approval of development permit.An application for a development permit may proceed simultaneously with an application for site plan, but may not be issued prior to project approval of such plan by the Building Inspection Department. 
a.  The application for a development permit shall be submitted to the Building Inspection Department and must include the following: 
(1)  Application on the form furnished by the Building Inspection Department, requesting review for issuance of a development permit. 
(2)  Six copies of: 
(a)  The civil design and construction drawings prepared in conformance with the specifications and standards in this Development Code. 
(b)  Site plan requesting or reflecting project approval by the Building Inspection Department. 
(3)  Payment of any development permit fee, as established from time to time by the Governing Body. 
b.  The application will be checked for completeness within five business days of its submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
c.  Upon receipt of a complete development permit application, the Building Inspection Department shall refer the soil erosion and sediment control plan to the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sediment control plan. No development permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances and bonding, if required, have been obtained. 
d.  The applicant may be required by the Building Inspection Department to secure development approval from other agencies if they are affected by the development. Development approval may be required from but not limited to: 
(1)  The Planning Department. 
(2)  The Public Works Department. 
(3)  The Public Utilities Department. 
(4)  Fire Department. 
(5)  County Health Department. 
(6)  Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation Commission District. 
(7)  Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(8)  Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(9)  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(10)  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
e.  Upon receipt of comments from other departments, the Building Inspection Department shall forward all comments related to compliance with this Development Code, conditions of zoning approval, and other regulations or ordinances, as appropriate. 
f.  The applicant shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the comments received from the various departments and agencies. 
g.  Reserved. 
2.5.4. - Required performance surety. 
a.  If the applicant has had two or more violations of previous development permits, the Development Code or the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the Chief Building Official shall refer the development permit application to the Governing Body. 
(1)  The Governing Body may deny the development permit application; or, 
(2)  The Governing Body may require the applicant to post a performance bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the development permit. If the applicant does not comply with this Development Code or with the conditions of the development permit after issuance, the Governing Body may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
2.5.5. - Issuance of development permit. 
a.  Following satisfaction of all comments, receipt of approvals from all affected agencies and receipt of all required bonds, the Chief Building Inspector shall issue a development permit authorizing development activities to begin based on the approved civil design and construction drawings. 
b.  No development permit shall be issued unless the erosion and sediment control plan has been approved by the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District and it has been affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with all requirements of this Development Code. If the development permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. (See Article 6.13.) 
c.  If the tract is to be developed in separate and distinct phases, then a separate development permit may be required for each phase. (See Article 6.13.) 
d.  The development permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of his Development Code. A holder of a development permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the development permit. (See Article 6.13.) 
2.5.6. - Expiration of development permit. 
a.  A development permit shall expire if the development activity described in the permit is not begun within six months from the date of issuance. 
b.  The Chief Building Inspector may renew any development permit that has expired with the concurrence of the respective Public Works Department, within six months of expiration. If a development permit has expired for more than six months, the applicant shall be required to apply for a new development permit-under the development permit approval process of this Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 05-2-4, § I, 2-7-05) 
2.6. - Flood area permit. 
2.6.1. - Permit required.If development or construction is proposed within or affecting an area of special flood hazard, approval of a flood area permit application shall be required. An application for a flood area permit may be included with and reviewed as part of a development permit application. 
2.6.2. - Application process for a flood area permit. 
a.  Application for a flood area permit shall be made to the Building Inspection Department on forms furnished by them prior to any development activities. 
b.  The application for a flood area permit is to include the following: 
(1)  Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question. 
(2)  Location of existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials and drainage facilities. 
(3)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings. 
(4)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential building will be flood-proofed. 
(5)  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that any non-residential flood-proofed building will meet the flood-proofing criteria in Article 6 of this Development Code. 
(6)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
c.  An application for a flood area permit shall be processed in the same manner as a development permit. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
2.7. - Driveway approval. 
a.  No curb shall be changed or removed, and no driveway connected to a public street or on or across a public right-of-way or public property shall be repaired or installed without first having the written approval of the Public Works Department. 
b.  Applications may be made at the Public Works Department. 
c.  Approval shall expire for work not started within 90 days or completed within six months of the date of approval. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
2.8. - Building permitting. 
The building codes adopted and enforced by the City of Rome and Floyd County shall include those mandated by the State of Georgia; and may include those approved by the state. Building codes may be revised from time to time as mandated or approved by the state. 
2.8.2. - Procedures to obtain a building permit.A building permit issued by the chief building official is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving or alteration of any building or structure unless such construction, erection, moving or alteration is exempted from permitting requirements by the building codes that have been adopted and are enforced by the City of Rome and Floyd County. No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in the city or county unless access has been established in accordance with this Development Code. No building permits shall be issued before approval of the final plat. All structures shall comply with the requirements of this Development Code, whether or not a building permit is required. 
a.  Procedure for approval. The Chief Building Official shall be responsible for administering and enforcing the building codes of the City and the County. 
(1)  Prior to issuance of a building permit the owner shall have received a development permit if required by this Development Code. 
(2)  Zoning verification shall be obtained from the Planning Department. The following shall be attached to the Zoning Verification Application: 
(a)  For a single-family detached or two-family dwelling, a plat of the lot showing the outline of the principal building and minimum building setback lines for the lot or an affidavit signed by the owner and stating that the site complies with the provisions of this Code concerning the placement of the dwelling. 
(b)  For a multi-family or non-residential building, the site plan upon which was granted project approval by the Planning Commission. 
(c)  A street address number is assigned by the appropriate local government department as required by O.C.G.A. § 43-4-14. 
(3)  Application for a building permit shall be made to the Chief Building Official. The application shall include: 
(a)  Application on the form furnished by the Chief Building Official, requesting issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  A copy of the zoning verification approved by the Planning Department. 
(c)  Two sets of the building plans for principal multi-family or nonresidential buildings prepared in conformance with this Development Code and the applicable building codes. Plans shall be prepared by or under the supervision of, or reviewed and approved by, an architect registered in Georgia, who shall sign and seal each sheet in the original set of drawings. 
(d)  The Governing Body has allowed County Health Department approval if an on-site sewage disposal system. 
(e)  Payment of the building permit application and review fee. 
(f)  Water meter receipt issued by the appropriate local department. 
(g)  For applications to move a site-built house, structure or building, the following additional information is required: 
1)  The name of the person performing the moving; 
2)  The origin and destination of the moving; 
3)  The names of the owners of the property from which the structure is removed and of the property to which it is moved; 
4)  A detailed outline of the route to be followed and the equipment to be used; and 
5)  An estimate of the time involved, including the time of the day when said operation shall be conducted. 
6)  Any application for a permit must be made at least 48 hours prior to the proposed moving. 
7)  In addition to a fee charged for permits, the mover of any site-built house, building or structure shall deposit with the Chief Building Official $400.00 for each structure, to be returned to the mover within five days after such moving if no damage is done to public property. 
8)  The Chief of Police shall furnish a police escort if he deems it necessary 
(4)  The Chief Building Official will check the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
(5)  For multi-family and nonresidential buildings, within two weeks following receipt of a complete application, the Building Official shall indicate on one copy of the building plans or in writing all comments related to compliance of the building plans with this Development Code, applicable building codes, and any conditions of zoning approval. 
(6)  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with this Development Code and all building code requirements, regulations, and for the satisfaction of all of the comments of the Building Official. 
(7)  At such time as the owner has addressed the comments to the satisfaction of the Building Official and the State Fire Marshall, a building permit shall be issued for the structure. 
(8)  Plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits shall be issued separately by the Building Official or separately identified on the building permit. Such permits must be issued prior to commencement of work by each affected trade. 
b.  Standards for approval. 
(1)  Building permits shall be issued only on buildable lots of record, as defined in this Development Code. 
(2)  Building permits shall be issued in conformance with the adopted technical codes and supplements that constitute the Building Code and with this Development Code. 
a.  It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building, or structure, or premises, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure, until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued stating that the building or structure or premises conforms to the requirements of the building codes and this Development Code. 
b.  If the property is served by an on-site sewage disposal system, the Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued by the Chief Building Official until the Health Department has approved a septic system and in return notifies the Chief Building Official that the system installed meets the County Health Department's standards. 
c.  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period not to exceed six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building or structure pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. 
d.  A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
(1)  Occupancy and use of a building or structure constructed or enlarged. 
(2)  Change in use of existing buildings to uses of a different classification. 
(3)  Any change in use of a nonconforming use, lot or structure. 
(4)  Permanently Electric power may not be supplied to any structure until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued. Electrical service shall be supplied by a temporary meter pack to be installed on the permanent meter socket until all phases of inspections have been satisfactorily completed. 
e.  A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be maintained by the Building Inspection Department and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 06-10-5, § I, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 2009-4-11, § I, 4-20-09; Ord. No. 2009-4-12, § I, 4-20-09) 
2.9. - Building construction. 
a.  Building permits for all structures or interior finishes are issued after meeting the applicable requirements of the fire prevention and life safety code and the various health and building codes. A permit is also required for the movement of any site-built house, structure or building. 
b.  For any structure served by an on-site sewage disposal system, a permit issued by the Floyd County Health Department shall be required prior to issuance of a Building permit. Said permit may first require approval by the Floyd County Health Department of a plan showing the location of the sewage disposal system and other on-site improvements, in accordance with their regulations. 
c.  Building permits shall only be issued on lots of record, as defined in this Development Code. 
a.  Inspections shall be scheduled with the Chief Building Inspector at least 24 hours before the inspection is needed for all foundations and footings, and 48 hours prior to all other inspections. Requests for inspection should include the street address, lot number, building permit number, and type of inspection. 
b.  Required Inspections: 
(1)  Foundation. Verify minimum required building setbacks, footing, trenches dug and reinforcing steel in place. 
(2)  Plumbing Connections. Water supply line and sewer lateral in slab foundation. 
(3)  Framing. Completion of all rough-ins and after insulation is installed. 
(4)  Interior walls may not be covered until the following inspections are completed: 
(a)  Mechanical. Rough-ins complete with pressure test on gas line. 
(b)  Electrical. Rough-ins with neutral, ground, and service cable wired are completed. 
(c)  Plumbing. Rough-ins complete and all fixtures installed. 
(d)  Other inspections are completed as required by the Building Inspection Department as necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable codes. 
(5)  Final Inspection. Building is complete and ready to occupy. 
2.9.3. - Construction in flood area.Construction of a building for which a flood area permit was issued shall be governed by the following: 
a.  Upon placement of the lowest floor, or flood proofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the development permit holder to submit to the Chief Building Inspector a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, flood proofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. 
b.  Certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by such registered land surveyor or professional engineer. When flood proofing is utilized for a particular building, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the professional engineer or architect. 
c.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the development permit holder's risk. 
d.  The Chief Building Inspector shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. The development permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed shall correct deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
2.10. - Text amendments. 
The Rome-Floyd County Development Code may be amended from time to time in whole or in part under the provisions of this section. For an amendment having application in both the City and County to become effective, the governing bodies of both the City and the County must approve it. For an amendment having on its face application only in the City to become effective, the Governing Body of the City only must approve it. For an amendment having on its face application only in the county to become effective, the governing body of the County only must approve it. 
2.10.1. - Initiation.A Governing Body or the Planning Commission may initiate a proposed change to the text of The Rome-Floyd County Development Code by a majority vote of those voting. 
2.10.2. - Text amendment process.Before the Governing Body may take final action on a proposed text amendment, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. 
a.  Public Notice. The public shall be notified of any proposed text amendments in the following manner. 
(1)  At least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. The Planning Department shall prepare such notice, which shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(2)  For overlay district text amendments, the Planning Department shall give notice to each property owner, as such names and addresses appear on the County's ad valorem tax records, whose property lies within the boundaries of such overlay district. The notice shall be mailed at least five days prior to the hearing and shall state the nature of the proposed amendment; and the time and place of the hearing. 
b.  Planning Commission Public Hearing. The public hearing held by the Planning Commission for a text amendment shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(1)  The Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson, or the Planning Commission's designee, who shall act as the Presiding Official, shall convene the public hearing at the scheduled time and place. 
(2)  The Presiding Official shall call for each proposed text amendment to be presented to the Planning Commission. 
(3)  No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. Upon rising to speak, each person shall state his or her name and home address. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the proposed text amendment. No less than ten minutes shall be provided for all those speaking in support of a text amendment and no less than ten minutes shall be provided for all those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. Each side shall be afforded an equal minimum time period for presentation of data, evidence and opinion. 
(4)  Following the public hearing on each text amendment, the Planning Commission at that time shall make its recommendation or take such other action as may be appropriate. 
(a)  A motion to recommend approval that receives an affirmative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded to the Governing Body as a recommendation for approval. A motion to recommend approval that receives a negative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded as a recommendation for denial. 
(b)  A motion to recommend denial that receives an affirmative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded to the Governing Body as a recommendation for denial. A motion to recommend denial that receives a negative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded as a recommendation for approval. 
(c)  A tie vote on a motion will be forwarded to the Governing Body as no recommendation with the actual vote transmitted. 
(d)  If no action is taken on an application, it will go forward to the Governing Body with no recommendation. 
(e)  A motion to postpone that receives an affirmative vote from a majority of the voting members present will result in action on the text amendment being deferred for a period of time as specified by the members of the Planning Commission. However, where the governing body has initiated a text amendment, the Planning Commission shall act on the text amendment by the date specified by the Governing Body. At the discretion of the chair, a postponed text amendment may be considered at a specially called meeting. 
c.  Governing Body Public Hearing. 
(1)  Each Governing Body shall conduct a public hearing to consider a text amendment at no later than its second scheduled meeting following the public hearing of the Planning Commission, except that no public hearing or vote shall be conducted by the County where the proposed amendment has on its face application only in the City, and no public hearing or vote shall be conducted by the City where the proposed amendment has on its face application only in the County. 
(2)  The Chairperson of each Governing Body or another person designated by the Governing Body shall act as Presiding Official. 
(3)  The Presiding Official shall submit each proposed amendment to the Governing Body. The Presiding Official shall read the recommendation of the Planning Department and shall present such other documentation, as he may deem pertinent. 
(4)  No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. Upon rising to speak, each person shall state his or her name and home address. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the proposed text amendment. No less than ten minutes shall be provided for all those speaking in support of the text amendment and no less than ten minutes shall be provided for all those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. Each side shall be afforded an equal minimum time period for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion. 
(5)  During the public hearing, the members of the Governing Body may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
(6)  Following the public hearing on the text amendment (or at the second reading), action shall be considered by vote of the Governing Body. 
(a)  A motion to approve or deny an amendment must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least a quorum of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
(b)  If a motion to approve an amendment fails, the amendment is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an amendment fails, another motion would be in order. 
(c)  A tie vote on a motion for approval of an amendment shall be deemed a denial of the amendment. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(d)  If no action is taken on an amendment, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the Governing Body. 
(7)  In taking action on an amendment, each Governing Body may: 
(a)  Approve, approve with changes, or deny the proposal; or, 
(b)  Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or, 
(c)  Refer the amendment back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
d.  Referral to Planning Commission for Further Consideration. If the Governing Body refers an amendment back to the Planning Commission for further study: 
(1)  The Planning Department shall give public notice of the Planning Commission's hearing for further consideration in the same manner as described above, and the Planning Commission shall conduct its additional public hearing and take action as described above. 
(2)  After the Planning Commission's rehearing and recommendation on the referred amendment, the Governing Body shall follow the same procedure set forth above to consider the amendment. 
2.10.3. - Standards for text amendments.The Planning Commission and each Governing Body shall consider the following standards in considering any proposal that would result in a change to the text of this Development Code, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
a.  Is the proposed amendment consistent with the purpose and intent of this Development Code as stated under Article 1? 
b.  Does the proposed amendment further or is it compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
c.  Is the proposed amendment required to adequately address new or changing conditions or to properly implement the Comprehensive Plan? 
d.  Does the proposed amendment reasonably promote the public health, safety, morality or general welfare? 
a.  Approval of a text amendment having application in both the City and County shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the Governing Bodies of both the City and the County or upon the stated effective date thereof, and shall thereupon apply to every property for which a use has not been established or for which a building permit or development permit may be subsequently requested. Approval of a text amendment having on its face application only in the City shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the Governing Body of the City, or upon the stated effective date thereof and shall thereupon apply to every property in the City for which a use has not been established or for which a building permit or development permit may subsequently be requested. Approval of a text amendment having on its face application only in the County shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the Governing Body of the County, or upon the stated effective date thereof and shall thereupon apply to every property in the County for which a use has not been established or for which a building permit or development permit may subsequently be requested. 
b.  For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a text amendment affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed under the provisions for Non-conformities in Article 1 of this Development Code. 
c.  Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a text amendment may continue to completion as though no change had occurred and, upon completion, shall be governed under the provisions for Nonconformities in Article 1 of this Development Code, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 04-4-4, § I, 4-5-04; Ord. No. 04-7-4, § IV, 7-19-04; Ord. No. 05-2-11, § II, 2-21-05; Ord. No. 06-8-3, § I, 8-7-06; Ord. No. 2007-9-2, § II, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 2010-6-6, § I, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 2010-6-7, § I, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 2010-9-4, §§ I, II, 9-20-10) 
2.11. - Appeals. 
2.11.1. - Types of appeals.Persons may appeal to the Board of Adjustments for relief under the following circumstances: 
a.  When aggrieved by an action or an interpretation of an administrative official made under this Development Code. 
b.  When an exception is desired for a particular property from certain requirements of this Development Code, as specified in this Section. 
c.  When compliance with the requirements of this Development Code would create a particular and unique hardship. 
d.  When the requirements for flood protection affect an historic structure. 
a.  All requests for relief shall be taken as an appeal to the Board of Adjustments, as provided in this Section. 
b.  If denied, an application for a hardship variance or special exception affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the Board of Adjustments may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
a.  Appeals of an administrative decision to the Board of Adjustments may be initiated by any person aggrieved or by an officer or department head of the City or County. Such appeal shall be initiated within 15 days of the action or decision appealed from by filing with the Chief Building Official a notice of said appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
b.  The holder of or applicant for a development permit or a building permit may appeal any of the following actions taken by an administrative official: 
(1)  The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a development permit by the Chief Building Official upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan or other approved plans. 
(2)  The determination by the Chief Building Official that the holder is in violation of development permit or building permit conditions. 
(3)  The determination by the Chief Building Official that the holder is in violation of any other provision of this Development Code. 
c.  Interpretations. The Board of Adjustments, upon appeal of an aggrieved party or at the request of the Chief Building Official shall: 
(1)  Interpret the use of words or phrases within the context of the intent of this Development Code as pertinent to their jurisdiction. 
(2)  Determine the boundaries of the various zoning districts where uncertainty exists. 
(3)  Decide appeals from any order, determination, decision or other interpretation by the Chief Building Official or other person acting under authority of this Development Code, where a misinterpretation or misapplication of the requirements or other provisions of this Development Code is alleged. 
(4)  Interpret such other provisions of this Development Code as may require clarification or extension in specific or general cases. 
d.  An appeal of an administrative decision stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer or department head from whom the appeal is made certifies to the Board of Adjustments, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which must be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
e.  A decision of the Board of Adjustments shall be final unless the aggrieved party request an appeal before the City and/or adjudication by the City or County Attorney in an effort to resolve appeals, prior to going to court. Only a court of competent jurisdiction may hear such appeals. 
a.  General limitations on relief. Special exceptions shall be limited to relief from the following requirements of this Development Code: 
(1)  Minimum building setbacks. 
(2)  Maximum building height. 
(3)  Minimum lot width. 
(4)  Public street frontage. 
(5)  Buffers and screening. 
(6)  Signage, in accordance with a uniform sign plan. 
(7)  Parking requirements. 
b.  Standards for approval. A special exception may be granted upon a finding that the relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of the Development Code. 
c.  If denied, an application for a special exception affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the Board of Adjustments may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
d.  In no case shall a special exception be granted from the conditions of approval imposed on a property through a zoning change granted by the Governing Body. 
a.  General. 
(1)  Relief from the application of the provisions of this Development Code may be granted by the Board of Adjustments upon a finding that compliance with such provision will result in a hardship to the property or owner that is substantially unwarranted by the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, and the need for consistency among all properties similarly zoned. 
(2)  Such relief may be granted only to the extent necessary to alleviate such unnecessary hardship and not as a convenience to the applicant nor to gain any advantage or interest over similarly zoned properties. 
b.  Standards for approval. A hardship variance may be granted in whole or in part, or with conditions, in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Board of Adjustments that: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; or, 
(2)  The application of the Development Code to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; or, 
(3)  There are conditions that are peculiar to the property which adversely affect its reasonable use or usability as currently zoned. 
c.  If denied, an appeal for a hardship variance affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the Board of Adjustments may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
d.  In no case shall a hardship variance be granted for any of the following: 
(1)  A condition created by the applicant, including the result of an unwise investment decision or real estate transaction. 
(2)  A change in the conditions of approval imposed through a zoning change granted by the Governing Body. 
(3)  Reduction of a minimum lot size required by a zoning district. 
(4)  A use of land or buildings or structures that is not permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
(5)  Any increase in the number of dwelling units or non-residential building floor area otherwise permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
a.  Flood protection variances may be approved for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places provided that the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the building losing its historical designation. 
b.  In passing upon a flood protection variance, the Board of Adjustments shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this Development Code relating to flood damage prevention, and the: 
(1)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  Susceptibility of the facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  Importance of the services provided by the facility to the community; 
(5)  Necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
(6)  Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  Compatibility of the use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  Relationship of the use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for that area; 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
c.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this Development Code, the Board of Adjustments may attach such conditions to the granting of the variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes of flood damage prevention. 
d.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
e.  Conditions for variances are as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of an historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historical character and design of the building. 
(2)  Variances shall only be approved upon: 
(a)  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(b)  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(c)  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expenses, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or Development Codes. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The Chief Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
a.  Upon receiving a notice of an appeal, the Chief Building Official shall assemble such memos, papers, plans, or other documents as may constitute the record for the appeal or as may provide an understanding of the issues involved. 
b.  An application for an appeal shall include such descriptions, maps or drawings as needed to clearly illustrate or explain the action requested. The Chief Building Official may request such additional information from the appellant as necessary to provide a full understanding of the appellant's request. 
c.  Once the record has been assembled, Chief Building Official shall schedule the appeal for consideration at the next scheduled meeting of the appropriate Board of Adjustments for which adequate public notice can be given. 
d.  Public Notice. 
(1)  Notification to the General Public. 
(a)  At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the County. The Building Inspection Department shall prepare such notice, which shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(b)  A request for a special exception, hardship variance or flood protection variance shall be heard at a public hearing only upon: 
1)  The published notice, in addition to the requirements above, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the nature of the requested action; and 
2)  At least 15 days prior to the public hearing, the Chief Building Official shall post a sign or signs of not less than 6 square feet stating "Zoning Action Pending. For further information please contact the Rome-Floyd County Planning Department at (phone number) or (e-mail address)." One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the subject property. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. 
(2)  Notice to Surrounding Property Owners. If the request is for a special exception, hardship variance or flood protection variance, notice shall also be given to surrounding property owners as follows: 
(a)  At least five days prior to public hearing, the Chief Building Official shall cause a notice to be mailed to all persons owning property located adjacent to or across the street from the property that is the subject matter of request. 
(b)  The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing by the Board of Adjustments. The written notice shall be mailed to the property owners as such names and addresses appear on the County's ad valorem tax records. 
e.  Any appellant wishing to withdraw an appeal prior to the meeting of the Board of Adjustments shall file a written request for such withdrawal with the Chief Building Official. The appeal shall thereupon be removed from the Board's agenda and the request shall have no further effect. 
f.  Board of Adjustments Public Hearing. 
(1)  The Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson, or the Board of Adjustments' designee, who shall act as the Presiding Official, shall convene the public hearing at the scheduled time and place. 
(2)  The Presiding Official may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
(3)  The Chief Building Official shall submit the assembled record of the appeal to the Board of Adjustments. The Chief Building Official, or other appropriate party if the appeal was taken from an administrative action or interpretation, shall provide such information or explanation as appropriate to the circumstances of the appeal. 
(4)  At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. Upon rising to speak each person recognized shall state his or her name and home address. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a request, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the request. No less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking in support the request and no less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. If reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the general public may speak at a hearing. However, the appellant and nearby property owners shall be afforded the first opportunity to speak. 
(5)  The appellant shall be allowed to speak first in order to present the request. Others in support of the request may then speak, followed by those in opposition to the request. The appellant will then be allowed time for rebuttal. Rebuttal must be limited to points or issues raised by opponents to the request at the hearing. 
(6)  During the public hearing, the members of the Board of Adjustments may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
(7)  At the meeting, following presentation of the appeal, action shall be taken by vote of the Board of Adjustments. 
(a)  A motion to approve or deny an appeal must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least three members in order for the motion to be approved. 
(b)  If a motion to approve an appeal fails, the appeal is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an appeal fails, another motion would be in order. 
(c)  A tie vote on a motion for approval of an appeal shall be deemed a denial of the appeal. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(d)  If no action is taken on an appeal, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the Board of Adjustments. 
(8)  In taking action on an appeal, the Board of Adjustments may: 
(a)  Approve, approve with changes, or deny the request; or, 
(b)  Table the appeal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or, 
(c)  Allow withdrawal of the appeal at the request of the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 2008-2-3, § I, 2-4-08; Ord. No. 2009-4-13, § I, 4-20-09; Ord. No. 2011-11-4, § I, 11-21-11) 
2.12. - Temporary suspension of permitting. 
a.  Upon submission of a valid application for a zoning change or for the granting of an appeal on a property, no permits shall be issued nor shall any actions be undertaken on the property that may be affected by the outcome of such application. 
(Ord. No. 02-1-4, § I, 1-7-02) 
ARTICLE 3. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

3.1. - Purpose of Article 3. 
This Article describes the specific uses to which land and structures may be put in the various zoning districts, and includes special requirements in order for certain uses or structures to be allowed. District regulations such as lot size, building setbacks, residential floor area and structure height are included. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
3.2. - Zoning map. 
a.  The boundaries of the various zoning districts shall be shown on a set of parcel specific, tax maps collectively entitled "Zoning Districts Maps, Rome-Floyd County, Georgia" and adopted on the respective dates of adoption for this ordinance, and as subsequently amended thereafter from time to time in conformance with this Code. 
b.  The "Zoning Districts Maps, Rome-Floyd County, Georgia" is adopted as the Official Zoning Map(s) and is hereby made a part of this Code, and all notations, references and other information shown on it shall be a part of this Code. 
c.  The Official Zoning Map(s), as adopted by the governing body and subsequently amended from time to time by its action, shall be maintained by the Rome/Floyd County Planning Department. 
The Official Zoning Map(s) shall be stored and maintained in an electronic database. So stored and maintained, the Official Zoning Map(s) shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of all land, water, buildings and structures within the county. 
On a quarterly basis, the Official Zoning Map(s) shall be printed. All printed maps shall be identified by the following words: 
Zoning District Maps, Rome-Floyd County, Georgia: This is the Official Zoning Map(s) referred to in Article 3.2.1 of the Rome-Floyd County, Georgia, Unified Land Development Code, as of _______ (date). 
a.  Changes Due to Map Amendment. No changes of any nature shall be made to the Official Zoning Map(s) except in conformity with amendments to the map approved by the Governing Body. 
b.  Changes Due to Annexation. Where city limit boundaries change by virtue of annexation, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Land area incorporated through annexation shall retain its existing zoning classification until an application for rezoning is filed for rezoning with the Planning Director. 
(2)  Any application for a building permit or development permit will be processed in the customary fashion as it would have been prior to annexation. 
c.  Notification Upon Amendment. Following the approval of a zoning map amendment by the Governing Body, the Clerk shall transmit a copy of the amendment to the Planning Director. If the action was to rezone property, the Planning Director shall cause the Official Zoning Map to be amended to show the change. 
a.  The boundaries of the districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined on the basis of the legal descriptions associated with approved zoning petitions, or, lacking such legal descriptions, on the basis of the location of the boundary as depicted on the Official Zoning Map along with any dimensions shown. 
b.  Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundary lines are center lines of streets or railroads or such lines extended, property lines or such lines extended, a line lying in the center of a stream or drainage way, or the city limits of Rome. 
(2)  Where a district boundary line parallels a street right-of-way or discernible topographic feature but no dimension is given, the distance shall be scaled from the Official Zoning Map. 
(3)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot that is of single ownership at the time of the effective date of this Code [August 1, 2001], the zoning classification of the larger portion may be interpreted to extend into the smaller portion for a distance of no more than ten feet. 
(4)  In the event the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
(5)  Where a public road, street, alley or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it is reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street, alley or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 03-10-3, § I, 10-20-03) 
3.3. - Zoning districts. 
a.  Zoning districts established: 

 
b.  Permitted uses. Principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as special uses are shown in Section 3.4—List of Permitted Uses. 
c.  Density, lot width, setback and height standards. Applicable density, lot width and setback standards are contained in Section 3.5—Lot Size, Density and Setbacks and Section 3.6—Structure Heights. 
d.  Residential cluster overlays, neighborhood office commercial and planned developments. 
e.  Application and Hearing Procedures. Procedures for filing for rezoning, subdivision or site approvals are contained in Article 2—Procedures. 
f.  Restrictions Regarding Particular Uses. Applicable standards regarding specific uses, regardless of the zoning district where they are located are contained in Article 4—Restrictions Regarding Particular Uses. 
g.  Sign Standards. Applicable regulations are contained in Article 5—Sign Regulations. 
h.  Buffers, Landscaping, Tree Protection and Parking Standards. Applicable regulations are contained in Article 6—Subdivision and Project Standards. 
i.  Construction Development Standards. Standards regarding site grading, flood hazard areas, erosion control, installation of streets, drainage, public utilities and building construction are contained in Article 6—Subdivision and Project Standards. 
a.  A-R Agricultural Residential. 
(1)  The A-R Agricultural Residential District is established to provide areas for agricultural and forestry uses and residential development. 
(2)  Manufactured and mobile homes are permitted with limitations throughout the A-R District outside the City of Rome. A Special Use Permit is required within the City. 
b.  S-R Suburban Residential. 
(1)  The S-R Suburban Residential District is established for three levels of residential development (in addition to all forms of agricultural crop production and forestry): 
(a)  In areas where public sanitary sewer and public water are not available, the S-R District is established to provide areas of primarily low density residential development of one unit per acre. 
(b)  In areas where public water is available, but not public sanitary sewer, minimum 20,000 square foot lots are required. 
(c)  In areas where sanitary sewer and public water are available, the S-R District is established to provide moderately dense, primarily single-family residential development with minimum 7,200 square foot lots. 
(2)  Manufactured home subdivisions are deemed appropriate in the S-R Residential District within the city and county. Manufactured homes on single parcels outside an established manufactured home subdivision are permitted in this district except a special use permit is required: 
(a)  Within the city; and 
(b)  Within those portions of the county consisting of a land development project in which two or more lots are created, along with streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots. 
(3)  Attached single-family dwelling as defined in Article 8 may be considered appropriate as infill development if the design is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in terms of scale, height, roof pitch, provision of parking, and orientation toward the street. Such development, if approved by Special Use Permit, must meet the standards listed in Article 4.1.28. 
c.  HT-R High Density Traditional Residential. 
(1)  The HT-R Traditional Residential District is established to provide opportunities for higher density single family residential averaging four to seven units per acre. The HT-R District development patterns and architectural styles are reflective of the residential neighborhoods established before the 1940's. Streets were developed along a grid pattern with neighborhoods conveniently located to local shopping areas. Although these are older areas of the community, it is envisioned that this zoning district is also appropriate for new single-family development built in this "neo-traditional" style. 
(2)  Manufactured homes are not considered appropriate in the HT-R District. 
(3)  Two Family Dwellings (Duplexes) may be deemed appropriate in the HT-R District under certain circumstances, however, a Special Use Permit is required. 
(4)  Attached single-family dwelling as defined in Article 8 may be considered appropriate as infill development if the design is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in terms of scale, height, roof pitch, provision of parking, and orientation toward the street. Such development, if approved by Special Use Permit, must meet the standards listed in Article 4.1.28. 
d.  LT-R Low Density Traditional Residential. 
(4)[1]  The LT-R Traditional Residential District is established to provide opportunities for lower density single-family residential averaging one to four units per acre. The LT-R District development patterns and architectural styles reflect the residential neighborhoods established before during the 1940's, 50's and early 60's. Streets were largely developed along a grid pattern with sidewalks and neighborhoods conveniently located to local shopping areas. Although these are older neighborhoods of the community, it is envisioned that this zoning district is also appropriate for new single-family development built in "neo-traditional" style in accordance with current new urbanism concepts. 
(5)[2]  Manufactured housing units are not considered appropriate within the Low density, Traditional Residential District. 
(3)  Two Family Dwellings (Duplexes) may be deemed appropriate in the LT-R District under certain circumstances; however, a Special Use Permit is required. 
(4)  Attached single-family dwelling as defined in Article 8 may be considered appropriate as infill development if the design is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in terms of scale, height, roof pitch, provision of parking, and orientation toward the street. Such development, if approved by Special Use Permit, must meet the standards listed in Article 4.1.28. 
e.  D-R Low Duplex Residential. 
(1)  The Duplex Residential District is established to provide a location for two attached residential units with a maximum density of six units per acre. 
(2)  The Duplex Residential District includes only single family detached, single family attached, and two-family attached (duplex) residential units. 
(3)  The Duplex District is intended to allow for an intermediate density of residential that blends easily with nearby single family residential units. Such units, if effectively sited, are deemed to be suitable buffers between single family residence (S-R or T-R) and higher density. Multifamily Residential (M-R), Office/Institutional (O-I), and/or Neighborhood Office Commercial (N-O-C) uses. 
(4)  Attached single-family dwelling as defined in Article 8 may be considered appropriate as infill development if the design is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in terms of scale, height, roof pitch, provision of parking, and orientation toward the street. Such development must meet the standards listed in Article 4.1.28. 
f.  M-R Multifamily-Residential. 
(1)  The M-R Multifamily Residential District is established to provide a location for attached units with densities from six to 14 units per acre. Multifamily development includes, triplexes, apartments of four units or more, townhomes, condominiums, and manufactured home parks. The M-R district is designed for areas served by publicly provided sanitary sewer. 
(2)  The M-R District is intended to accommodate higher density attached residential development that blends easily with nearby single-family units. M-R District developments such as duplexes, triplexes, townhomes, and low density apartment complexes are considered appropriate in proximity to the S-R and T-R residential districts, if effectively sited, landscaped, buffered and adequate provisions for access and open space are made. 
(3)  A wide range of multifamily densities and dwelling types may also be appropriate in large-scale mixed use developments or as a residential re-use option in obsolete commercial centers. 
(4)  Manufactured home parks are allowed as a M-R District use with restrictions, but are not considered appropriate options in proximity to single-family subdivision development or as re-use options for commercial properties. 
(5)  A residential cluster option is allowed as a use allowed by Special Use Permit with restrictions in the M-R District, but must meet all development standards and criteria for a multi-family residential development. 
f.[g.]  N-O-C Neighborhood Office Commercial. 
(1)  The N-O-C Neighborhood Office Commercial District is established to accommodate modestly sized professional offices and retail services in close proximity to and in harmony with nearby residential properties. 
(2)  The N-O-C District is designed for locations where existing residential is no longer the most appropriate use due to conflicts from nearby nonresidential uses and traffic. This district is also appropriate for small-scale retail/office in newly developed planned residential areas. 
(3)  The N-O-C District recognizes the need to protect adjacent residential uses, thus the basic character of the N-O-C District encourages a compatible mixture of residential, office and specialty retail types of land uses. This district is identified as one in which the physical character and design of existing and proposed new structures play an important role in assuring compatibility with existing residential development. Review of building design, uses, buffers, landscaping, lighting and parking are recognized as essential for the establishment and maintenance of the character of this district. Uses that create issues with noise, traffic or odors are not permitted in this district. 
(4)  Areas zoned N-O-C are not intended to be moderate-to-large retail or office centers. 
(5)  Businesses that prepare and serve food are limited to custom service restaurants that do not create smoke, noise or undue congestion. No drive-in windows are permitted. 
(6)  New buildings in the N-O-C District may not exceed 2,500 square feet. However, pre-existing residential structures that exceed this building maximum, may be considered for rezoning to N-O-C. 
(7)  Uses are limited to services that generate no more than 150 vehicular trips per day. 
(8)  The residential character and design of existing and proposed new structures are required to be maintained. 
(9)  No front or side yard parking is permitted. 
(10)  Review of building design, uses, buffers, lighting and parking is required. Such reviews shall be accomplished by a Special Review Panel consisting of the Director of Planning, Historic Preservation Director, and Chief Building Official or their designee(s) as required. 
(11)  Reserved. 
(12)  Signage shall be in accordance with Article 5—Sign Regulations, and should be designed to have minimal impact on neighboring residential properties. 
(13)  Window displays or other displays of work are not permitted to be visible from the exterior of the building. 
(14)  Landscaping similar to that of residential properties between the nonresidential and residential uses, or 
(15)  New structures: 
(a)  New structures shall utilize the shapes and proportions common to single-family residential architecture as guides to the architectural design, and alterations of or additions to existing structures. 
(b)  The rhythm or pattern of placement of windows, doors, chimneys, gables, dormers, roof pitch, offsets in the walls, and other elements should also be considered by the Review Panel as in creating residential compatibility. 
g.[h.]  O-I Office Institutional. 
(1)  The O-I Office Institutional District is established to provide for both private and public administrative and professional offices and on sites greater than those permitted in the N-O-C District. 
(2)  The O-I District is established to provide for institutional uses such as hospitals, clinics, churches, schools, cemeteries, etc., occurring in the more densely developed areas of Rome-Floyd County (the S-R and T-R zoning districts). This is due to the potential for conflicts between the institutional uses and densely developed residential neighborhoods. 
(3)  Within this district the sale, wholesale, storage or processing of merchandise is not permitted, except as accessory uses to the primary O-I uses. Areas zoned to this classification are not intended to be commercial or industrial centers. 
(4)  The district is intended primarily to be located along major streets, but it can also be located in an area dominated by institutions such as a college where a wide range of land uses are required. 
h.[i.]  C-C Community Commercial. 
(1)  The C-C District is considered inappropriate for heavier commercial uses that border on being more "light industrial" in nature, and thus more appropriate for the H-C or L-I District. 
(2)  It is the intent of the C-C District to promote a streetscape that encourages buildings to be moved forward adjacent to the front yard setback line and the edge of the required landscape improvements. This site design improves the benefits derived from the required landscaping and the overall image of the commercial corridor. 
i.[j.]  C-B-C Central Business Commercial. 
(1)  Within the C-B-C Central Business Commercial District the most intensive use of land is permitted in combination with a variety of commercial and residential uses. The district is intended to serve as the central headquarters for economic and administrative activity in the community. The district is designed to have uses that are centrally located and compact so that maximum convenience is afforded the users and occupants of the district. 
(2)  It is the intent of the C-B-C District to be pedestrian friendly. Structured parking is encouraged over surface parking lots. There is no yard setbacks to encourage buildings to locate adjacent to the property line and utilize on-street or structured parking to the greatest extent possible. 
(3)  In the C-B-C District residential use is encouraged above commercial operations in existing buildings, as well as within new, free-standing high-rise residential buildings. Commercial store fronts in existing buildings shall be maintained in both form and function and shall not be converted to residential use. 
(4)  The CBC zoning district may also be used in the unincorporated areas where the availability of water, sewer, transportation routes and other services and utilities make high density, mixed use development possible. 
j.[k.]  H-C Heavy Commercial. 
(1)  The H-C Heavy Commercial District is established to provide for the sales and service of commercial uses that are not considered as compatible with traditional retail sales and services allowed in the C-C District. 
(2)  Uses within the H-C District border on being more "light industrial" in nature. These are uses such as major car repair or service, auto painting and body shops, construction contractors, large truck, manufactured home, boat or heavy equipment sales, and retail home improvement stores with outside storage, etc. 
k.[l.]  L-I Light Industrial. 
(1)  The L-I Light Industrial District is intended to provide areas for light manufacturing uses that primarily involve finishing, or assembly of previously manufactured goods. The district is also intended to provide for the location of wholesaling or warehousing uses, as well as office uses. 
(2)  The L-I District excludes manufacturing or industrial uses that emit noxious odors, dust, fumes, gas, noise or vibration outside of any building on the premises. It also excludes hazardous materials such as those involving bulk storage of gasoline or toxic chemicals. 
(3)  This district is designed for industrial and warehousing uses that do not have a detrimental effect upon adjoining residential or commercial developments. 
l.[m.]  H-I Heavy Industrial. 
(1)  The H-I Heavy Industrial District is intended for the location of primarily heavy manufacturing uses with restrictions on noxious odors, dust, fumes, gas, noise or vibration. 
(2)  Due to the potential for uses in the H-I District to handle materials that are potentially hazardous, emit smoke, dust or odors, or require large transport services, a five acre minimum lot size is required. 
m.[n.]  P-D Planned Development. 
(1)  The P-D Planned Development District is established for two purposes. First it provides a district for addressing specific site and building design issues and needs created by large scale residential, commercial, office, institutional or industrial uses. Secondly, it allows for more flexible placement, mixture, arrangement and orientation of residential, office, institutional, commercial and/or industrial uses. This provides for accompanying flexibility in the subdivision of land and the grouping of open space and accessory facilities. 
(2)  Uses or developments that are subject to the requirements of the P-D Planned Development District are: 
(a)  Buildings that exceed 70,000 square feet; this does not include industrial space if the persons employed (b) and the vehicular trips generated (c) per site are not exceeded. 
(b)  Operations that would employ over 200 persons. 
(c)  Developments that generate over 10,000 vehicle trips per day. 
(d)  Residential development involving over 250 units or are in excess of 300 acres. 
(e)  Mixed use developments: Developments that desire to provide a mix of residential, office, commercial and/or industrial uses. 
(3)  Application requirements. Developments that are subject to the P-D Planned Development District are required to follow normal submission requirements, zoning and subdivision approvals and construction standards as outlined in other sections of the Code. 
(4)  Site Requirements. 
(a)  Single-Purpose Development. 
1)  Defined. A single-purpose development is one that involves only one type of general land use category such as retail, industrial, institutional, or residential development. A single-purpose development may be one building or a multiple of buildings. 
2)  As a requirement of zoning, a single-purpose development is required to submit the following information (in addition to that which is required in other sections of the Code). 
a)  Overall compatibility of development with adjacent land uses. 
b)  Traffic management plan and a street continuation plan (if applicable). 
c)  Orientation of building(s) to the public rights-of-way. 
d)  Parking lot configuration and orientation to the street. 
e)  Nonresidential building(s) exterior treatment and signage plans. 
f)  Proposed outside storage and treatment of buffers and landscaping. 
g)  Hours of business operation and service vehicle routing plan. 
h)  Any other information that is deemed useful in determining the proposed use's impact on surrounding properties and the community as a whole. 
(b)  Mixed use developments. 
1)  Defined. A mixed use development is a development that provides a mix of residential, office, commercial and/or industrial uses under a unified plan of development. 
2)  Development standards. 
a)  Overall standards. Lot densities, lot areas, widths and setbacks are to be established as conditions of zoning approval for each Planned Development. 
b)  Residential densities. The maximum dwelling units permitted is six units per acre. In calculating permitted residential densities, land devoted to nonresidential uses and road rights-of-way may not be included. However, open space held in common may be included in the calculations of densities. 
c)  Open space. Within the residential portions of the development, 20 percent of the land must be preserved in open space, half of which is usable open space for active or passive recreation use. Said open space shall be held in common by a legally constituted homeowners association with the financial capability to maintain the open space. For the purposes of calculation, open space does not include any public rights-of-way but does include lakes, walking trails, and active recreation areas. 
d)  Compatibility. On-site land uses developed at the perimeter of the site shall be developed in a manner that is compatible with adjacent off site land uses. 
e)  Enclosure of uses. All uses except off-street parking and loading shall be located and maintained entirely within completely enclosed structures. 
3)  Protection of residential uses. Where a mixture of residential and nonresidential uses is proposed for a site, or where a nonresidential use is proposed on property adjoining a residential use, plans shall provide for protection of the residential use to ensure a suitable living environment. 
a)  Increased separation between residential and nonresidential uses, 
b)  Placement of parking areas to minimize noise and screen the view of vehicle movements, 
c)  Use of vegetative screening, 
d)  Location within the structure or on the lot of a use causing adverse impact so as to minimize the impact, 
e)  Use of building alterations or special equipment or devices to minimize adverse impacts, 
f)  Landscaping similar to that of residential properties between the nonresidential and residential uses, or 
g)  Placement of signs to minimize impact on residential uses. 
4)  Site plan requirements. 
a)  Mixed use development site plans shall contain the same information requested for single purpose development. 
b)  In addition to the requirements above, the following is required: 
1.  Street rights-of-way, 
2.  Proposed building sites, 
3.  Uses proposed for buildings, 
4.  General drainage improvements, 
5.  Proposed reservations or dedications for streets and other public facilities, and 
6.  A contour map of the site. 
c)  Written report. A written report, including photographs or other relevant illustrations or information, may be submitted: 
1.  To explain features that cannot be shown adequately on the site plan; 
2.  To explain the means by which compatibility between a mixture of uses shall be ensured; or, 
3.  To illustrate the existing architecture on which the proposed design is based. 
o.  U-M-U Urban Mixed Use. 
(1)  The UMU District is established to accommodate intensive development, including infill development, and to provide for relatively high density residential, commercial, and office/institutional uses in a pedestrian friendly, urban environment. The district may be appropriate in areas that are adjacent and peripheral to the CBC District. 
(2)  The uses allowed in the UMU District are similar to the uses allowed in the CBC District and are shown in Table 3.2. 
(3)  No building setbacks or landscaping requirements shall apply, and a buffer requirement of no less than 20 feet shall apply only where adjacent properties are zoned for residential uses. The height limitation for structures shall be 100 feet. No minimum lot size or lot width shall apply. Each lot shall abut a street that has been opened and accepted for public maintenance; that has been designated by the City or County as a private street; or whose construction has been guaranteed, as provided under Article 6.4.6 of this Code; for a distance of no less than 26 continuous feet. 
(4)  In order to efficiently utilize limited land resources, structured parking shall be provided wherever it is feasible. Shared parking arrangements shall be encouraged. 
(5)  Sidewalks and streetscapes shall be provided along all street frontages to promote attractive, safe, and convenient pedestrian access. Multi-purpose trails or other pedestrian walkways may also be appropriate to ensure connectivity. 
(6)  Loading areas, material handling areas, and waste containers shall be located, screened or enclosed so that they are not visible from streets, sidewalks and other public areas. The design of such facilities shall be approved by the Building Official. 
(7)  The UMU Zoning District may also be used in the unincorporated areas where the availability of water, sewer, transportation routes and other services and utilities make high density, mixed use development possible. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 02-4-15, § I, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 02-7-6, § I, 7-1-02; Ord. No. 02-9-2, § II, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 2004-6-4, § III, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 05-12-2, § I, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 06-1-2, § I, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 2007-2-10, § I, 2-19-07; Ord. No. 2007-2-11, §§ I—V, 2-19-07; Ord. No. 2015-02-03, § I, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 2016-12-03, § I, 12-19-16) 
3.4. - List of permitted uses. 
a.  Principal and accessory uses that are permitted by right, permitted by right but with limitations, and uses permitted as special uses are shown on the following tables: 
(1)  Table 3-1 shows all such uses for the residential and agricultural districts. 
(2)  Table 3-2 lists all such uses for the districts that are primarily nonresidential in nature. 
b.  In a P-D Planned Development District uses that are permitted are specified as part of the zoning approval for each development. 
c.  The following permitted uses herein identified and listed are not intended to be exhaustive, but only representative of those uses permitted in each Zoning District. It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Director and Chief Building Official to concur in any additional uses not herein specifically identified as permitted uses. Any use not shown in the following Table of Permitted Uses that cannot be concurred upon shall be brought before the Planning Commission for final resolution, and shall require a Special Use Permit. Uses that are specifically prohibited are listed in Article 4. 
List of Permitted Principal and Accessory Uses  Table 3-1. Residential and Agricultural Districts 

 

 
Notes: 
1  Special use permit also required in the City 
2  Special use permit also required in the City, and a special use permit also required in the County within those portions of the County consisting of land development project in which two or more lots are created, along with the streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots, except where such development is specifically designed for manufactured homes 
3  Where served by sanitary sewer 
4  Special use permit required in the City 
(Ord. No. 02-4-16, § I, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 02-7-7, § I, 7-1-02; Ord. No. 02-9-2, § IA, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 03-7-12, § I, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 03-10-12, § I, 10-20-03; Ord. No. 04-3-7, §§ II—VII, 3-1-04; Ord. No. 04-6-4, §§ IV, V, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 05-2-10, § III, 2-21-05; Ord. No. 05-6-9, § I, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 2007-2-10, § II, 2-19-07; Ord. No. 2007-2-11, § VI, 2-19-07; Ord. No. 2008-4-4, § I, 4-7-08; Ord. No. 2011-3-3, § I, 3-21-11; Ord. No. 2012-3-5, § I, 3-19-12; Ord. No. 2013-1-4, § I, 1-28-13; Ord. No. 2013-3-3, § I, 3-25-13; Ord. No. 2014-7-3, § I, 7-28-14; Ord. No. 2015-12-05, § I, 12-28-15; Ord. No. 2016-12-03, § II, 12-19-16; Ord. No. 2016-12-04, § I, 12-19-16) 
List of Permitted Principal and Accessory Uses  Table 3-2. Nonresidential Districts 5 

 

 
Notes: 
5  See Article 4 - Restrictions regarding particular uses, for specific requirements that apply to uses permitted by right but with limitations. 
6  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
7  As adaptive reuse existing building only 
8  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
9  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
10  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
11  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
12  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
13  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
14  With the footnote: "Business operation only, with no repossessed vehicles received, parked, stored, displayed, or sold from any property within the NOC district. 
15  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
16  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
17  As adaptive reuse of existing building only 
18  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
19  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
20  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
(Ord. No. 02-4-11, § I, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 02-4-12, § I, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 02-4-14, § I, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 02-4-16, § II, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 02-6-2, §§ IV, V, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 02-9-2, §§ IA, IB, VII, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 02-11-2, § I, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 02-11-5, § I, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 03-7-12, §§ II—IV, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 03-10-4, § I, 10-6-03; Ord. No. 04-3-7, §§ II, VIII—X, 3-1-04; Ord. No. 04-4-9, § I, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 04-6-4, § IV, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 04-6-5, § I, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 05-2-10, §§ I, II, 2-21-05; Ord. No. 05-6-9, § II, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 05-12-2, § II(Exh. A), 12-19-05; Ord. No. 2008-4-4, § II, 4-7-08; Ord. No. 2008-9-4, § I, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 2011-6-9, § I, 6-20-11; Ord. No. 2012-2-4, § I, 2-6-12; Ord. No. 2012-3-5, § II, 3-19-12; Ord. No. 2012-5-7, § I, 5-21-12; Ord. No. 2012-10-3, § I, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 2013-3-3, § II, 3-25-13; Ord. No. 2014-6-5, § I, 6-30-14; Ord. No. 2014-7-2, § I, 7-28-14; Ord. No. 2014-7-3, § II, 7-28-14; Ord. No. 2014-12-5, § I, 12-22-14; Ord. No. 2015-02-03, § II, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 2015-04-05, § I, 4-27-15; Ord. No. 2015-06-01, § I, 6-8-15; Ord. No. 2015-07-03, § I, 7-27-15; Ord. No. 2015-12-05, § I, 12-28-15; Ord. No. 2016-12-04, § I, 12-19-16; Ord. No. 2017-2-5, § I, 2-27-17; Ord. No. 2017-9-4, § I, 9-25-17) 
3.5. - Lot size, density and setbacks. 
3.5.1 - Minimum lot size.Every property upon which a principal use may be located shall meet or exceed the following requirements for its respective zoning district except that the minimum lot size (square feet) requirements in column three of Table 3-3 shall have application only in the city; everything else in section 3.5.1 shall remain the same. Exception: The minimum lot size (square feet) requirements in column three of Table 3-3 shall not apply to a subdivision of land in designated redevelopment districts in the City of Rome. 
Table 3-3  Minimum Lot Size 

 
* Unless specified elsewhere in this code. 
** Development that is not permitted along major streets. 
*** Specific standars are found in Article 4 of this code. 
**** Minimum lot width may be reduced to 150 feet if shared access is provided with adjacent lot. 
(Ord. No. 02-4-8, § I, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 02-4-16, § III, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 05-12-2, § II, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 2007-10-6, § 1, 10-1-07; Ord. No. 2011-6-6, § I, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 2014-12-4, § I, 12-22-14; Ord. No. 2016-12-03, § III, 12-19-16) 
3.5.2. - Minimum principal building setbacks.All principal buildings on a lot shall be set back from the street rights-of-way lines and property lines bounding the lot no less than the distances shown on the following table: 
Table 3-4  Minimum Setback—Principal Buildings 

 
* Residential lots shall not be platted to front directly on the right-of-way of a major arterial, unless adequate provisions for access have been established. 
** Development that is not permitted along major streets. 
*** If the adjacent property on both sides is developed with asimilar use, new construction or infill development shall provide a setback equal to the average setback on the adjacent properties. 
**** Individual townhouse units may provide 0 feet side yard separation but end units must provide 20-foot side yards on the periphery of the lot. 
***** No setback required where adjacent to rail line. For parcels zoned H-I, side and rear setbacks shall be the same as for the L-I district when adjacent to other H-I properties. 
(Ord. No. 02-4-9, § I, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 02-4-16, § IV, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 04-6-4, § VI, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 05-12-2, § II, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 2016-12-03, § IV, 12-19-16) 
Table 3-5  Maximum Structure Heights 

 
(Ord. No. 05-12-2, § II(Exh. A), 12-19-05; Ord. No. 2007-10-7, § I, 10-1-07) 
3.6. - Structure heights. 
3.6.1. - Maximum structure heights.The maximum height of all structures in each zoning district (except as provided in the subsections below) shall be as follows: 
3.6.2. - Exceptions to height restrictions.The following structures are exempt from the height limitations: 
a.  Agricultural building such as but not limited to barns, silos, windmills, grain elevators, and other farm structures, but not including dwellings. 
b.  Cooling towers, gas holder, or other industrial structures where required as part of the manufacturing process. 
c.  Church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, observation towers, wireless communication towers, commercial radio and television transmission towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, and TV reception antennae. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 2014-6-6, § I, 6-30-14) 
ARTICLE 4. - RESTRICTIONS REGARDING PARTICULAR USES 

4.1. - Principal uses. 
The following specific requirements apply to each of the following uses in all zoning districts where each use is permitted with limitations. 
4.1.1. - Agricultural and forestry. 
a.  Concentrated animal feeding operation. 
(1)  All livestock buildings or feeding enclosures shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(2)  Chicken broiler houses and other covered animal feeding operations are included in the definition of animal feeding operation to the extent that they must setback requirements and that their waste by-products must be disposed of in a timely and environmentally acceptable manner. 
(3)  Minimum parcel size is ten acres. 
(4)  There shall be at least 5,000 square feet of fenced area not covered by the principal structure for each animal unit, excluding poultry. (See definitions.) All confined animal feeding operations shall comply with the requirements of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division and the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rules and Regulations for Water Quality (July 6, 1999) relating to animal waste disposal. 
b.  Livestock sales pavilions, operated in accordance with state and county health department regulations, are required to be located at least 50 feet from any property line. 
c.  Riding stable: 
(1)  Lot must be at least five acres. 
(2)  Structures shall be located at least 50 feet from any property line. 
d.  Temporary or portable sawmill. 
(1)  Shall not exceed a period of six months. 
(2)  Such use must be at least 200 feet from any property line. 
e.  Tenant dwellings for persons employed on land used for bona fide agricultural purposes may not be rented for any other purposes but to provide housing for persons employed by agricultural operations upon the same parcel of land; except that such dwellings that were built prior to the adoption of this Ordinance may be rented. 
a.  Automobile parking lot or parking garage, commercial may include gasoline pumps if located entirely within the principal structure. 
b.  Automobile repair and paint shops. 
(1)  Such use shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground, day care home or center, nursing home, convalescent home, personal care home, or hospital; or within 300 feet of any residentially zoned property. 
(2)  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
(3)  Damaged vehicles shall be stored within a storage area that meets the criteria outlined in Article 4.1.2i. 
c.  Automobile and truck salvage and retail sales. 
(1)  Automotive salvage operations where parts are to be retailed or wholesaled as usable replacement parts are permitted provided they are properly screened from view on all sides by a solid fence a minimum of eight feet tall. 
d.  Automotive service business and automobile service station. 
(1)  Auto repair shall not be permitted. 
(2)  Gasoline pumps and other service facilities shall be set back not less than 15 feet from the right-of-way line. 
(3)  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
(4)  No inoperable vehicles shall be stored on the site for more than 24 hours. 
(5)  Such use in a P-D District shall not be constructed until the primary structure has been constructed. 
e.  Automobile, boat, truck and trailer sales, lease and rentals. All parking areas shall be clearly marked, and no unit shall be parked within the setback areas of the district. 
f.  Automobile wash service. A paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting service equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the wash machines. 
g.  Automobile wrecking or junkyards. 
(1)  Such use shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than eight feet in height that provides total visual screening. Such screening shall be maintained in good condition and meet the standards established for buffers in Article 6. 
(2)  The storage of vehicles shall be on an all-weather treatment, such as asphalt, concrete or gravel. Vehicles shall be arranged in rows and not stacked upon one another. 
(3)  No such activity may be conducted within 100 feet of any property line or 200 feet of any property zoned or used for residential purposes. The incidental sale of auto parts removed from cars on the site shall be permitted. 
h.  Retail automobile parts and tire store. 
(1)  Unless elsewhere permitted within the district, there shall be no dismantling of vehicles on the premises to obtain auto parts. 
(2)  Unless elsewhere permitted within the district, the only auto part installation that shall be permitted in connection with this use shall be the installing of tires and the installation of minor maintenance or accessory parts. 
(3)  Unless elsewhere permitted within the district, major auto repair shall not be permitted in connection with this use. 
i.  Storage yards for damaged or confiscated automobiles. 
(1)  This use shall be enclosed by a fence or wall at least eight feet in height that provides total visual screening. Such screening shall be maintained in good condition and meet the buffer standards of Article 6 "Site Design Standards." 
(2)  The storage of vehicles shall be on an all-weather treatment such as asphalt, concrete or gravel. Vehicles shall be arranged in rows and not stacked upon one another. 
(3)  No such activity may be conducted within 100 feet of any property line or 200 feet of any property zoned or used for residential purposes. The incidental sale of auto parts removed from cars on the site shall be permitted. 
(4)  No dismantling, repair, or other such activity shall be conducted unless otherwise permitted in the district. 
(5)  No automobiles shall be held longer than the expiration of its current registration period. 
a.  When abutting a residentially zoned district, any building or structure shall be set back not less than 50 feet from any side or rear property line. 
b.  No parking area shall be established within 20 feet of a residential zone. 
c.  For new construction on an undeveloped lot, the site must be at least one acre in size and have frontage on a public street of at least 100 feet. 
4.1.4. - Civic, social and fraternal organizations.All structures shall be at least 50 feet from any property line, and parking. 
4.1.5. - Communications, radio and TV towers. All towers must be set back from any adjacent (next to or across the street) lot or unrelated structure a distance equal to the height of the tower. Article 4.1.5 shall not have application to towers located in the County. 
1 Setbacks for communications, radio and TV towers located in the County shall be established through a separate comprehensive ordinance of the County and not in the ULDC. 
4.1.6. - Construction contractors.Storage of materials not within a building or structure shall be screened by a permanent fence, wall, or approved planted buffer. Such screen shall be at least six feet in height or two feet higher than stored materials, whichever is higher. Such screen shall also be in conformance with buffer standards in Article 6—"Site Design Standards." 
4.1.7. - Custom order and specialty shops.Such uses are allowed by right if less than 10,000 square feet and if the sales area is within a building and occupies more than 10,000 square feet of building floor area, it shall be permitted with limitations by special use permit. 
4.1.8. - Custom service restaurants.A restaurant in this district shall be a custom service restaurant and shall be located in a pre-existing residential structure modified for such use. 
4.1.9. - Day care and kindergartens. 
a.  The lot shall have access on an arterial or major collector. 
b.  There shall not be less than 30 square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum enrollment, and not less than 100 square feet per child of outdoor pay area, for the maximum number of children that will use the play area at any given time, but in no case less than one-third of the maximum enrollment. 
c.  A fence not less than four feet in height shall enclose the outdoor play area. 
d.  A circular drive shall be provided for off-street loading and unloading. 
e.  In P-D and C-B-C Districts the use shall be permitted only as accessory use to a primary use. 
4.1.10. - Dry cleaning plants. 
a.  Dry cleaning plants using systems that make use of solvents rated at above 40 according to the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. standard of classification known as class I systems, shall be prohibited. 
b.  Dry cleaning plants that make use of solvents rated at more than five but less than 40 according to the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. standard of classification, known as class II and III systems, shall not be established in buildings with other occupancy. They shall only be established in buildings that are set back at least 20 feet from any side or rear property line and another building. 
c.  The applicant for such a plant shall certify in writing at the time of application that all the above conditions shall be met. Such dry cleaning plant shall comply with all of the requirements of the Life Safety Code NFPA No. 101. 
d.  Such plant shall be designed to operate in a manner that will not emit noise, smoke, odor, or objectionable waste materials. 
4.1.11. - Lodging. 
a.  Bed and Breakfast Inn. 
(1)  Permitted only in federally designated National Historic Register districts and the A-R District as a Special Use. 
(2)  Bed and Breakfast Inns are permitted to offer from one to ten units. 
(3)  Parking requirements are stated in Article 6—Subdivision and Project Standards. 
(4)  Signs shall meet the sign standards of the district wherein the facility is located. 
b.  Fraternity and sorority houses and residence halls. 
(1)  The use must be located within 1,000 feet of an accredited institution of higher education. 
(2)  In computing area required to determine dwelling unit densities, each six beds or fraction thereof shall be considered as one dwelling unit. 
4.1.12. - Manufactured homes.These regulations shall govern the use and operation of all manufactured homes used for residential purposes and manufactured home communities within the County. It is the intent of these regulations to empower the Planning Commission, the Fire Department, the County Health Department, and the Building Inspection Department to review the development of manufactured home sites and parks within the county for the purposes stated in this article. 
a.  Purpose. These regulations are being promulgated to project the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the County. The County recognizes that manufactured housing meets the needs of many county residents for affordable housing. 
b.  General standards. 
(1)  No mobile home shall be brought into the County after the effective date of this Development Code [August 1, 2001]. 
(2)  Zoning requirements: 
(a)  A-R District: Manufactured and mobile homes are permitted with limitations within unincorporated Floyd County and only by Special Use Permit inside the City of Rome. 
(b)  S-R or P-D Residential Districts: Manufactured homes on individual lots are permitted only by special use permit within those portions of the county consisting of a land development project in which two or more lots are created, along with streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots. In other portions of the county in said Residential Districts, manufactured homes are permitted with limitations. Manufactured homes on individual lots in the city are allowed only by special use permit. Manufactured home subdivisions are permitted with limitations. 
(c)  HT-R and LT-R Residential District: Manufactured homes on individual lots are not permitted. 
(d)  D-R Residential District: Manufactured homes on individual lots are excluded from the Duplex District. Manufactured home subdivisions are excluded from this zone. 
(e)  M-R Multifamily Residential District: Duplex manufactured homes are permitted. Manufactured home parks are permitted with limitations. 
(f)  Manufactured and mobile homes are prohibited from any historic district. 
(3)  Mobile home inspection. No mobile home shall relocate from a site within the county without the following inspection. The cost of such inspection shall be the responsibility of the mobile home owner. 
(a)  Structural inspection by the Building Official to assure integrity of outside structural items such as windows, doors, and siding. 
(b)  HVAC inspection conducted by The Building Inspection Department: 
1)  Gas piping systems shall stand a pressure of six (6) inches mercury or three (3) PSI gauge for a period of not less than ten minutes without showing any drop in pressure. 
2)  When appliances are connected to the gas piping system, the entire system shall be pressurized to not less than ten (10) inches nor more than fourteen (14) inches water column and the appliance connections tested for leakage with soapy water or bubble solution. 
(c)  Electrical inspection shall be conducted by the Building Inspection and shall meet the requirements of the latest edition of the National Electrical Code. 
(d)  Smoke detectors shall be installed and operational using the mobile home's internal electrical wiring. At the minimum, a detector shall be located in the hallway(s) leading to the sleeping area(s). Detectors shall be Underwriter's Laboratories approved and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(4)  An annual location decal is required and shall be filed by the owner of a manufactured or mobile home located in the county. The filing is at the office of the tax commissioner. Homes having filed for a homestead exemption in the property tax assessor's office are excluded from such requirement. 
(5)  Permanent additions may be built onto any manufactured home or mobile home provided such addition or modification meets the requirements of the building code and the procedures outlined for developing a manufactured home park as applicable. 
(6)  Manufactured or mobile homes placed after the date of this article shall be required to have the following improvements at the manufactured or mobile home stand per the Manufactured Home Division of the Safety Fire Commissioner of the State of Georgia: 
(a)  Tiedowns: Each manufactured or mobile home shall be secured to ground anchors or other devices securing the stability of the manufactured or mobile home as outlined in the building code. 
(b)  Foundations: Foundations shall be installed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Georgia Installation Code for Manufactured Homes. 
(c)  Steps: Steps are required to be placed within 45 days of installation for all doors into the manufactured home and shall be at least 36 inches in width. If more than three steps are required, the steps shall be equipped with a hand railing. The improvements shall comply with the provisions of the building code. 
(d)  Any manufactured or mobile home located within the county shall be skirted within 45 days of installation. 
(e)  Any manufactured or mobile home located within the City must be placed on a masonry foundation or masonry piers with masonry curtain wall within 45 days of its installation. 
(7)  Any manufactured or mobile home that is damaged by fire, flood, explosion, wind or other catastrophe in any amount equal to or greater than 60 percent of its replacement value shall be removed and disposed of or repaired by the owner within 90 days after damage occurred unless a variance has been granted. 
(8)  Nonconforming manufactured or mobile home sites, parks or subdivisions lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this regulation may be continued; but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 12 months, the manufactured or mobile home site, park or subdivision shall be made to conform with the requirements of these regulations. 
c.  Exceptions: An exception to the provisions of this article may be granted based on medical hardship by authorized staff of the Planning Commission. An application for exception shall contain an affidavit of a physician showing at present lodging facilities are inadequate and that a hardship condition exists requiring the use of a manufactured home for the health care of a dependent of the occupant of the premises. The application shall attach a separate statement by the applicant that he/she recognizes the exception, if granted, is to last only as long as the health condition exists. 
An exception may also be granted in an area that has been officially declared a disaster area by federal, state, or local government. In such a case, an application for exception shall include a statement by the applicant that he/she is the owner of the premises; and that he/she recognizes the exception is temporary and shall last only until permanent housing can be repaired or replaced; no more than 180 days which period can be extended one time for 180 more days by Planning Department staff. 
In either case: 
(1)  Any change in the status of the occupant(s) justifying the granting of an exception, shall be reported to the City of Rome/Floyd County Building Inspection and/or Planning Office within 30 days. 
(2)  The applicant shall also state that he/she shall cause the removal of manufactured home on the termination of the exception and that upon failure to do so irrevocably grants the Governing Body the right to use equipment to remove the manufactured home from the premises at the applicant's expense. 
(3)  A manufactured home placed in this manner is not to be used as a rental property. It must be removed at the expense of the property owner, once the special medical or other need for which a variance was granted no longer exists. 
d.  Manufactured and mobile homes on individual lots. 
(1)  Manufactured and mobile homes situated on individual lots in the unincorporated county shall be required to meet the same location standards as other single-family units located within the same zoning district. 
(2)  Health Department approval will be required for every manufactured home and/or mobile home on a lot not connected to public sewer systems. Lot size shall be approved by the Health Department using appropriate percolation and/or soil test data. No septic tanks shall be allowed if public sewerage is available. All dwellings shall connect to the public sewer when such sewer is within 300 feet of the property being subdivided. 
(3)  All lots shall comply with the Flood Damage Prevention provisions of this Development Code. Each lot shall have thereon a viable homesite above the 100-year floodplain. 
(4)  Any manufactured home or mobile home placed on an individual lot within the city shall be compatible with single-family dwellings on surrounding lots for a distance of 100 feet or one block in any direction in terms of roof pitch, exterior wall treatment, and orientation relative to the street frontage. 
e.  Where private sewerage disposal systems are to be placed in front yard areas, setbacks shall be established by the Floyd County Health Department but shall not be less than 40 feet. 
f.  Manufactured home subdivisions. 
(1)  Manufactured home subdivisions shall be required to meet all the development standards of this Code. 
(2)  Manufactured and mobile homes situated on individual lots shall be required to meet the same standards for location as single-family dwelling units. Prior to the placement of the manufactured or mobile home on the lot, the owner shall submit a plot plan or an affidavit signed by the owner to the building inspection department that indicates the site complies with the provisions of this ordinance concerning the placement of such homes. 
(3)  Any manufactured or mobile home placed on an individual lot in a manufactured home subdivision within the city shall be compatible with single-family dwellings on surrounding lots for a distance of 100 feet or one block in any direction in terms of roof pitch, exterior wall treatment, and orientation relative to the street frontage. 
g.  Manufactured home parks: 
(1)  Approval of manufactured home parks: Procedures for developing a manufactured home park shall follow the same standards as specified for site plan approval outlined in Article 2. This Article relates to application submissions, approval processes, erosion and sediment control, design issues, grading, flood area management, etc. 
(2)  Site standards for manufactured home parks: 
(a)  Any park of ten units or more must be located on a road classified as an arterial as specified in the county road maintenance register or otherwise be on a state highway. Said park shall have a minimum street frontage of 300 feet. Parks with less than ten units shall be located on a major collector or higher functional street classification and have a minimum road frontage of 150 feet. 
(b)  Manufactured home parks shall front on a publicly maintained street. 
(c)  Manufactured home parks shall be served by a public water and sanitary sewer source. Any extension of public water lines shall be constructed in accordance with standards established by this Development Code for single-family dwellings. All water mains shall be at least six inches in diameter. Fire hydrants shall be readily accessible for fire department use. Hydrants shall be located so that each home or building in the park is within 500 feet of a hydrant. 
(d)  All manufactured home parks shall be served by a garbage collection system. Collection facilities may be provided for the entire community or at individual lots within each manufactured home park. The design for these facilities must be approved at the time of development plan approval. 
(e)  Each manufactured home shall be located on a lot having an area of 5,000 square feet and minimum building line width of 40 feet. 
(f)  Manufactured homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least sixteen (16) feet. Porches and decks without opaque tops or roofs shall be excluded from this requirement. 
(g)  One accessory storage building is allowed on an individual lot. The maximum size shall not exceed 120 square feet. 
(h)  All structures shall be set back from any exterior property line of the manufactured home park by 40 feet. 
(i)  One or more recreation areas shall be provided within those manufactured home parks having ten or more units. Such recreation area shall constitute a minimum of five percent of the space designated for residential lots. All such recreation areas shall be so designated on the development for the park and shall not be converted to use as a manufactured home lot. Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic and safety hazards. At least 50 percent of the recreational open space land shall be of a character suitable for active recreation, such as playgrounds or ball fields. 
(j)  All interior roadways are to be surfaced with a material such as asphalt, chert, gravel, etc., to a width of 12 feet for one-way streets or to a width of 18 feet for two-way streets and maintained by the manufactured home park owner. 
(k)  Areas not surfaced or built over shall be planted in grass or other suitable vegetative cover. 
(l)  Adequate security lighting shall be provided for the manufactured home park. 
(m)  The location of electrical cables, gas piping, water piping, and sewer lines buried underground shall be indicated by an above ground sign(s) or underground marker tapes identifying the proximity of the lines. A plot plan showing the as-built location of underground utility lines shall be provided to the Building Inspector. 
4.1.13. - Personal care homes. 
a.  In all residential districts, a personal care home of more than two persons (family, group or congregate) shall be at least 1,500 feet from any other personal care home of any type. 
b.  In all residential districts, the square footage of an existing dwelling shall not be enlarged by more than 25 percent of the existing to facilitate use of the structure as a personal care home. Exterior modification of an existing dwelling and provision of required parking shall be consistent with the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood; i.e., in design, scale, and number of vehicles allowed. 
c.  New construction in a residential neighborhood shall be consistent with the residential character and scale of the surrounding neighborhood. 
d.  Personal care homes of all types shall maintain all applicable federal and/or state license and/or permits. 
4.1.14. - Photographic studio. 
a.  No commodities may be sold other than photographs of customers made by the studio and items accessory to and sold in conjunction with those photographs. 
b.  On-site film processing and printing is solely for the studio's use. 
c.  No custom framing or other non-photography work may be performed as part of the business. 
a.  Quarrying and mining includes removal, extraction and/or processing of any dirt, sand, soil, clay, rock, gravel, minerals, gas, oil or other fuels for sale or removal from the property in its extracted form, finished form or as a component of another product. Borrow pits are permitted where less than one and one-tenth acres of land will be disturbed. 
b.  Prior to initiation of mining activities an application for a Special Use Permit must be submitted to the Planning Commission. Such application must provide: 
(1)  Written stipulations that the activity will not have any harmful impacts on the environment (air, water, natural landscape), neighboring residents and businesses, or to livestock. 
(2)  A specific site plan and time schedule for completion of mining operations. 
(3)  Information as to how the operation will be buffered and methods to assure that no harmful off-site impacts will occur. 
(4)  A transportation plan detailing routes to be used by vehicles serving the site, weight limits and traffic volumes. 
(5)  Information on hours of operation and procedures (on and off-site) related to any on-site blasting that might occur. 
(6)  Adequate financial bonding for damages (to be determined by the governing body). 
c.  The removal area shall be completely enclosed with a fence not less than six feet in height. 
d.  An earthen berm shall be provided that shields all operations from ground level view along all property lines. 
e.  Drainage plans and a plan for the development of the site when the removal is completed shall be submitted with the application for a development permit. 
f.  This section shall not prohibit the removal of earth and rock and filling and grading in any district done for land development purposes, upon issuance of a development permit in accordance with this Development Code. 
g.  These uses shall be established only on a site of not less than 200 acres. 
4.1.16. - Recreation and entertainment. 
(1)  Special Outdoor Entertainment, Concert or Event of Community Interest. 
(a)  Such activities shall not exceed 14 days and may not occur more often than twice in any calendar year. 
(b)  Adequate parking and traffic maneuvering space must be located on the same property as the special event. 
(c)  Such activities shall not be conducted within 100 feet from any property line. 
(d)  No programs involving music or amplified sound may be presented within 200 feet of any residential zoning district or residence. 
(e)  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
(f)  Lighting shall be established so that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and shall be in accordance with Article 6 - "Site Design Standards." 
(2)  Carnival, Rodeo, Horse Show, Community Fairs, Fairgrounds and Amusement Parks. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in the section above, the following additional requirements shall apply: 
(a)  These uses shall not be permitted within 500 feet of the property line of an adjacent residence. 
(b)  Facilities shall be enclosed by a wall or fence not less than 5 feet in height. 
(3)  Outdoor Special Events Venues. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in the section above, the following additional requirements shall apply: 
(a)  Site plans shall be approved by the Planning Commission to ensure compatibility of the facility with the neighborhood in which it is to be located. 
(b)  Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
(4)  Golf Courses and Club Houses, Private Neighborhood Recreation Centers or Swimming Pools, Noncommercial Club or Lodge, Planetarium, Aquarium, Botanical Gardens, and Other Natural Exhibitions. 
(a)  Any building or structure shall be set back 100 feet from any property line except where such property line is a street line. In such cases, the front yard setback established for the district shall apply. When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line set back shall not be required. 
(b)  Site plans shall be approved by the Planning Commission to ensure compatibility of the facility with the neighborhood in which it is to be located. 
(c)  A fence having a height of not less than 6 feet shall enclose a swimming pool. Swimming pools shall be permitted only upon written approval of the health department to indicate compliance with health department swimming pool regulations. 
(d)  Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
(e)  No fraternal club or lodge may be permitted in a residentially zoned district. 
(5)  Wedding Chapels and Indoor Special Event Venues. 
(a)  Any building or structure must comply with the same front, side, and rear setbacks as required in each zoning district. When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line set back shall not be required. 
(b)  Adequate parking as per Section 6.8 and traffic maneuvering space must be located on the same property as the special event. 
(c)  Site plans shall be approved by the Planning Commission to ensure compatibility of the facility with the neighborhood in which it is to be located. 
(d)  Programs involving music or amplified sound must be presented indoors. 
b.  Golf Courses and Club Houses, Private Neighborhood Recreation Centers or Swimming Pools, Noncommercial Club or Lodge, Planetarium, aquarium, botanical gardens, and other natural exhibitions. 
(1)  In addition to the requirements set forth in the section above, the following additional requirements shall apply: 
(a)  Any building or structure shall be set back 100 feet from any property line except where such property line is a street line. In such case, the front yard setback established for the district shall apply. When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback shall not be required. 
(b)  Site plans shall be approved by the Planning Commission to ensure compatibility of the facility with the neighborhood in which it is to be located. 
(c)  A fence having a height of not less than six feet shall enclose a swimming pool. Swimming pools shall be permitted only upon written approval of the health department to indicate compliance with health department swimming pool regulations. 
(d)  Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
(e)  No fraternal club or lodge may be permitted in a residentially zoned district. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04-05, § II, 4-27-15) 
4.1.17. - Repair services. 
a.  All activities shall be conducted within a building or fenced area, involving no outdoor storage of materials, equipment, or items being repaired, unless elsewhere permitted in the district. 
b.  Any outside storage shall be confined to the rear of the property and shall be visually screened in accordance with the buffer standards in Article 6—"Site Design Standards." 
c.  Such activity shall not generate noise, odors, or fumes that can be detected beyond the walls of the building in which the use is housed. 
4.1.18. - Retirement, convalescent, assisted living centers or nursing homes.Minimum site area of two acres shall be provided for retirement, convalescent, assisted living centers or nursing homes. 
4.1.19. - Sewage treatment plants. 
a.  The directors of the county health and water and sewer departments and the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources shall approve the design and operation of such facility. 
b.  Any building or structure comprising the facility shall be set back 100 feet from any property line. 
4.1.20. - Sexually oriented adult uses.Sexually oriented adult uses shall comply with all requirements regarding "adult entertainment establishments" of the Code of Ordinances of the applicable Jurisdiction. 
4.1.21. - Solid waste disposal sites.The same requirements outlined under the "mining" shall apply to solid waste disposal sites, however, substitution of "land fill" activities should be made for "mining" activities. 
4.1.22. - Temporary sales office for a subdivision.A temporary sales office, where otherwise allowed, shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  The temporary sales office shall be located on a lot within an area that has received Final Plat approval and has been recorded with the Clerk to the Superior Court. 
b.  Sales shall be limited to the lots and buildings within the subdivision where the temporary sales office is located. 
c.  The temporary sales office may not be a portable building that is transferred to the site as a unit. 
d.  The temporary sales office shall cease to exist within 30 days after Certificates of Occupancy have been issued on 80 percent of the lots in the subdivision. 
4.1.23. - Townhouse subdivisions.Townhouse developments in which each dwelling unit is to be located on a separate lot must comply with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Number of dwelling units per building: At least three but no more than ten. 
b.  Staggered front facades: The dwelling units in a building shall be staggered, singly or in pairs, by at least three feet. 
c.  Minimum lot width: The average width for the units in a single building shall be 20 feet, with no lot being less than 18 feet wide. 
d.  Minimum lot area: The minimum area per lot for the units in a single building shall be 2,400 square feet. 
e.  Minimum building separation: 20 feet. 
4.1.24. - Utility company substation.Such use must be approved as a Special Use and must be enclosed within a woven or solid fence at least six feet high. Buffering of this use shall be provided in accordance with Article 6—"Site Design Standards." No storage of vehicles or portable equipment will be allowed. 
a.  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
b.  No animals shall be housed or caged outside the principal building in an O-I or a C-C District. 
c.  Noncommercial kennels (facilities accommodating three or more animals) on residentially zoned property shall be located on a site of not less than one acre. 
4.1.26. - Warehouse and storage.A buffer that meets the provisions of Article 6—"Site Design Standards", shall screen any storage area. 
a.  Petroleum bulk stations. Any structures or buildings shall be at least 200 feet from any property line. 
b.  Unless otherwise permitted within the district: 
(1)  No outdoor storage of goods. 
(2)  No fabrication of goods. 
(3)  No processing of goods handled in a manner that produces liquid or solid waste or noise, odor, fumes, or dust which can be detected beyond the walls of the building in which such wholesaling activity is housed. 
Single-Family Attached Dwelling in which each dwelling unit is to be located on a separate lot must comply with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Each housing unit must comply with all current requirements of the Building Codes as adopted by the Governing Body and, if applicable, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act for single family dwellings. 
b.  Housing units must be served by public water and sewerage. 
c.  Housing units, including Type V construction, must be separated by a common party wall. The common party wall must be a parapet wall and meet the standards adopted by the Governing Body and, if applicable, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
d.  Number of dwelling units per building: Two units. 
e.  Minimum road frontage: 40 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
g.  Minimum lot area: Minimum area per lot will be 4,250 square feet. 
h.  Minimum front and rear yard setbacks shall be those required for principle structures in the zoning district. Minimum side yard setbacks shall be those required for principle structures in the zoning district or shall be zero feet on the side where two units join. 
4.1.29. - Accessory Apartment.Where otherwise permitted, an accessory apartment must comply with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  The footprint of an existing primary dwelling or an existing detached garage shall not be increased or expanded to accommodate an accessory apartment. 
b.  The principle residential building located on the lot must be occupied by the owner of that property. 
c.  Only one accessory apartment shall be permitted per lot. 
d.  An accessory apartment shall preserve the character of the single-family pattern of development of the neighborhood and remain visually subordinate to the principal residential building. 
e.  The floor area of an accessory apartment shall not exceed 750 square feet or 40 percent of the floor area of the principal building, whichever is less. 
f.  One off-street parking space on the same lot shall be provided for the accessory apartment. 
(a)  All units shall be accessed from the interior of the building. 
(b)  No outdoor storage shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 03-7-11, § I, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 04-3-7, § I, 3-1-04; Ord. No. 04-6-4, § VII, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 05-6-9, § III, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 06-3-5, § I, 3-20-06; Ord. No. 06-6-2, § II, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 07-1-5, § I, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 2007-2-10, §§ III-V, 2-19-07; Ord. No. 2007-2-11, § VII, 2-19-07; Ord. No. 2011-2-5, § I, 2-7-11; Ord. No. 2011-8-2, § I, 8-2-11; Ord. No. 2012-10-3, § II, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 2013-2-3, § I, 2-25-13) 
4.1.31. - Mobile food vehicle park.Mobile food vehicle parks shall comply with the following: 
1)  Mobile Food Vehicle Parks are permitted within both the C-C Community Commercial and H-C Heavy Commercial Districts with a Special Use Permit. 
2)  Mobile food vehicle parks shall be subject to all guidelines and restrictions set by the Unified Land Development Code, including, but not limited to, landscaping, buffers, storm water management, provision of paved parking on site, and lighting. 
3)  At least three parking spaces per mobile food vehicle shall be provided on-site. Drive aisles shall be designed and constructed in such a way that all mobile food vehicles and seating areas can be accessed by emergency vehicles. 
4)  Mobile food vehicle park operators are responsible for all lessee operations and ordinance compliance and are held responsible for all infractions. A mobile food vehicle park operator must be present at all times during operation. 
5)  No special events, including but not limited to, concerts, farmers markets, flea markets, or meetings/gatherings of any sort shall be held within a mobile food vehicle park. 
6)  Electrical hook-ups must be provided for each mobile food vehicle, generators shall not be allowed unless such generators operate at less than 80 decibels as measured ten feet away; and at least one accessible water tap shall be provided. 
7)  Permanent restroom facilities that comply with health department standards and accessibility standards as set forth in the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended, shall be provided on-site. 
8)  Mobile food vehicle park operators shall be responsible for properly disposing of refuse, trash, and litter generated by operation of the mobile food vehicle park, as would any business; and shall not place it in any public trash container, or in any private container without proper permission. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06-01, § II, 6-8-15) 
4.1.32. - Residential cluster option. 
a.  Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose of these regulations to allow development of clustered dwelling units as a means to increase the stock of affordable housing. It is intended to permit multiple single-family dwelling units on lots of 1-2 acres in size where services and utilities exist to accommodate higher densities. 
b.  General Standards. 
1)  Clustered developments shall include attached and detached single-family dwelling units on a single lot. Dwelling units shall be site-built or modular homes that meet state and/or local standards and codes. 
2)  Attached and detached dwelling units shall be set back no less than ten (10) feet from each other, measured from their nearest edge. 
3)  Required parking spaces shall be located within 50' of the front door of each dwelling unit, shall be in clusters of six or less, and shall be accessible from a public street or road or a driveway that meets the standards of Section 6.10. 
c.  Variances and Special Exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 2.11, variances, special exceptions, or appeals from any of the requirements, standards, and conditions of this article must be approved by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12-03, § V, 12-19-16) 
4.1.33. - Recreational Vehicle Park or Campgrounds. 
The following standards shall apply to all recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds: 
a.  Zoning Requirements. Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds are permitted within the A-R Agricultural Residential, S-R Suburban Residential, M-R Multifamily Residential, C-C Community Commercial and H-C Heavy Commercial Districts with a Special Use Permit. 
b.  Customary Accessory Uses. Customary accessory uses for recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds may include: 
(1)  Office and dwelling for park manager or night watchperson; 
(2)  Community sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Community laundry facilities; 
(4)  Recreational areas; 
(5)  Small scale (3,000 square feet or less) commercial uses supplying essential goods and services for the exclusive use of park patrons. 
c.  General Standards. 
(1)  All proposed and required water sources and sanitary facilities serving recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds shall conform to the requirements of the Georgia Department of Public Health "Rules and Regulations, Tourist Accommodation, Chapter 511-6-2" as appropriate and shall follow all applicable state and/or local guidelines and standards. 
(2)  Conventional, industrialized and manufactured houses are prohibited on all recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds. 
(3)  Camping shall be restricted to no more than 60 days in a calendar year. 
(4)  With the exception of driveways, parking areas, and campsites all grounds shall be maintained with grass, trees and/or shrubs to enhance the appearance of the park and to prevent soil erosion or the creation of dust during dry weather. A landscaped buffer shall be required along a side or rear lot line that abuts 1- or 2-family residential zoning districts. Buffer design standards and requirements shall meet the requirements of Article 6, Section 6.16 of this Code. 
(5)  Parks designed to accommodate 15 or more campsites shall provide one or more outdoor recreation areas. 
(6)  All interior roadways are to be surfaced with a material such as asphalt, chert, gravel, etc., to a width of 12 feet for one-way streets or to a width of 18 feet for two-way streets and maintained by the recreational vehicle park owner. 
d.  Recreational Vehicle and Campground Standards. 
(1)  Each campsite within the park shall have lot lines that are clearly delineated and shall have a minimum area of not less than 1,500 square feet. 
(2)  The facility shall be designed to accommodate 20 feet, edge-to-edge, of separation between campsites and shall be located no less than 30 feet from any exterior property line. 
(3)  Each campsite with individual parking shall contain at least one reinforced surface parking space incorporated into the site itself and shall be level from side to side with sufficient crown to provide adequate drainage. 
(4)  Each campsite shall have access to a minimum of one electrical outlet, and one water tap. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12-04, § II, 12-19-16) 
4.2. - Accessory uses and structures. 
The following specific requirements apply to each of the following accessory uses or structures in all zoning districts where each use is otherwise permitted. 
a.  Accessory buildings and structures having a floor area of 144 square feet or less must be at least five feet from any property line. 
b.  Accessory buildings having a floor area greater than 144 square feet must comply with the same front, side and rear yard setbacks as required for principal buildings in each zoning district; except that in single-family and duplex residential districts (H-TR, L-TR, NOC, S-R and D-R), accessory buildings must be at least 5 feet from any side or rear property line; unless specific setbacks are provided under Article 4. 
a.  No accessory use or structure shall be allowed on any lot except in relation to an existing principal use on the lot to which it is accessory. 
b.  Accessory structures shall not be permitted in a required front or side setback, except wherein specifically provided below. In a residential district, no accessory structure shall be located closer to an adjacent street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
c.  Residential accessory uses shall not be rented or occupied for gain. 
d.  No accessory building shall be constructed until construction of the principal building has commenced or the principal use has been established. 
e.  On a corner lot in a residential district, no accessory building shall be located closer to either street right-of-way than the principal building. 
f.  Canopies shall conform to the minimum building setback requirements for principal buildings in each zoning district. 
g.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by breezeway, passageway, or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is an accessory use. 
h.  No nonresidential accessory building shall be used by other than employees of the owner, lessee, or tenant of the premises. 
4.2.3. - Customary accessory uses to a dwelling.Each of the following uses is considered to be a customary accessory use to a dwelling and may be situated on the same lot with the principal use to which it serves as an accessory. 
Customary home occupations and associated uses, including hobbies and retirement avocations, require a Special Use Permit only if within a residence or an additional structure is required on the property. Any customary accessory residential use is allowed that does not conflict with the general appearance of a residential community, with specific restrictions as follows: 
a.  Private garage not to exceed the following storage capacities; one or two-family dwelling, four automobiles; multi-family dwelling, two automobiles per dwelling unit; group dwelling, 1½ automobiles per sleeping room. 
b.  Outdoor parking area for motor vehicles, provided that such space does not exceed the maximum respective storage capacities listed in (1)[a.] above; and provided that such space shall not be used for more than one commercial vehicle per family residing on the premises. 
c.  Detached Home Office and/or Studio for exclusive use by the residence owner or immediate family members as occupants of the residence, provided such space is incorporated within a detached garage, guest quarters, or storage facility and can meet all rear and side setback requirements. 
d.  Shed or tool room for the storage of equipment used in grounds or building maintenance. 
e.  Children's playhouse and play equipment. 
f.  Non-commercial greenhouse. 
g.  Quarters for the keeping of pets owned by occupants for non-commercial purposes provided that such use does not generate a nuisance to adjoining properties. 
h.  Private recreational facility, such as a swimming pool and bathhouse or cabana, tennis court, deck or patio. These uses shall conform to the minimum setback requirements for principal buildings in each zoning district. Swimming pools shall be permitted only upon written approval of the health department to indicate compliance with applicable health department regulations. Pools must be enclosed by a six-foot fence or wall with a locking gate. 
i.  Accessory uses in an apartment development may include laundry facilities for the convenience of residents which are housed in a primary use structure. 
j.  Structures designed and used for purposes of shelter in the event of man-made or natural catastrophes. 
k.  Guest Houses. Where otherwise permitted, a guesthouse must comply with the following: 
(1)  The guesthouse must be an accessory use to a single-family detached dwelling already existing on the lot. 
(2)  The guesthouse must meet or exceed the Standards of this Code for class A Single-Family Dwellings. 
(3)  A guesthouse shall be permitted only on a lot having at least 20,000 square feet in area. 
(4)  The guesthouse must be placed to the rear of the main house at least 20 feet away. 
(5)  No more than one guesthouse may be located on any lot. 
(6)  The building floor area of the guesthouse may not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the main house. 
l.  Residential Home Office. 
(1)  Permitted Activities. A residential home office shall be limited to the personal conduct of a business within one's place of residence. There shall be no exterior indication that the business activity is taking place, including signage. This provision is intended to allow work to be conducted at home by individuals employed by an offsite employer. 
These provisions do not apply to dwellings that are located on properties where agricultural activities are the principal use. 
(2)  Limitations on Size and Location. 
(a)  Not more than 25 percent, not to exceed 300 square feet of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used for all of the activities devoted to the home office. 
(b)  The use shall be carried on wholly within the principal building. The attachment of an accessory building by a breezeway, roof, or similar structure shall not be deemed as sufficient for the accessory building to be considered as a portion of the primary building. 
(c)  There shall be no activity or display associated with the home office outside of any building or structure. 
(d)  There shall be no alteration of the residential character of the building or premises. 
(3)  Activity Controls. 
(a)  Sales. There shall be no exchange of merchandise of any kind on the premises. 
(b)  Transfer of goods. There shall be no goods, products or commodities received on the premises. 
(c)  Personal services. There shall be no activities on the premises that are associated with personal service occupations such as a barber shop, beauty shop, hairdresser or similar activities. 
(d)  Employees. There shall be no associates or employees on the premises other than other members of the family who reside on the premises. 
(e)  Outsiders and nonresidents on the premises. There shall be no non-resident persons on the premises in conjunction with the home office. 
(4)  Parking. 
(a)  There shall be no parking spaces provided or designated specifically for the home office other than as is required for the residence. 
(b)  No equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises except that one business vehicle (the carrying capacity of which shall not exceed 1 ½ tons) used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage, or rear or side yard. 
(5)  Signs. Signage shall comply with the sign standards for residential districts contained in Article 5—"Sign Regulations." 
m.  Residential Business. Residential businesses shall meet the requirements of "home office" above with the following additional exceptions: 
(1)  Permitted Activities. 
(a)  Approved activities may be engaged in by persons who reside on the premises of the residential business and who are appropriately qualified and licensed, including business licenses where required: 
1)  Artistic. This group shall include activities such as teaching, creation and production by professional artists, sculptors, craftspeople (craft-makers), musicians, writers and others who produce work on the premises for individual purchases, as differentiated from mass production or manufacturing. 
2)  Business. This includes commercial trade activities such as those conducted by a manufacturer's representative or telephone salesperson, but not involving the delivery of goods or services directly to customers on the premises. 
(2)  Limitations on Size and Location. 
(a)  Not more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used for all of the activities devoted to the residential business. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and structures may be used for the residential business, but in no case shall the total area of the accessory structure devoted to such use be greater than 500 square feet. 
(c)  If parts of the dwelling unit and an accessory structure are devoted to a residential business, no more than 1,000 square feet of combined gross floor area shall be used for such activity, including no more than 30 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit. 
(3)  Activity Controls. There shall be no exchange of merchandise of any kind on the premises except for those products produced on the premises as a direct result of the residential business. 
(4)  Personal Services. There shall be no activities on the premises that are associated with personal service occupations such as a barber shop, beauty shop, hairdresser or similar activities unless specifically permitted as part of the Special Use approval. 
(5)  Outsiders and nonresidents on the premises. There shall not be more than two (2) nonresident persons on the premises at the same time in conjunction with the residential business whether they are students, clients, or customers. 
(6)  Hours of Operation. The Residential Business shall not be operated between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day except Sunday. On Sunday, the Residential Business shall not be open before 1:00 p.m. or after 7:00 p.m. 
(7)  Parking. 
(a)  One off-street paved parking space for each 150 square feet of floor area devoted to the home occupation shall be provided in addition to the required parking for the residential use of the building. 
n.  Personal Horse Stable. A personal horse stable may be permitted as an accessory use to a residence provided that at least one acre of lot area is provided for each horse stabled on the property. 
o.  Keeping chickens within the City Limits of Rome. The following is a list of possible conditions that may be attached to a Special Use Permit to allow the keeping of a small number of domesticated female chickens (hens) on a noncommercial basis as an accessory use to a single-family dwelling: 
(1)  Chickens shall not be kept on a lot of record that is less than 30,000 square feet. 
(2)  Chickens will be kept in a manner consistent with good animal husbandry practices and in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and ordinances. 
(3)  No more than four female chickens as pets or for egg production may be kept. No roosters may be kept. 
(4)  No other types of fowl, including but not limited to ducks, geese, turkeys, quail, pigeons, guinea fowl, or peafowl may be kept. There is no restriction on chicken species. 
(5)  No butchering of chickens may be done. No eggs, meat, fertilizer, or live chickens may be sold, or provided for use by anyone other than the residents of the property where the chickens are kept. 
(6)  Chickens shall be provided with adequate food and water at all times. 
(7)  Chickens must be kept on the lot of record where the primary use (dwelling) is located. 
(8)  Chickens shall be housed within a coop or henhouse. The coop or henhouse shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)  The coop or henhouse shall be located in a side or rear yard as defined in Article 8. In no case shall a coop or henhouse be located in a front yard as defined in Article 8. 
(b)  The coop or henhouse shall be constructed of uniform material designed to be used in the outdoors, and not of scrap lumber, sheet metal, interior grade paneling or plywood, or similar materials. The structure shall have a solid roof and be enclosed on all sides. The door providing access shall be able to be shut and locked at night. 
(c)  The structure shall provide four square feet of floor space for each chicken and shall not exceed seven feet in height. 
(d)  The coop or henhouse shall be secured against predators such as rodents, reptiles, dogs, cats, and wild birds; shall provide shelter from sun, precipitation, and wind; and shall provide adequate ventilation. 
(e)  The coop or henhouse shall be located no near than 30 feet to a property line. 
(f)  A building permit is required for the construction of a coop or henhouse. 
(9)  Chickens may be allowed outside of the coop in a securely fenced pen and with supervision. 
(10)  At all times, keeping of chickens shall be conducted in a manner that ensures adjacent properties and neighborhoods are not adversely impacted. 
(a)  In no case shall chickens be allowed to leave the property where they are kept. 
(b)  Coops or henhouses and pens shall be maintained in good condition, shall effectively confine the chickens, and shall be secured against all predators. 
(c)  Chicken feed shall be kept in a closed container so wild birds, insects, and other animals are not attracted to the property. 
(d)  Manure and food waste shall be cleaned from coops or henhouses and pens on a regular basis, stored in a covered container, and properly disposed of or composted and used as fertilizer. 
(e)  Odors from chickens, manure, or other substances related to the keeping of chickens shall not be perceptible at any property boundary. 
(f)  Noise from chickens shall not be loud enough at the property boundary to disturb persons of reasonable sensitivity. 
(g)  Chickens that are diseased or carry a disease, are infested with parasites, or are found to be kept in an unsafe or unhealthy manner shall be destroyed. 
(h)  Dead chickens shall be disposed of promptly in a sanitary manner. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, controlling, or keeping domesticated animals to allow the premises to become filthy or unsanitary. 
a.  As an accessory use to an automobile service station: 
(1)  The lot for the primary use must be at least 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  The use shall not occupy more than ten percent of the lot area. 
(3)  Parking areas shall be located only in portions of the lot where off-street parking is permitted. This area shall not occupy spaces set aside for required off-street parking or use by cars awaiting service. 
a.  District Use, Materials and Height Limitations. 
(1)  Agricultural—Residential, Office, Commercial, Multifamily, and Industrial Districts. 
(a)  No fence or free-standing wall may exceed eight feet in height, unless approved by the Planning Commission to adequately shield objectionable materials or activities. 
(b)  Fences or free-standing walls occupying the front yard may not exceed four feet in height unless constructed parallel to the front of the building (parallel fences shall not exceed six feet in height), with the exception of agricultural and heavy industrial uses. Any fence or free-standing wall occupying the front yard must be designed and located to ensure that it does not create a hazard for vehicles or pedestrians. 
(c)  Security wire may only be used in heavy commercial and industrial districts. However, barbed wire fences are permitted on properties where an agricultural activity is the principal use. 
(2)  In the Single-Family Residential zoning districts, the following shall apply: 
(a)  A fence or free-standing wall in any yard adjacent to a street may not exceed four feet in height. Any fence or free-standing wall occupying the front yard must be designed and located to ensure that it does not create a hazard for vehicles or pedestrians. 
(b)  A fence or free-standing wall in any side or rear yard may not exceed six feet in height. 
b.  Setback limitations. There shall be no minimum setback for fences or free-standing walls, provided that any fence or free-standing wall shall not obstruct visibility at street intersections and driveway accesses. 
a.  Must be approved as an accessory use to a retail use permitted by right. 
b.  Such manufacturing or fabrication activity may not be considered a heavy industrial use. 
c.  May occupy no more than 1,000 square feet of floor area, 
d.  All products made on the premises must be sold on the premises as a retail activity. 
a.  A residence for a night watchman, approved as a Special Use accessory to a business or industrial operation, may be any of the following: 
(1)  Site-built single-family detached dwelling or manufactured home. 
(2)  Located within a commercial or industrial structure. 
b.  Night watchman residences shall conform to the minimum setback requirements for principal buildings in each zoning district. 
a.  The following merchandise or goods may be located in outdoor display areas on a permanent basis if for sale, lease or rent (where the use is otherwise permitted): 
(1)  Motorized vehicles that are in good running condition free from exterior damage or substantial wear. 
(2)  Power boats and sailboats. 
(3)  Manufactured homes and utility buildings. 
(4)  Plant nursery items. 
(5)  Light building materials such as lumber, patio pavers, and decorative stone; yard furniture such as benches, swings, and bird baths; and yard maintenance materials such as fertilizer, mulch, straw, and seed. 
b.  All other outdoor display of merchandise or goods shall be conducted on a temporary basis associated with special sales promotions. Such display shall be for a period not to exceed two weeks, and shall not occur more often than three times per year. 
c.  Any area outside of a building where merchandise or goods are located but which is permanently screened by a fence or free-standing wall at least six feet in height shall not be considered an outdoor display area. 
4.2.9. - Outdoor storage.Outdoor storage, where the use is otherwise permitted, is limited as follows: 
a.  In the Community Commercial, Heavy Commercial and Light Industrial zoning districts, outside storage of materials is only permitted in the rear yard and shall be screened from view by an opaque fence or free-standing wall no less than eight feet in height. 
b.  In the Heavy Industrial District, any storage use operated as a principal use or accessory use on a property shall be contained entirely within a building or shall be screened from view by an opaque fence or free-standing wall no less than eight feet in height. 
c.  Rear yard setbacks must be a minimum of five feet for any storage building or structure. 
4.2.10. - Private use airport or heliport.As an accessory use approved as a Special Use, a private use airport or heliport shall meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  The development of a private use airport or heliport shall be in accordance with the guidelines specified in the Federal Aviation Administration. 
b.  Private use heliports shall, as a minimum, have a takeoff and landing area one and one-half times the overall length of the largest helicopter expected to use the facility. The surface of the area shall be grassed, paved or treated as may be required to minimize dust or blowing debris. 
c.  The owner of a private use airport or heliport shall erect a safety barrier around the peripheral area surrounding the takeoff and landing area. The safety barrier shall be a fence, wall or hedge no less than four feet in height and fully enclosed with a self-locking gate. 
4.2.11. - Retail uses in office building.An office building may contain retail stores, so long as they occupy no more than 25 percent of the total ground floor area of the building. 
4.2.12. - Responsibility for notification on special conditions.All conditions or special requirements placed on the approval of a Special Use Permit or Conditional Use, including special exceptions for medical and/or other issues associated with granting a hardship exception, must be fully documented in the minutes of the approving body (City or County Commission or Board of Adjustments), and a certified copy transmitted to the Rome/Floyd County Building Inspection Department for enforcement. Such items shall be recorded, flagged, and monitored for enforcement of specific deadlines and/or permitted allowances by the Zoning Enforcement Inspector. 
a.  Small wind energy systems shall be permitted as an accessory use provided the system has a rated capacity of ten kilowatts or less in residential districts, 60 kilowatts or less in agricultural districts, and 60 kilowatts or less in commercial or industrial districts. 
b.  System height: The total system height shall not exceed 65 feet, except on property of over five acres located in agricultural, commercial or industrial zones in which the total system height shall not exceed 150 feet. System height is the vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind turbine blade when it is at its highest point. 
c.  Setback: No part of the system may be closer than one and one-half times the total system height to any property boundary. 
d.  Sound level: The noise level from the small wind energy system shall not exceed 55 decibels using the A scale (dBA), as measured at the site property line. 
e.  Code compliance: The small wind energy system shall comply with all applicable sections of the Building Code and Federal Aviation Administration regulations. 
f.  Clearance of blade: No portion of the small wind energy system's blade sweep shall extend within 20 feet of the ground or over parking areas, driveways, or sidewalks. 
g.  Abandonment: Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall physically remove the small wind energy system within 90 days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. This period may be extended at the request of the owner and at the discretion of the chief building official. 
The small wind energy systems shall not be located within 200 feet of a federal, state, or locally designated historic district. 
In the C-C-, H-C, and L-I districts, mold pouring of concrete products, including but not limited, storm shelters, septic tanks, burial vaults, and lawn ornaments shall be allowed if all operations, including but not limited to mixing, pouring, drying, painting, and display are carried out within a building. 

a.  Production of limited quantities of alcohol for human consumption shall be permitted by Special Use Permit in the A-R District in conjunction with an established, conforming agricultural operation. Production of beer/malt beverages only shall be permitted as an accessory use in the C-C, C-B-C, or U-M-U Districts. 
b.  Approval shall be based on submittal of a site plan detailing building location, access, and parking. All applicable standards of the Unified Land Development Code will apply, except as noted in this Article, including parking lot design, vehicle access design, signage, buffers, and landscaping. The plan shall include a statement detailing waste product disposal and a safety plan for construction, operation, maintenance and transport that has been approved by both the Fire Marshal and the Building Official. 
c.  Construction and operation of equipment and storage structures shall meet all applicable local, state, and federal standards, including but not limited to fire codes, air quality standards, and water quality standards. All applicable permits and licenses shall be obtained, including building, electrical, and plumbing permits. The owner/operator shall provide proof of such compliance. 
d.  The owner/operator shall also provide proof of compliance with the rules of the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
e.  Best practices for operation and maintenance shall be utilized to ensure that traffic, noise, odors, fumes, or lighting shall not create a nuisance for adjacent and nearby property owners. 
f.  The following standards should also apply to a Special Use Permit for a Farm Distillery or Winery in the A-R District: 
(1)  Production and storage equipment shall be within a containment facility capable of holding the contents of the production and storage equipment. 
(2)  Production and storage equipment shall be located a minimum of 100' from any property line, or from any structures inhabited by humans or primarily used for human activity. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 02-4-13, §§ I, II, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 02-11-11, § I, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 2008-2-3, § I, 2-4-08; Ord. No. 2009-1-3, § I, 1-5-09; Ord. No. 2010-7-1, § I, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 2012-5-7, § II, 5-21-12; ; Ord. No. 2013-1-4, § II, 1-28-13; Ord. No. 2013-3-3, § III, 3-25-13; Ord. No. 2017-3-7, § I, 3-27-17) 
4.2.17. - Solar farms and solar panels. 
Solar Farms shall be set back from the property line a minimum of 50' in every zoning district where allowed by right or by special use permit. 
Solar Panel Arrays shall be set back from the property line the same distance as is required for a primary building/use in each zoning district where they are allowed. All panels shall be constructed of non-reflective materials, or shall be treated with an anti-reflective material. Solar panel arrays shall be encircled by a security fence or wall a minimum of six feet tall. Screening vegetation shall be provided outside the security fence meeting the standards of article 6.16.3. 
Solar Panel Installations shall be set back from the property line the same distance as is required for a primary building/use in each zoning district where they are allowed. Solar panel installations mounted on a building or structure shall be on the side or rear of the property, facing away from a public right-of-way. Solar panel installations shall be positioned and/or screened in such a way that glare does not affect adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 2014-7-3, § III, 7-28-14; Ord. No. 2014-9-7, § I, 9-22-14) 
4.3. - Highly restricted. 
The following uses are permitted by special use permit and only within heavy industry districts. 
a.  Caustic or corrosive acids. 
b.  Chlorine or other noxious gasses. 
c.  Explosives. 
d.  Fertilizer or glue. 
e.  Products involving hair or fur. 
a.  Tanning or finishing of leather or other hides, except taxidermy. 
b.  The disposal of hazardous waste. 
c.  Petroleum refining. 
d.  Processing of sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast. 
e.  Rendering or refining of fats and oils. 
f.  Slaughterhouse. 
g.  Stockyard or animal feeding pens. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
ARTICLE 5. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

5.1. - Purpose. 
5.1.1. - Purpose of Article 5.This Article sets out the standards that control the number, type, and placement of signs on an individual property or building. In addition to the general purposes of this Ordinance, the purposes of these sign regulations are as follows: 
a.  To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and support economic development of the City and County; 
b.  To maintain and improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
c.  To minimize potential adverse effects of signs on nearby property; and, 
d.  To encourage the proper use of signs as a means of effective communication. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
5.2. - Applicability. 
a.  The regulations and requirements of this Article apply to all signs that are or are intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way or that are intended to be viewed from outdoor areas of public property. 
b.  Such signs are allowed only in conformance with these sign regulations, or as otherwise provided for nonconforming signs under Article 1 of this Ordinance. 
c.  All signs except billboards, real estate and real estate directional signs shall be considered as accessory uses and may be located only on properties where a principal use exists or is under construction. 
a.  No sign shall be erected or maintained where, by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape or color, it may obstruct the view of oncoming vehicles or impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or device. 
b.  No sign shall contain or be an imitation of an official governmental traffic control sign, signal, or emergency vehicle device. 
c.  No part of any sign shall be located in, over, or project into a public right-of-way except for awning signs, canopy signs, or projecting signs in the C-B-C zoning district. 
d.  No sign shall be erected, located, or maintained in such a manner as to interfere with safe and free ingress and egress of any door, emergency exit, driveway, street, or roadway. 
e.  No sign shall interfere with such utilities as water mains and hydrants, sanitary sewerage, gas, electricity, and communications equipment or lines, nor interfere with natural or manmade storm water drainage facilities. 
f.  No building sign shall extend above the top edge of the parapet or eaves of a flat or shed roof; the ridge line of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof; or the deck line of a mansard roof. 
g.  No sign shall be painted on or attached to a tree, utility pole, rock or other natural feature. 
h.  An inflatable sign shall be allowed only in association with a special event allowed under the provisions of Article 3. 
i.  Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are not allowed: 
(1)  Animated Sign: A sign with action, motion, changing colors, flashing lights, or moving characters. Such signs may require electrical energy, but shall also include wind-activated devices including, but not limited to, spinners, aerial devices, and other attention-getting devices. This prohibition does not include rotating signs that revolve no faster than five revolutions per minute or electronic message boards that change messages no more often than 12 times per minute. 
(2)  Derelict Sign: A sign that is dilapidated or in such condition as to create a hazard or nuisance, or to be unsafe or fail to comply with the Building or Electrical Codes. 
(3)  Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or similar material, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. The term "pennant" shall not include a "banner" or an "official or personal flag" as regulated herein. 
(4)  Portable Sign: A sign designed to be transported or easily relocated and not attached to the ground, such as: 
(a)  A sign designed to be temporarily placed upon the ground and not otherwise affixed to it. 
(b)  A sign mounted on a trailer, with or without wheels. 
(c)  An A-frame or sandwich board sign. 
(d)  A sign mounted or painted upon a parked vehicle that is positioned for the primary purpose of acting as a sign exposed to the public and is not in use in the ordinary course of carrying out its transportation function. 
(e)  A sign mounted or painted upon a vehicle that is operated on public streets for the primary purpose of presenting a message or symbol offering or supporting the sale, rent, lease, loan, or other availability of any property, product, or service, and is not otherwise in use in the normal course of transporting people, merchandise, or freight. 
(5)  Sound or Smoke Emitting Sign: A sign that emits or utilizes in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing; or a sign that emits smoke, vapor, particles, or odors. 
(6)  Streamer: A long narrow banner, pennant, or strip of fabric or other material. 
a.  Window displays of goods available on a site are not considered to be signs and are exempt from these sign regulations. 
b.  Brand names or logos on products, product containers, or dispensers that are an integral part of the product or the product's packaging are not considered to be signs and are exempt from these sign regulations. 
c.  A building design, color, or motif that is associated with a particular establishment or organization but which conveys no commercial message is not considered to be a sign and is exempt from these sign regulations. 
d.  Exempt Signs. Each of the following types of signs are allowed in any zoning district and are exempt from the restrictions imposed by this Article: 
(1)  Official Signs: Signs placed by a governmental body, governmental agency, or public authority, such as traffic signs, signals, or regulatory devices or warnings; official emblems, public notices, or official instruments; signs of historical interest; signs designating special events or areas of architectural or historic significance or gateways; or other similar signs or devices. Such signs are authorized within all rights-of-way or other properties controlled by such governmental body, agency, or authority. 
(2)  Warning Signs: Signs and notices on private property that warn of dangerous conditions or restricted access to property or buildings. Includes "No Trespassing" signs, "No Hunting" notices and pennants, streamers or other fluttering material used to increase the visibility of a wire or cable. 
(3)  Property Address Sign: A sign limited in content to the street name and address number of the building or property to which it is affixed, provided that such sign consist of lettering no larger than four inches in height on a building or two inches in height on a mailbox. 
(4)  Holiday Decorations: Displays erected on a seasonal basis in observance of religious, national, or state holidays, which are not intended to be permanent in nature and that contain no advertising material. 
(5)  Agricultural Production Process Sign: A sign placed in conjunction with an agricultural activity on a property that functions solely to assist in the conduct of the activity by marking the location of agricultural products, providing a warning to employees, or indicating an activity related to the production process. Examples include signs that mark row crops, designate loading areas, indicate smoking prohibitions, or designate the contents of storage structures. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
5.3. - General requirements. 
5.3.1. - Requirements applying to signs in all zoning districts. 
a.  Conformance to Other Codes. 
(1)  A permit shall be obtained from the Building Inspections Department prior to installation or placement of any free-standing sign having a sign structure area greater than 15 square feet or any building sign having a sign face area greater than six square feet. All signs for which a building permit is required shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with all Building Code and Electrical Code requirements. 
(2)  Plans required for issuance of a building permit for a sign shall be certified as to conformance with all structural and wind-load resistive standards of the Building Code by a structural engineer registered in the State of Georgia, or be prepared using standard drawings prepared by a structural engineer or other qualified professional meeting or exceeding all requirements of the Building Code. These provisions are excluded from any sign printed or affixed to a wall and/or pylon signs of less than 32 square feet or less than six feet tall. 
(3)  All signs involving internal lights or other electrical devices or circuits shall display a label certifying it as being approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. No electric sign may be installed that is not approved by the Underwriter's Laboratory, Inc. Each sign manufacturer's UL# and the UL#s of each individual sign must be provided as part of the sign permit application to prevent non-UL signs from being installed. 
(4)  All electrical service to a sign shall be in compliance with the Electrical Code. 
(5)  Clearance from all electrical power lines shall be in conformance with the requirements of the Electrical Code. 
b.  Sign Maintenance. All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in good repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, shall be given a protective coating as necessary to maintain a clean appearance and safe condition. 
c.  Principal Free-standing Signs. 
(1)  Each principal free-standing sign shall be located at least 75 feet from any other free-standing sign on an adjacent property on the same side of the street. This distance may be reduced upon approval by the Chief Building Official if it cannot be met due to the location of existing signs on separate but adjoining lots. Such reduction shall be the minimum required in order to maintain the greatest separation possible from such existing signs. 
(2)  Principal free-standing signs shall be located at least 37 feet from a side lot line, or one-half the width of the lot frontage, whichever is less, except on intersecting corners of corner lots where the setback must be ten feet from each side. A site drawing must be prepared and provided the Building Inspection Department when applying for a permit. 
(3)  A minimum of 25 square feet of landscaped area, exclusive of the sign structure, shall be located at the base of each principal freestanding sign. The landscaping shall consist of shrubs, ground covers, or other plants appropriate to the setting of the sign. This requirement is the responsibility of the property owner or tenant, not the sign company. 
(4)  There shall be a minimum of ten feet between any street right-of-way line and the nearest edge of a principal freestanding sign. Monument signs over 36 inches in height must be set back at least 20 feet from any street right-of-way. 
d.  Projecting, Awning, and Canopy Signs. 
(1)  Over Private Property: Projecting, awning, and canopy signs shall provide at least eight feet of clearance above the ground when erected over pedestrian walkways on private property and 17 feet of clearance when erected over driveways or other areas used for vehicles. Suspended canopy signs shall be at least four inches from the building face and at least eight inches from the edge of the canopy. 

Canopy Sign 
(2)  Over Public Property: Projecting, awning, and canopy signs that project over public property, such as a sidewalk along a public street, shall maintain a clear height of nine feet and shall extend not more than within 18 inches of the back of curb. 
(3)  Projecting and canopy signs shall be limited to no more than one per tenant on a property, and each tenant shall have no more than one projecting sign or canopy sign. 
(4)  These requirements exclude overhanging "Clearance Signs" over private drives used to warn drivers of low clearances under canopies, covered delivery/pickup area, etc. 
e.  Banners. Banners shall be allowed only as wall or window signage and shall be placed flush upon the wall or window to which it is attached. Banners shall not be hung as canopy signs, flown as flags, or used as any other form of sign. In addition to any other signage allowed, one (1) banner per street frontage is allowed. Area of banner shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
f.  Conformance with State Law. Any sign within 660 feet of a State or U.S. numbered highway that advertises or offers anything for sale or lease that is not located on the property where the sign is located must be zoned for commercial or industrial use, and must conform to the regulations of the Georgia Dept. of Transportation. 
For sign clearances under conductors or high tension lines of over 600 volts, see the National Electric Safety Code, ANSI C2-1996, Part 2, Safety Rules for Overhead Lines, Articles 234B1 through 234A3 which must be met. 
g.  Enforcement by Permit Number. With each permit issued under this Article, the Building Inspection Department shall issue a sticker bearing the same number(s) of the permit with which it is authorized (in One-Inch Numbers), to be affixed in the corner area of the sign nearest the street, so as to be easily seen. 
The absence of a proper sticker on a sign erected subsequent to the passage or adoption of this Code, shall be prima facie evidence that the sign has been erected in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
5.3.2. - Computation of sign area.In order to determine compliance with the maximum allowable sign areas permitted under this Article, the area of a sign shall be considered the area of the sign structure unless otherwise stated. The area of a sign structure and a sign face shall be computed as follows: 
a.  The area of a sign face shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of a sign face, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign face module, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
b.  The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the structure, supports or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those portions contained within the rectangle that delimits the sign face or a sign face module. 

Sign Face Area 
c.  For any sign on which the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements routinely change or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 

Examples of Sign Face Area Measurement 
d.  The area of a sign structure shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of the surface of a sign whereon the sign face or sign face modules may be placed, including all portions of a sign structure that provide a background for the sign face but are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
e.  Any open space contained within the limits of the rectangle delimiting the sign face, sign face module, or sign structure shall be included in the computation of the area of such sign face, sign face module, or sign structure. 
f.  For multi-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel (back-to-back), or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 45 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs, the area of the sign shall be the total area on all sides that can be viewed at one time from any angle. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
5.4. - Permitted signage. 
5.4.1. - By zoning district.The following table presents the maximum number, size, height, and other restrictions relating to specific signage that are permitted by right in each zoning district. 
a.  The "Principal Free-standing Sign—One Use on Property" category applies to a lot where there is only one single or two-family dwelling, one multi-family complex, or one business occupant. 
b.  The "Principal Free-standing Sign—Two or More Uses on Property" category applies to a single office, commercial or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately owned and have no corporate relationship. 
c.  For building signs in the office, commercial and industrial zoning districts, the following shall apply: 
(1)  For single-occupant buildings, the total sign face area for building signs on each side of a building shall be calculated on the basis of the horizontal length of the wall along that side of the building. Each side of the building shall be calculated separately. 
(2)  In addition to the total sign face area calculated from the following table, one more square foot of sign face area shall be allowed on a wall facing a public street for each foot that the building is set back beyond the minimum principal building front setback required from that street. 
(3)  For multi-tenant nonresidential developments (such as shopping centers), the total sign face area per wall for each tenant shall be distributed on the basis of the horizontal length of the wall along each tenant's occupied space. The maximum sign face area on a particular wall for each tenant shall be calculated separately. 
d.  Project entrance signs are limited to freestanding monument signs. 
e.  For signs in the PD Planned Development District, each development shall conform to the sign regulations established as part of the zoning approval for the Planned Development. If no such regulations exist, each portion of a Planned Development shall conform to the regulations of this Article for the zoning district most comparable to that portion of the Planned Development. 
Table 5-1. Permitted Signs—By Zoning District or Special Use 1 [] 
Principal Freestanding Sign—One Use on Property 

 
1 Special use permit also required in the city. 
2 Where served by sanitary sewer. 
Principal Freestanding Sign—Two or More Uses on Property 

 
NOTE: Height of sign means, in the case of freestanding signs, the distance in vertical feet measured from the level of an adjacent street centerline to the highest point of the sign structure. The sign measured at its base shall not extend over 40 feet in height above the centerline of any adjacent road. 
Building Sign: Wall signs and awning, canopy, projecting, incidental, roof and window signs, etc. 18 

 
Note: Street frontage is defined in this Code as being a street "from which access may be directly gained." 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 05-12-2, § III, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 2011-6-3, § I, 6-6-11) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
See text for regulations relating to the P-D Planned Development District. 15 Agricultural uses only. 16 Monument sign only in C-B-C. 
 --- () --- 
Agricultural uses only. 18 All building signs attached to a particular wall and its windows, doors, awnings, canopies, or roof, including signs that project from the wall, shall collectively not exceed the total square footage of sign face area allowed for the particular wall. 

In addition to the specific signs permitted in each zoning district, the following signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts (or in the zoning districts as indicated) under the conditions noted for each type of sign: 
f.[a.]  Project entrance signs. Two monument signs may be located at each entrance into a residential subdivision or into an office or industrial park consisting of two or more buildings. Each project entrance sign shall not exceed: 
(1)  32 square feet in sign face area. 
(2)  96 square feet in sign structure area. 
(3)  Two and one-half feet in height if located within a sight visibility triangle (see Section 6.8) or eight feet otherwise. 
g.[b.]  Miscellaneous free-standing signs. Additional free-standing signs are permitted for any multi-family, office, commercial or industrial use if each sign complies with all of the following: 
(1)  Within the minimum front yard setback for principal buildings required for the zoning district, miscellaneous signs may be located at entrance or exit driveways to the property. There shall be no more than two such signs per driveway and each such sign shall not exceed eight square feet in sign area nor be more than two and one-half feet in height. 
(2)  Miscellaneous signs located farther from the street than the minimum required front yard setback for principal buildings shall be allowed as follows: 
(a)  One miscellaneous sign may be located on the property for each principal building on the lot. Each such sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area nor be more than eight feet in height. 
(b)  An unlimited number of miscellaneous free-standing signs may be located on a property developed for multi-family or nonresidential use, provided that each such sign is no more than six square feet in sign area nor more than four feet in height. 
h.[c.]  Temporary signs. 
(1)  Political signs. 
(a)  Political signs may be placed as of the date of qualification of candidates, and shall be removed upon the final results. Each political candidate or ballot question shall be considered a separate temporary special event. 
(b)  Political signs shall not exceed the following: 
Table 5-2  Political Sign Maximums 

 
(2)  Construction signs. One construction sign per street frontage, not to exceed 64 square feet ((2) 4′ × 8′ boards) in area, may be placed upon the commencement of construction and shall be removed upon issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the construction or development project to which it refers. 
(3)  Other temporary special event signs. An additional sign other than a political sign or a construction sign may be located on a property related to a temporary special event as defined and permitted in this Code, subject to the following: 
(a)  One temporary sign per street frontage announcing a temporary special event may be placed for a period of no more than 30 consecutive days. Temporary signs for the same business or organization shall not be placed on a property more often than three times per calendar year, nor within 30 days of when the last temporary sign was placed on the property. 
(b)  Each temporary special event sign shall not exceed six square feet in a residential zoning district or 32 square feet in a nonresidential zoning district. 
(c)  Temporary special event signs shall be limited to one such sign per street frontage per temporary event. 
(4)  Inflatable Signs. In addition to the temporary signs allowed under this Section, a temporary special event may utilize one inflatable sign on the property of the event under the following conditions: 
(a)  The inflatable sign may be displayed only during the 30-day period that the other temporary signage is allowed on the property. 
(b)  The inflatable sign shall be installed in accordance with all requirements of the Building Code. 
(c)  If affixed to a roof, the inflatable sign may extend above the roof line of the building. 
(d)  Whether affixed to a roof or free-standing, the inflatable sign shall comply with the maximum sign face and sign structure area requirements associated with the principal free-standing sign otherwise permitted on the property (see Table 5-1). 
(5)  Real Estate signs. One real estate sign per property or premises may be placed on a site until the property or premises to which the sign refers is sold or leased. Such signs shall be limited as follows: 
(a)  Residential districts: Six square feet in area, five feet high. 
(b)  Multi-Family and nonresidential districts: 32 square feet in area, six feet high. 
(6)  Real estate directional signs. A sign that conveys directions to a specific property for sale or lease, such as a real estate development, residential subdivision, apartment or condominium project, home for sale, apartment for rent, or any other real estate property for sale or lease, is permitted if it complies with all of the following: 
(a)  Real estate directional signs may not contain any commercial message or advertisement, but may contain the name, trademark or trade symbol of the development or property to which directions are being provided and/or the real estate company offering the property. 
(b)  Real estate directional signs are allowed in all zoning districts except within 660 feet of the right-of-way of any state highway where real estate directional signs are only allowed on properties zoned for commercial or industrial use. 
(c)  Real estate directional signs shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
(d)  Real estate directional signs shall not exceed a maximum size of four square feet. 
(e)  Real estate directional signs shall not be illuminated. 
(f)  Real estate directional signs shall be removed within five days of the consummation of the sale or lease of the property to which directions are provided. 
(g)  There may be no more than four real estate directional signs providing directions to any one residential, commercial, or industrial development; and no more than two signs providing directions to any one lot. 
i.[d.]  Semi-public use directional signs. A sign that coveys directions to a specific use owned or operated by a non-profit, religious or eleemosynary institution for the purpose of providing educational, cultural, recreational, religious or social services to the general public, is permitted if it complies with all of the following: 
(1)  Semi-public use directional signs shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
(2)  Semi-public use directional signs shall not exceed a maximum size of six square feet in area and six feet in height. 
(3)  Semi-public use directional signs shall not be lighted. 
(4)  There shall be no more than four semi-public use directional signs providing directions to any one semi-public use. 
(5)  Semi-public use directional signs shall be erected on supports provided specifically for that purpose and no more than one such support may be erected at any street corner. 
j.[e.]  Billboards. A billboard is a free-standing sign that exceeds the maximum sign face or sign structure area permitted by right on a property under the provisions of Section 5-4. A billboard may be allowed individually as a principal use or as an additional free-standing sign on a property under the following conditions: 
(1)  The sign must be located in an A-R, C-C, H-C, L-I or H-I zoning district within 660 feet of a State or U.S. numbered highway, and shall comply with all requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  The area of the sign face shall not exceed 400 square feet, nor shall the sign exceed 40 feet in height. 
(3)  All portions of the billboard shall be located on a lot in accordance with the principal building setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(4)  The billboard shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any other billboard or within 200 feet of a zoning district where billboards are not allowed. Distance measurements shall be made horizontally in all directions from the nearest edge of the sign structure. 
(5)  The billboard may not be located on or project over any building. 
(6)  The billboard shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any major river corridor or tributary river corridor established under Section 6 of this Code. Such distance shall be measured from the top of the stream bank. 
a.  A uniform sign plan is required for any multi-tenant nonresidential development, such as a shopping center, before any signs for the development or the development's tenants may be erected on the property. 
b.  The uniform sign plan shall govern the placement and design of all signs within the development as to their location, materials, and size. 
c.  A uniform sign plan shall be submitted and approved as follows: 
(1)  The uniform sign plan shall consist of such drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials and size of all and every sign to be placed as freestanding and building signs within the development. 
(2)  The uniform sign plan is to be submitted to the Building Inspection Department. The uniform sign plan shall be approved upon a finding by the Chief Building Inspector that: 
(a)  The plan provides that signs of a similar type and function within the development have a consistency of size and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
(b)  The signs proposed in the uniform sign plan comply with the requirements of this Article, such as number, location, and size restrictions. 
d.  All tenants of the development, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser, or other occupant, shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. 
a.  Modifications to the restrictions on signage established by a uniform sign plan for a specific property or development may be requested for administrative approval. 
b.  Such requests shall be submitted to the Building Inspections Department for review and handling. 
c.  A request for modification shall be supported by a revised uniform sign plan. 
(1)  The revised uniform sign plan shall consist of such drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all and every sign to be placed as freestanding and building signs within the development. 
(2)  The revised uniform sign plan shall establish design standards such that signs of a similar type and function within the development shall have a consistency of size, lettering style, color scheme, and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
d.  Denial. If the Building Inspections Department denies the requested modification, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Adjustments as a special exception. See Section 2.12.4. 
e.  Approval. Following approval by the Chief Building Inspector or the Board of Adjustments, all tenants of the property or development, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser, or other occupant, shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 2008-2-3, § I, 2-4-08) 
5.5. - Removal of abandoned and illegal signs. 
a.  Any sign that provides notice of a temporary special event or any other temporary purpose that has since occurred shall be deemed to have been abandoned. 
b.  Any sign that fails to meet the maintenance requirements of this Article shall be deemed to be abandoned and subject to removal if such deficiencies are not corrected within 30 days after a written notice from the Chief Building Official to the owner or tenant concerning said deficiencies. The Chief Building Official shall have the discretion to grant an additional 30 days for the required improvements to be made provided substantial progress is being made to correct the deficiencies and a written request for such an extension is received at least five working days before the end of the original notice. 
a.  The owner of the sign or owner of the premises shall remove signs that are deemed to be abandoned or otherwise found to be in violation of this Ordinance within 30 days from the written notice by the Chief Building Official. Any such signs not removed within 30 days from the written notice may be removed by the Jurisdiction and all costs charged to the owner of the premises upon which such sign was located, or the owner of the sign itself. 
b.  Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the Chief Building Official, the owner or person or firm maintaining the sign shall, upon written notice from the Chief Building Official, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within ten days, remove such sign or secure it in a manner approved by the Chief Building Official. Any such sign not removed or secured within ten days from the written notice may be removed by the Jurisdiction and all costs charged to the owner, agent, or person having beneficial interest of the building or premises upon which such sign was located, or in the sign itself. 
c.  If any sign is installed, erected, or constructed in violation of this Ordinance, the owner or person or firm maintaining the sign shall, upon written notice from the Chief Building Official, within ten days, remove such sign or bring it into compliance with this Ordinance. Any such sign not removed or properly altered within ten days from the written notice may be removed by the Jurisdiction and all costs charged to the owner, agent, or person having beneficial interest of the building or premises upon which such sign was located, or in the sign itself. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
ARTICLE 6. - SUBDIVISION AND PROJECT STANDARDS 

6.1. - General. 
6.1.1. - Purpose of Article 6.This Article sets out: 
a.  The minimum requirements and standards for construction of land development projects, including general principals of design and layout and requirements for such public facilities as streets and utilities. 
b.  The requirements that apply to carrying out the land development process, including site grading and land disturbance activities; addressing flood hazard areas; the installation of streets, drainage facilities and public utilities; and building construction. 
c.  The standards that control the separation between incompatible uses, landscaping and tree conservation, the provision of vehicular parking and access, and other requirements relating to a site design for an individual property. 
6.1.2. - Applicability.All persons proposing construction within the public right-of-way, or within easements dedicated to the City of Rome or Floyd County shall perform all construction in accordance with these specifications and standard design drawings. 
6.1.3. - Standards incorporated by reference 
a.  Unless otherwise specially set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction and storm drainage construction shall conform to the latest standard specifications of the State Department of Transportation. 
b.  Design criteria and standards for streets and traffic control not specifically set forth herein shall conform to the latest edition of the ASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets and the U.S. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as appropriate. 
c.  Construction plans for all facilities covered by these regulations shall conform to the Rome-Floyd County Standard Drawings, where applicable. 
6.1.4. - Subdivision development overview. 
a.  City-County Coordination. In order to assure full coordination between all affected departments and agencies and to increase efficiency in the processing of permits, all applications for subdivision platting, shall be submitted to the Public Works Department of the respective jurisdiction for handling. 
b.  Subdivisions with Public Improvements. The division of land into two or more lots that will require the construction or extension of public streets, water or sanitary sewerage (other than the direct connection of buildings to existing facilities) shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Project Approval is granted by the Public Works Department upon review and approval of a Preliminary Subdivision Plat. 
(2)  A Development Permit is issued by the Chief Building Official based on the review and approval by the Public Works Department of a Development Plan for construction of the subdivision. 
(3)  Receipt by the Public Works Department of accurate surveys of the as-built condition of public improvements is required in order to allow filing of a Final Plat. 
(4)  Approval of a Final Subdivision Plat by the Planning Commission will authorize recordation of the plat with the Clerk of Superior Court. 
(5)  After recordation of the Final Plat, the lots may be sold and building permits on the lots may be obtained. 
(6)  A maintenance period will extend for one year after acceptance of all public improvements, as described in Section 6.4.7. 
c.  Minor Subdivisions. The division of land into four or fewer lots, each of which will be adequately served by existing public streets, water and sanitary sewerage; and which meet all other requirements of the Ordinance, shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Administrative Approval of a Final Subdivision Plat by the Planning Director will authorize recordation of the plat with the Clerk of Superior Court. 
(2)  After recordation of the Final Plat, the lots may be sold and building permits on the lots may be obtained. 
d.  Private Subdivisions. The procedures for approval of private subdivisions are the same as those for subdivisions with public improvements. 
e.  Multifamily and nonresidential projects are approved for development in accordance with the procedures described in Article 2. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 02-5-4, § I, 5-6-02) 
6.2. - Preliminary plat and development plan approval for subdivisions. 
The Public Works Department must first approve the preliminary plat prior to either public or private subdivision activity, prior to the issuance of a development permit and prior to the initiation of any land disturbing or construction activities. 
6.2.1. - Responsibility. 
a.  The Director of Public Works is responsible for administering the review and approval process for preliminary subdivision plats. The Director of Public Works shall forward a copy of the project approval application to appropriate City or County Departments, the Georgia Department of Transportation, or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. The Director of Public Works shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, who shall work with each City or County Department or other agency as necessary to resolve all issues. 
b.  A preliminary plat may be prepared by a professional engineer, a land surveyor or a landscape architect registered to practice in the State of Georgia. 
6.2.2. - Procedure for project approval. 
a.  An application for subdivision approval may be processed independently or in conjunction with an application for issuance of a development permit. 
b.  An application for project approval shall be submitted to the Public Works Department by the property owner or their authorized representative. The application shall include: 
(1)  A properly completed application form, as furnished by the Public Works Department, requesting review for project approval. 
(2)  Copies of the preliminary subdivision plat showing the entire ownership drawn to the specifications of this Section, in a number as required by the Public Works Department. 
(3)  Copies of the development plans prepared in accordance with the requirements of this code, in a number as required by the Public Works Department. 
(4)  Payment of all applicable application and review fees, as established by the Governing Body from time to time. 
c.  The Public Works Department shall review the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
d.  Within two weeks following receipt of the application, the Public Works Department shall return to the applicant, on the drawing or in writing, all comments related to compliance with this Development Code. 
e.  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments. 
f.  The Public Works Department may not approve any preliminary subdivision plat whereon is shown a lot or situation that would clearly require a variance to order to be reasonably usable, whether due to the presence of flood plain, unusual configuration, zoning compliance, lack of public utilities, or for any other reason. 
g.  When the Public Works Department has determined that the preliminary subdivision plat is in compliance with the requirements, purpose and intent of this Development Code, it shall be approved. The Director or his designee shall sign and date the Certificate of Project Approval stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the preliminary subdivision plat. One copy of the approved drawing shall be transmitted to the applicant and one copy shall be retained by the Public Works Department. 
h.  The Certificate of Project Approval shall remain in effect for a period of 12-consecutive months after which time it shall become null and void and a new Certificate may be required if either no permit has been issued or a permit has been issued but no development activity has begun. 
6.2.3. - General standards. 
a.  The proposed name of the development and proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other development or street in the city or county. If shown to the contrary, the Public Works Department may refuse to accept such development or street names. The development may use letter designations in place of proposed street names at the option of the applicant. 
b.  The preliminary plat shall be prepared on a boundary survey of the entire tract to be subdivided or developed showing the location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract to be developed. 
c.  The preliminary subdivision plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of 100 feet or less to one inch. The recommended maximum dimensions of the sheet size is 36 inches by 48 inches and the minimum dimensions of 17 inches by 22 inches; however, the Director of Public Works may approve other sheet sizes and scales as appropriate. 
d.  For property of over 100 acres, a smaller scale may be used where, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, presentation of detailed data is not necessary to evaluate the entire project. It is the intent of this provision that in all cases sufficient information shall be provided for an adequate evaluation of the public and private improvements. 
6.2.4. - Preliminary plat requirements. 
a.  Proposed name of development. If the proposed development is a private subdivision, "Private Subdivision" shall be included in the title. 
b.  Name and address of the property owner and developer. 
c.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
d.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
e.  Proposed use of the property. 
f.  Location (Land District and Land Lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
g.  Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well known landmarks such as arterial streets, railroads or others. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
h.  Name and boundary of former approved subdivision if any or all of the land in the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan has been previously subdivided, showing boundaries of the lots to be re-subdivided. 
i.  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
j.  Delineation of required buffers, landscape areas, tree protection areas, and river corridor buffers, as applicable. 
k.  Rezoning or conditional use application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. Variances obtained on the property by application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. 
l.  Recorded deed names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
m.  Natural features within, affecting or affected by the property, including wetlands, drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all water courses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year floodplain and wetlands, if any, shall be outlined. The location of the site within a protected groundwater recharge area shall be noted if applicable. 
n.  Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including street right-of-way and pavement widths, names of existing streets, all easements, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location and dimensions of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features. 
o.  The proposed project layout including: 
(1)  For subdivisions, lot lines and street right-of-way lines, with proposed street names or letter designations and right-of-way widths, along with the front building setback line and the dimension of its length on each lot (i.e., the lot width). 
(2)  For multi-family and nonresidential development site plans, the outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas, driveways, curb cuts, and designated fire lanes. 
p.  The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
q.  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
r.  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. For those properties that will not be served by a public sanitary sewerage system, written approval by the Floyd County Health Department shall be submitted. 
s.  The approximate location of proposed storm water detention facilities. 
t.  Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate evaluation of the development activity proposed in the application. 
6.2.5. - Development plan requirements. 
a.  General Requirements. 
(1)  Persons seeking to undertake development activity shall not commence or proceed until development plans are approved and a Development Permit is issued by the Chief Building Official. The process for approval of a development permit is presented in Article 2.5. 
(2)  The development plans for a project shall conform in all respects with the requirements of this Development Code, and shall contain each of the plans in this Section as appropriate to the project, including: 
(a)  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
(b)  Grading Plan. 
(c)  Stormwater Management Plan. 
(d)  Street Improvement Plan. 
(e)  Buffer Plan. 
(f)  Public Utility Plan. 
(3)  All development plans and supporting studies shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a professional engineer registered in Georgia. 
b.  Provide the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Grading Plan, Stormwater Management Plan, and Buffer/Landscaping/Tree Conservation Plan in accordance with all requirements in Section as well as Article 2 of this Development Code. 
c.  Street Improvement Plan. 
(1)  Center line profiles and typical street sections of all proposed streets shall be required. Profiles shall be drawn on standard plan and profile sheet with plan section showing street layout, pavement and right-of-way width, curvature, and required drainage facilities. Typical street sections shall be provided for street widenings. 
(2)  Where sanitary sewer or storm water sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade, size, location and bedding class of pipe, and the location and invert elevation of manholes shall be indicated on the road profile. 
(3)  Center line profiles covering streets that are extensions of existing streets shall include elevations at 50 foot intervals for such distance as may be adequate to provide continuity consistent with the standards required by this Development Code for street improvements, but no less than 200 feet. 
(4)  All plan elevations shall be coordinated and sited into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey or Georgia Department of Transportation bench marks where feasible or into reference monuments established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(5)  A street striping plan, showing striping in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition as published by the Federal Highway Administration, shall be prepared for any street newly constructed or widened to four or more lanes. 
d.  Public Utility Plan. 
(1)  Sewage Disposal Plan. 
(a)  If connection to a public system is proposed, sewage disposal plans are to include: 
1)  Sanitary sewerage plans, including profiles of all mains and out-falls, lift station and force main details, typical manhole construction details, and other information as may be required by the Director of Public Utilities. 
(b)  For projects approved by the Governing Body to be served by on-site sewage disposal systems, location of septic tank, extent of drain field and attendant structures, location and results of percolation tests or soil data test locations, and other information shall be shown as required by the County Health Department. 
(2)  Domestic Water Supply Plan. For projects to be served by public water, the domestic water supply plan shall depict all water system improvements, water mains, fire hydrants, valves and other appurtenances, and other information as may be required by the Director of Public Utilities. 
6.2.6. - Evidence of project approval.Each preliminary subdivision plat shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped on the plat. 
a.  Signed approval from the County Health Department (if septic tanks will be allowed by the Governing Body). 
b.  Certificate of Project Approval, to read as follows: 

 
6.2.7. - Issuance of development permit. 
a.  Upon approval of the Preliminary Plat and Development Plans, the Chief Building Official shall issue a Development Permit authorizing development activities to begin based on the approved documents and in accordance with Article 2. 
b.  Development permits for subdivisions shall expire if the development activity described in the permit is not begun within 12 months of the date of issuance. Renewal of the permit after expiration shall be in accordance with the requirements of Article 2 of this Development Code. 
c.  If the subdivision is located outside of the City, certification is required by the Community Development Department that the proposed subdivision has applied for installation of street lighting in accordance with the County street lighting ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
6.3. - Final subdivision plat approval. 
6.3.1. - Responsibility. 
a.  The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for coordination of the approval process for all final subdivision plats for public and private subdivisions. 
b.  The final subdivision plat shall be certified and sealed by a registered land surveyor. 
c.  The owner is responsible for compliance with all requirements of this Development Code. Approval of a final subdivision plat and acceptance of the public improvements and dedications therein shall not relieve the owner of this responsibility. 
6.3.2. - Procedures for final plat approval. 
a.  Prior to submission of an application for final subdivision plat approval, either: 
(1)  For minor subdivisions, the Public Works Director shall have certified that all lots are adequately served by existing streets and public utilities; or, 
(2)  All public improvements shall have been properly installed and completed in accordance with all requirements and standards of this Development Code. 
(3)  A guarantee in lieu of completed improvements shall have been received by the Public Works Department and approved by the Governing Body as provided under Article 6.4.6 of this Development Code. 
b.  Prior to submission, the applicant shall provide to the Public Works Department: 
(1)  As-built surveys for all public improvements as required by this Article if the installation of said improvements varies from the approved development plan. 
(2)  Payment for materials and installation of traffic signs and street name signs. Payment of the cost of street striping or signalization, if required and not completed by the owner, shall also be included in the application. 
(3)  A maintenance bond providing adequate surety for the maintenance of all public improvements required by this Development Code in the subdivision for a period of 12 months following the date of final acceptance of said improvements. 
c.  Application for a final subdivision plat approval shall be made to the Public Works Department. The application shall include: 
(1)  A properly completed application form, as furnished by the Public Works Department, requesting final subdivision plat review. 
(2)  The original, two reproducible copies and nine prints of the final subdivision plat drawing prepared in conformance with the specifications in this Section. 
(3)  Payment of all applicable final subdivision plat application and review fees, as established by the Governing Body from time to time. 
(4)  Evidence of payment for traffic and street name signs, and maintenance bond, to the Public Works Department. 
d.  The Public Works Department shall review the application for completeness within business five days of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
e.  Within two weeks following receipt of the application, the Public Works Department shall indicate on the drawing or in writing all comments related to compliance with this Development Code. The Director of Public Works shall have sole authority to determine the applicability of any provisions of this Development Code to the final plat. 
f.  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations and zoning requirements, and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments of the Public Works Department. Resubmission of all revised drawings shall be made to the Public Works Department. 
g.  When all of the requirements of this Development Code, and any conditions of zoning approval, have been met, the Director of Public Works shall certify approval with signature and date on the plat. 
h.  Once the final subdivision plat has been so certified, it shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for approval after which the Director of Planning shall sign and date the Certificate of Final Plat Approval stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the final subdivision plat. The plat shall then be recorded by the Planning Department, or by the applicant with the Planning Director's approval, with the Clerk of Superior Court. An executed original of the approved drawing shall be transmitted to the applicant. 
i.  The final subdivision plat shall be submitted in digital form in a file format compatible with the Planning Department's GIS mapping system. 
6.3.3. - General standards. 
a.  The final subdivision plat shall be drawn on an appropriate material and sheet size, and using minimum line weights and letter heights as required by Georgia law for the recordation of maps and plats (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, as amended), and as acceptable to the Clerk of Superior Court. 
b.  The final subdivision plat shall substantially conform to the preliminary subdivision plat and may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary subdivision plat that the owner proposes to record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of this Development Code. 
6.3.4. - Final plat requirements.The final subdivision plat shall contain the following information: 
a.  All data required by Georgia law pertaining to the recordation of maps and plats (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, as amended). 
b.  Name of the subdivision. If the development is a private subdivision, "Private Subdivision" shall be included in the title. 
c.  Street names including both the name and the suffix such as "Street", "Avenue", etc. 
d.  Name of the former subdivision if any or all of the property has been previously subdivided. 
e.  Location sketch. 
f.  Lot lines with dimensions to the 1/100 (0.01) foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners. 
g.  Building front setback lines with dimensions as to length across each lot and distance from the street right-of-way. 
h.  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
i.  Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements, including drainage or slope easements, if required, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use. 
j.  A listing of the private covenants recorded with each lot or a statement of the location of such covenants, if applicable. 
k.  The extent of any area of special flood hazard, as defined in this Development Code. 
l.  The street address number of each lot, as assigned by the local government. 
m.  All maps or plats shall show the width and the former widths, if pertinent, of all rights-of-way adjacent to or crossing the property or adjacent to any point of reference. 
n.  Curve data shall be required for all curves of greater than ten degrees on new roads. Pertinent data including radius, central angle, and tangent distance must be given for regular curves. Chord distances and directions shall be given for irregular curves on preexisting roads. 
o.  All land lot lines, land district lines, land section lines, and city and county boundaries intersecting or adjacent to the surveyed property shall be indicated by lines drawn upon the plat with appropriate words and figures. 
p.  All plats shall show the state plane coordinates of at least two permanent monuments thereon, when a United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey monument is within 500 feet of any point on the property platted, or any point of reference shown thereon. 
6.3.5. - Private subdivision requirements.In addition to all other requirements of this Section, private subdivisions shall comply with the following: 
a.  As part of any final subdivision plat submission, the following documents must be filed for approval with the Public Works Department as a part of the development plan: 
(1)  The form of all agreements between the developer and property owners relative to development standards and property ownership and common area ownership and maintenance with a written statement by the City or County Attorney that this document has been reviewed by that office. 
(2)  The form of all agreements between and among individual property owners relative to the ownership and maintenance of privately owned properties and common areas with a written statement by the City or County Attorney that this document has been reviewed by that office. 
(3)  Certification by the Director of Public Works that all improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
b.  The following language shall appear on the plats, deeds and covenants to be recorded which concern the subdivision: "Required notice to all subsequent property owners: The grantee herein recognizes that any and all means of ingress and egress to the property conveyed hereby, and any water or sewer utilities servicing the property which are provided by the grantor or his successors or assigns are considered to be private facilities not maintainable by any local government. Therefore, the property owner hereby agrees that he or she will be responsible for his or her share of the upkeep and maintenance of said private facilities, holding Floyd County and the City of Rome completely harmless of any necessity for such upkeep and maintenance." A copy of the covenants as recorded must be provided to the Building Inspections Department prior to issuance of any building permits. 
6.3.6. - Surveyor and owner certificates.Each Final Subdivision Plat shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped on the plat and signed and dated in black ink. 
a.  Surveyor's Certificate, to read and be completed as follows: 

 
b.  Surveyor's Seal. The original final subdivision plat drawing shall bear the original signature, in black ink, of the registered land surveyor placed across the surveyor's seal in order to be valid and recordable. 
c.  Owner's Certificate, to read and be completed as follows, and signed in black ink on the original drawing: 

 
6.3.7. - Certification by health department.Certification by the Health Department that the water supply or sewerage systems installed or proposed to be installed fully meet the requirements of the Health Department's regulations. (These certifications may be submitted on a separate form as specified by the Planning Department). The Health Department certification statement shall include written notice that each lot not on public sewer must have a septic tank permit prior to the start of construction. For developments with public sewerage and public water systems this certification may be omitted. 
6.3.8. - Certificate of final subdivision plat approval.The following shall be stamped or printed on the final subdivision plat for execution upon its approval by the Planning Commission. 

 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
6.4. - Required improvements in subdivisions. 
6.4.1. - Exemptions.The subdivision of land in the A-R district into 4 or fewer lots, all of which have the minimum required frontage on a public street and meet all other minimum requirements of this Ordinance, shall be exempt from the improvement requirements of this section, except that a minimum right-of-way of fifty feet shall be provided on all adjacent streets. 
6.4.2. - Minimum requirements.The following improvements shall be provided by the developer or at the developer's expense in every subdivision or development. 
a.  Survey monumentation of the public streets and lot lines in a subdivision. 
b.  Streets providing access to a development and to all lots in a subdivision, including the extension of streets required to provide access to adjoining properties. 
(1)  Streets contained wholly within a subdivision shall be improved to the full standards contained in this Article. Existing streets that adjoin a subdivision shall be improved to the minimum standards provided in this Article from the centerline of the street along the subdivision's frontage as a project improvement. Right-of-way shall be dedicated to provide for street improvement, as prescribed in Article 6.6.1. 
(2)  Streets within or adjacent nonresidential subdivisions, or serving residential subdivisions with 200 dwelling units or more shall be improved to collector street standards; however, adjacent streets that are classified as arterials shall be improved to arterial standards. All other streets shall be improved to local street standards. 
(3)  New developments on an existing lot of record that adjoin only one side of an existing street shall dedicate one-half of the additional right-of-way necessary to provide a minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet. If any part of the development includes both sides of an existing street, all of the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated. In addition, if a deceleration lane is required, sufficient additional right-of-way shall be dedicated to provide for that lane. 
(4)  New development on an existing lot of record that adjoins an existing street listed in the Rome-Floyd Urban Transportation Study (FRUTS) and Transportation Improvement Program (TIP) shall dedicate the additional right-of-way necessary to provide for the planned improvement, except that only one-half of the additional right-of-way shall be dedicated if the development adjoins only one side of the street. 
c.  Storm water drainage and detention facilities. 
d.  Sidewalks along each side of any curb and gutter street within or adjacent to a subdivision, or adjacent to any development, if inside the City of Rome; and along any arterial and collector streets adjacent to any subdivision or development in the unincorporated areas of Floyd County. 
e.  Street name signs, stop bars and traffic control signs shall be installed by the Jurisdiction at the developer's expense. 
f.  Where public water is available at the property being subdivided, public water service shall be provided to every lot in a subdivision and to every development for both domestic use and fire protection. Water mains shall be connected to the existing public water system and extend past each lot. When the water main is located in the street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the adjacent lot, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed according to plans and specifications approved by the Public Works Director, the County Board of Health, and the State Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. Fire protection systems shall be installed to current Insurance Services Office (ISO) specifications and requirements. A contractor approved by the jurisdiction shall install all elements of the water system, including mains, valves and hydrants at the developer's expense. The Jurisdiction may participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that pipe sizes are needed in excess of that size required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
g.  Fire hydrants shall be located along the streets in every subdivision and within every development project. 
h.  Every lot in a subdivision and every development shall be connected to a public sanitary sewerage system unless on-site disposal is allowed by the Public Utilities Department and approved by the Floyd County Health Department. Sewer lines shall be connected to the existing sanitary sewerage system and extended past each lot. Every element of the sanitary sewer system, including mains, lift stations, outfalls, and laterals, shall be installed at the developer's expense by a contractor approved by the Public Utilities Department. The Jurisdiction may participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that sewer mains or related improvements are needed in excess of the facilities required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
i.  Street lights in a subdivision in the unincorporated portion of the County, in accordance with County Ordinances. 
6.4.3. - Private subdivisions.Private subdivisions shall meet all requirements and standards that apply to public subdivisions except as follows: 
a.  In private residential subdivisions the Typical Residential Roadway Cross-Section without Curb & Gutter, as shown in Figure 6.5, using green infrastructure/low impact development (GI/LID) engineering design may be used. (City Only) 
b.  Reserved. 
6.4.4. - Survey monuments.Concrete monuments with aluminum or brass marking shall be placed at all corners of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision being developed and shall be set flush or up to six inches above the finished grade. Existing permanent monuments, which in the professional opinion of a registered land surveyor, or the city or county engineer are of sufficiently durable construction may be maintained in lieu of a new concrete monument as described above. All other street or lot corners or angle points and points of curve in each street shall be marked with an iron pipe or surveyor's marker at least 24 inches long and driven no less than one inch or up to six inches above the finished grade. All such monuments shall be properly set in the ground and shall be approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time of final plat approval by the Planning Commission. 
6.4.5. - Streets. 
a.  A publicly approved street, that has been opened and accepted for public maintenance; or whose construction has been guaranteed, as provided under Article 6.4.6, and meeting the requirements of this Article, shall serve every development and every lot within a subdivision. 
b.  Every subdivision shall have access to the public street system via a paved roadway. Subdivision projects containing more than 200 lots must have at least two points of access. 
c.  When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
d.  No subdivision or development shall be designed in a way that would completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
e.  Where, in the opinion of the Public Works Department, it is necessary to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication of right-of-way to the boundary of such property through the development. 
f.  Where an arterial street adjoins or is included in a residential subdivision, the responsible city and/or county engineer may limit access to the arterial street. Lots that abut the arterial shall be provided with another means of access, such as (1) platting reverse frontage lots, (2) platting a separate street parallel to the arterial, or (3) platting a loop street or cul-de-sac. 
6.4.6. - Guarantee in lieu of completed improvements. 
No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the Rome/Floyd County Planning Commission or accepted for recordation by the Clerk of Superior Court until one of the following conditions has been met: 
a.  All required improvements have been constructed or funded in a satisfactory manner and approved by the Director of Public Works, or 
b.  The Governing Body has received in escrow 110 percent of the estimated cost of installation of the required improvements, and has approved an executed contract for installation of the improvements by a qualified contractor. The executed contract shall call for completion of the improvements within one year of approval of the final subdivision plat. 
6.4.7. - Acceptance of public improvements. 
a.  If construction of any required public improvements was deferred at the time of final plat approval, said work must be completed during the one-year maintenance period for the subdivision. 
b.  Prior to end of the maintenance period, a final acceptance inspection of the public improvements shall be conducted by the Public Works Department. 
c.  The owner must correct all defects or deficiencies in materials or workmanship and make such repairs as necessary to approximate the as-built condition of the improvements. 
d.  Upon certification by the Public Works Director that the public improvements depicted on the as-built surveys are in conformance with the specifications of this Development Code and are in good repair, the Governing Body shall accept the public improvements into perpetual maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 02-9-2, §§ III—VI, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 2017-11-2, § I, 11-27-17) 
6.5. - Subdivision design standards. 
6.5.1. - Suitability of the land.Land physically unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding, poor drainage, steep slopes, rock formations or other such features that may endanger health, life or property, aggravate erosion, increase flood hazard, or necessitate excessive expenditures of public funds for supply and maintenance of services shall not be approved for subdivision or development unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer for solving the problems. Such land shall be set aside for such uses as shall not involve such a danger. 
6.5.2. - Conformance to the Comprehensive Plan. 
a.  All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission to the Public Works Department. 
b.  All highways, streets and other features of the Comprehensive Plan shall be platted by the developer in the location and to the dimension indicated on the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  In subdivisions or developments related to or affecting any State or U.S. numbered highway, the Public Works Department shall require the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation and Public Works Department. 
6.5.3. - Name of subdivision.The name of each subdivision must have the approval of the Public Works Department. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
6.5.4. - Blocks. 
a.  Length: 
(1)  Residential Blocks. 
(a)  Blocks shall be at least 600 feet but not more than 1,800 feet in length, except as the Building Inspection Department considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street pattern. 
(b)  In blocks greater than 1,000 feet in length, the Building Inspection Department may require one or more public easements of not less than 20 feet in width to extend entirely across the block for pedestrian crosswalks, fire protection or utilities. 
(2)  Nonresidential Blocks. 
(a)  Blocks for other than residential use shall be of such length and width as may be suitable for the prospective use, including adequate provision for off-street parking and service. 
b.  Width: Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two rows of lots, except where reverse frontage lots on arterial streets are provided, or when prevented by topographic conditions or size of the property, or for lots along the periphery of the subdivision, in which case the Building Inspection Department may approve a single row of lots. 
a.  Authority of Health Department. Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing the Health Department, after study of the conditions existing in a proposed subdivision, from requiring that all or any portion of the area of such subdivision shall not be built upon or that the minimum lot sizes set forth in this Ordinance are inadequate and must be increased to ensure the protection of the public health. The developer is encouraged to consult with the Health Department regarding lot size requirements prior to submitting a development plan. 
b.  Adequate building sites. Each lot shall contain a site large enough for a normal building that will meet all building setback requirements and not be subject to flood or periodic inundation. 
c.  Street frontage. Each lot must abut a street fro a distance of no less than 60 continuous feet except lots abutting cul-de-sac turnarounds which must have no less than 25 feet, townhouse lots as provided in Section 4.1.23, and single-family attached dwellings as provided in Section 4.1.28. 
d.  Arrangement. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
e.  Minimum lot dimensions and areas. All lots proposed in a subdivision shall meet or exceed the area and dimensional requirements of this Development Code for the zoning district in which the lots are located. 
f.  Residential lots shall not be platted to front directly on the right-of-way of a major arterial, unless adequate provisions for access have been established. 
g.  City limit and lot lines. Corporate boundary lines shall not divide lots. 
h.  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently large to permit the location of buildings so as to conform to the front building lines on both streets. 
i.  Double and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where specifically required to provide separation of residential development from an arterial street or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation of property. An easement of at least ten feet across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided where required by the Building Inspection Department along the line of lots abutting such arterial streets, or to overcome the disadvantageous orientation of property. 
j.  Each lot shall have a viable home-site above the 100-year floodplain. 
a.  The street pattern within a subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of the existing street pattern at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width in the section of the community involved, unless the Building Inspection Department deems such extension undesirable. 
b.  Existing streets that adjoin a development or subdivision boundary shall be deemed a part of the subdivision. The proposed street system within a subdivision shall have the right-of-way of existing streets extended no less than the required minimum width. Subdivisions that adjoin only one side of an existing street shall dedicate one-half of the additional right-of-way needed to meet the minimum width requirement for the street. If any part of the subdivision includes both sides of an existing street, all of the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated. 
c.  Subdivision streets that intersect an arterial street shall do so at intervals of not less than 800 feet, or as required by the Georgia Department of Transportation, whichever is greater. 
d.  Reserve strips that prohibit access to streets from adjoining property shall be prohibited. 
e.  Design standards for subdivision streets shall meet all requirements for street construction in accordance with Article 6.6. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 02-9-2, § V, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 04-6-4, § VIII, 6-7-04) 
6.6. - Common project design standards. 
a.  Every development shall have access to the public street system via a publicly maintained roadway. 
b.  Existing streets that adjoin a development shall be deemed a part of the development. Developments that adjoin only one side of an existing street shall dedicate one-half of the additional right-of-way needed to meet the minimum right-of-way requirement for the street. If any part of the development includes both sides of an existing street, all of the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated. 
(1)  New developments on existing lots of record that adjoin only one side of an existing street shall dedicate one-half of the additional right-of-way width of 50 feet, which is the minimum right-of-way width for public streets under current city and county standards. If any part of the development includes both sides of an existing street, all of the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated. In addition, if a deceleration lane is required, sufficient additional right-of-way shall be dedicated to provide for the lane. 
(2)  New development on an existing lot of record that adjoins an existing street listed in the Floyd-Rome Urban Transportation Study (FRUTS) Long Range Transportation Plan (LRTP) and/or the Transportation Improvement Program (TIP) shall dedicate the additional right-of-way necessary to provide for the planned improvement, except that only one-half of the additional right-of-way shall be dedicated if the development adjoins only one side of the street. 
6.6.2. - Turning lanes.Turning lanes shall be required at all entrances to subdivisions and multi-family, industrial, office and commercial developments that front on arterial streets and may be required on collector streets. Turning lanes shall be 11.5 feet in width plus curb and gutter for a minimum distance of 200 feet measured from the intersection of the right-of-way lines or the edge of the driveway. 
a.  Sidewalks shall be provided along arterial and collector streets within the City of Rome and on parcels that are contiguous to the City of Rome; to provide a safe and convenient means for pedestrian movements. 
b.  Where provided, sidewalks shall be located not less than one foot from the property line to prevent interference of encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges or other planting or structures placed on the property line at a later date. In single-family residential areas sidewalks shall be no less than four feet in width, constructed of concrete no less than four inches in depth, and located no less than three feet from the back of curb. In commercial areas sidewalks shall be no less than five feet in width, constructed of concrete no less than four inches in depth. 
c.  Concrete shall be 2,000 PSI at 28 days strength. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be backfilled and grassed. 
a.  In the unincorporated area of the county curb and gutter are required on new roads in residential subdivisions where the average width of lots is less than 200 feet and the average lot size does not exceed one and one-half acres, and along all multi-family and nonresidential uses. 
b.  Curb and gutter shall be required on all streets in the City, except where the road serves only as a collector for the development of property, and where access and public services to more than one parcel are provided from other streets. 
c.  Where required, curb and gutter shall be provided as specified in the Design Standards for Streets. No variance of the requirement to provide curb and gutter shall be available unless specific approval is given by the Public Works Director of the Governing Body. 
6.6.5. - Easements.Easements shall be required in connection with subdivisions or developments for the following purposes, among others: 
a.  Utility Easements. Whenever it is necessary or desirable to locate a public utility line outside of the street right-of-way, the line shall be located in an easement dedicated to the Jurisdiction for such purpose. Easements for water and sanitary sewers shall be a minimum of 20-feet wide, and may be required to be wider depending on the depth of cut. 
b.  Watercourse and Drainage Easements. 
(1)  A publicly dedicated storm water right-of-access or drainage easement is to be provided along any drainage channel, stream or water impoundment within a development. The easement is to be substantially centered on the watercourse or surround the high water line of the impoundment, and shall be of such width as the Public Works Director deems necessary for adequate access by maintenance equipment. All easements shall be no less than 20 feet wide when used as an open ditch. Piped storm drainage shall have a minimum easement width of 15 feet wide. 
(2)  Drainage easements shall be opened at the time of development to control surface water runoff. 
(3)  Drainage easements off the street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the plat and deed of the individual property owner, and such property owner shall keep the easement free of obstructions and maintain that part of the easement within the property owner's boundary line so that free and maximum flow is maintained at all times. 
c.  Overlapping Easements. Easements for water and sanitary sewers and drainage purposes shall not overlap unless approved by the Public Works Department. 
a.  Sanitary Sewerage. 
(1)  Each developer shall be required to pay for the installation of a sanitary sewerage collection system connected to the public system serving his subdivision or development, if it is available or will be available in a timely manner. All dwellings shall connect to public sewer when such sewer is within 300 feet of the property being subdivided. No septic tanks shall be allowed if public sewerage is available. The layout and specifications of the system shall be in accordance with specifications approved by the Public Utilities Director, and shall be installed by a contractor certified by the State of Georgia for utility installation. 
(2)  When the sewer is located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street to serve the abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. 
(3)  Where connection to the sanitary sewerage system is not feasible in the view of the Public Utilities Director, the lot shall contain adequate area for the installation and safe operation of a septic tank and disposal field, as approved by the county health officer. 
(4)  Prior to the construction of any private community sewerage disposal system, the location, size, plans and specifications of such a facility shall be approved by the appropriate city and/or county official, the health department and the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
b.  Public Water. 
(1)  Each subdivision or development shall connect to the Jurisdiction's public water system where available, and shall provide service to each lot or the development as a whole, as appropriate, at the expense of the developer. 
(2)  The layout and specifications of the system shall be in accordance with Jurisdiction specifications, as approved by the Public Utilities Director, and shall be installed by a contractor certified by the State of Georgia for utility installation. 
(3)  Fire hydrants in subdivisions shall be installed and spaced no more than 1,000 feet apart, and meet the requirements of the Fire Department. 
(4)  When the water main is located in the street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the abutting lot, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line and a meter box installed to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. Alternatively, lines may be bored at the builder's expense. 
c.  Location of Utilities in Streets. 
(1)  Above-Ground Utilities. Telephone poles, street light poles, telephone junction boxes and other public or private utility structures placed above ground within a street right-of-way must meet the Utilities Protection Standardized Street Profile. 
(2)  Underground Utilities. Utilities placed underground shall be placed within the right-of-way as shown in Figure 6.1 at the end of this Article or in accordance with County standards for roads with swale ditches. 
(a)  All utilities beneath pavement shall be installed and the ditch backfilled and thoroughly compacted before any pavement or base is installed, or the pipes shall be bored if installed after street construction. 
(b)  All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought to the finished grade within the roadway section. 
(c)  All utility locations shall correspond to the typical layout shown by Standard Drawings. 
(d)  All private utilities that will cross under pavement shall be installed completely throughout the subdivision prior to any roadway base being applied. Installation of approved utility sleeves shall be considered as an alternate. 
a.  All utility street cuts within public rights-of-way shall be reviewed and approved by the appropriate engineering department before construction begins. 
b.  Pavement cuts for the installation of utilities shall be avoided whenever possible. Utility crossings shall be bored across any arterial, subject to the approval of the Georgia DOT, and across any collector unless a pavement cut is approved by the Director of Public Works. 
c.  Pavement cuts across local streets shall be permitted, provided the road is repaired with at least six inches of 3,000 psi Portland cement and topped with at least two inches of E or F hot plant mix asphaltic cement. The top of the concrete pad shall not exceed the elevation of the aggregate base course of the original road construction. 
d.  Pavement cuts across local streets shall conform to Figure 6.2 found at the end of this Article. 
6.6.8. - Lighting.To reduce light trespass, obtrusive light, and light pollution; to conserve energy and resources; to reduce extreme variations of illumination, to which elderly drivers are particularly sensitive; and enhance enjoyment of the night sky, the following standards shall apply to all exterior lighting with an illumination level about 230 lumens in residential zones and 500 lumens (600 lumens for fluorescent) in nonresidential zones: 
a.  All new or replacement lighting shall be of such a design, type, location, direction and shielding as to protect adjacent properties from excessive light. The level of lighting generated by a property shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles beyond any property line shared with a residential use or 1.0 footcandles beyond any property line shared with a nonresidential or public use. 
b.  No direct light shall be allowed onto adjacent residential property or public way. 
c.  All permanent area lights shall be full cut-off fixtures, downward directed, and shielded so that the angle of luminance does not result in light projecting beyond the area being lit. Except for outdoor recreation attractions, lights may be mounted at a height of no more than 25 feet from grade. 
d.  Accent lighting of structures and architectural features, such as steeples, monuments, or flagpoles, should be downward directed if feasible; however, upward directed lighting may be allowed provided light projecting above or beyond the feature is minimized. 
e.  Light fixtures illuminating signs shall be downward directed and shielded so that the angle of luminance does not result in light projecting above or beyond the sign being lit. Upward-directed sign lighting is prohibited except for monument signs of less than six feet overall height. 
f.  Lighting which presents a clear hazard to pilots, motorist, cyclists or pedestrians is prohibited. 
g.  High intensity, laser, and any similar lighting is prohibited. 
h.  Definitions: 
Cutoff fixture: An outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed in such a manner that no more than two and one-half percent of the total light emitted by the fixture is projected above the horizontal plane of the fixture. 
Direct light: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a light fixture. 
Footcandles: A unit of measure of the intensity of light falling on a surface, equal to one lumen per square foot and originally defined with reference to a standardized candle burning at one foot from a given surface. 
Indirect light: Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off of other surfaces. 
Light trespass: The shining of light produced by a fixture beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
Georgia law (O.C.G.A. § 27-3-133, and O.C.G.A. § 12-6-176) prohibits disturbance of any known burial place for human remains for development or for change of land use unless a permit is obtained from the governing body (city or county) or from the Superior Court of Floyd County. No such permit will be issued by the governing body or superior court without approved reinternment. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 02-11-7, § I, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 03-7-9, § I, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 2008-7-7, § I, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 2009-1-2, § I, 1-5-09; Ord. No. 2009-1-4, § I, 1-5-09) 
6.7. - Design standards for streets. 
a.  Arterial Streets. All major and minor arterial streets shall meet all design requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
b.  Local and Collector Streets. All local and collector streets shall comply with the design and construction requirements of this Ordinance. 
c.  Street names. 
(1)  Proposed streets that are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the name for a proposed street duplicate existing street names in the City or County, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, road, pike, drive, way, place, court or other derivatives. 
(2)  The entire County is divided into four street number quadrants designated "N.E.," "N.W.," "S.E.," and "S.W." All streets shall bear the proper quadrant suffix. 
(3)  All street names are subject to the approval of the respective public works department. 
(4)  Property address numbers shall be provided by the Public Works Department. 
d.  Street name and traffic control signs. Street name signs of a type approved by the Jurisdiction is to be placed at all intersections. Traffic control signs shall be placed by the Jurisdiction and conform to the U.S. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. 
Minimum width of right-of-way measured from lot line to lot line shall be as follows: 
Table 6-1  Minimum Right-of-Way Width 

 
a.  Vertical alignment of streets. 
(1)  The maximum grade and vertical curve allowed for a street are shown on the following table, except that the grade across a cul-de-sac in all directions shall not exceed one and one-half percent. All streets shall have a minimum grade of one percent. 
Table 6-2  Vertical Alignment 

 
(2)  All changes in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve so constructed as to afford a minimum sight distance, said sight distance being measured from the driver's eyes, which are assumed to be three and one-half feet in height above the pavement surface, to an object six inches high on the pavement. 
The minimum sight distance shall be as follows: 
Table 6-3  Minimum Sight Distance 

 
b.  Horizontal alignment of streets. 
(1)  Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, the radius of curvature of the center line of said street shall be not less than as follows: 
Table 6-4  Horizontal Alignment 

 
(2)  Curved streets shall have a minimum tangent of 100 feet at intersections as measured from the centerline of cross streets. A tangent of a least 200 feet in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on collector streets, and 100 feet on local streets. 
(3)  Adjoining street intersections shall be spaced at least 200 feet apart measured from edge of right-of-way to edge of opposing right-of-way. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be allowed. 
(4)  Intersections. The centerline of no more than two streets shall intersect at any one point. All streets shall intersect at no less than 60 degrees, and as near a right angle as possible. The angle of intersection is to be measured at the intersection of the street centerlines. Such intersecting streets shall provide an uninterrupted line of sight from the center point of the intersection for not less than the minimum sight distance required in accordance with this Development Code. 
(5)  Islands at intersections shall be subject to individual approval by the appropriate engineer of the city and/or county. In no case shall anything extend more than three feet above the back of the curb within the right-of-way of the intersecting street. 
(6)  Curb lines at street intersections shall have a radius of curvature of not less than 25 feet. 
(7)  Intersecting street right-of-way lines shall be rounded with a radius of no less than 25 feet. 
c.  Design Speed. Horizontal curves and super elevation shall be designed in accordance with the following minimum design speeds: 
Table 6-5  Design Speeds 

 
6.7.4. - Dead-end streets. 
a.  A cul-de-sac shall be no more than 1,600 feet long unless necessitated by topographic or other conditions and approved by the Building Inspection Department. 
b.  Cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way of at least 100 feet in diameter and a paved turnaround with a minimum diameter of 80 feet to the edge of the pavement. 19 [] 
c.  A reverse curve joining a cul-de-sac turnaround to a street section is to have a right-of-way radius of 29 feet and a radius to the back of curb of 40 feet (42 feet to edge of pavement). 
d.  A dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac shall not be allowed except as a temporary stage of construction of a street that is intended to be extended in a later stage of construction. Such a temporary dead-end street shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a diameter of 80 feet, within the right-of-way if: 
(1)  One or more lots front exclusively on the street; and, 
(2)  Extension of the street is not under construction when the Final Plat is submitted for recording. 
e.  Temporary turnarounds shall consist of a tack coat and one inch of asphalt. 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Radius to back of curb is 42 feet. 

6.7.5. - Alleys and service drives.Alleys may be provided in residential blocks where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. Where an alley has been specifically authorized or required by the Building Inspection Department, it shall comply with the following minimum design standards: 
a.  The roadbed width shall be no less than 20 feet, containing a paved roadway of no less than 16 feet exclusive of gutters. 
b.  Dead-end alleys shall be provided with a turnaround having a radius of at least 40 feet. 
6.7.6. - Half streets.Half streets are prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
a.  Split Level Streets and One-way Streets. 
b.  Streets which are constructed so as to have two traffic-ways, each at a different level within the same right-of-way, shall provide a paved traffic surface of at least 20 feet on each level and a slope between the two traffic-ways of not less than three to one. One-way streets and split streets will be allowed when: 
(1)  Topographic conditions are such that alternatives to the typical street construction would be more desirable. 
(2)  The shape and size of the parcel could be more efficiently developed. 
In either case, approval must be obtained from the Building Inspection Department and the appropriate Public Works Department. 
6.7.7. - Pavement design. 
a.  Minimum width of pavement. The minimum pavement width, measured from curb edge of gutter to edge of gutter (or edge of pavement to edge of pavement for swale ditch section) required for collectors and local streets shall be as follows: 
Table 6-6  Minimum Pavement Width 

 
b.  Street base. 
(1)  Street base material shall conform to the following specifications: 
Table 6-7  Street Base 

 
(2)  For streets without curbs, the base shall extend at least 12 inches beyond the edge of payment. 
c.  Asphaltic Concrete Pavement. 
(1)  Streets shall be paved with asphaltic concrete meeting the following standards: 
Table 6-8  Pavement Topping 

 
6.7.8. - Curb and gutter. 
a.  Where required, curb and gutter shall be of vertical, roll back or "Rome" type and shall conform to D.O.T. standard Class B Curb Mix. 
b.  Whenever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property line at such street corner shall be round or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. 
c.  Where curb and gutter are not required, a 60-foot street right-of-way with approved drainage facilities will be required. The appropriate City or County official shall according to plans and specifications approve installation of curb and gutter or alternative facilities. 
d.  Curbing along streets shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Developer's engineer or surveyor shall set line and grade. 
(2)  One-half inch expansion joints of premolded bitumastic expansion joint material shall be provided at all radius points and at intervals not to exceed 50 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 
(3)  The appropriate engineer shall individually approve special curbing design (center islands, etc.). 
(4)  Curb and gutter shall be set true to line and grade and finished by skilled workers to the section shown on the plans. 
(5)  Inferior workmanship or construction methods resulting in unsightly curb and gutter will be cause for rejection of the finished work. 
(6)  All curbing shall be backfilled and grassed. 
(7)  Adequate storm drainage structures shall be provided. The curb and gutter shall be constructed so as to present a smooth, even line both horizontally and vertically. 
e.  Valley gutters shall not be allowed across streets at street intersections. 
6.7.9. - Storm drainage. 
a.  Street Cross Drains or Culverts. 
(1)  Pipe size for culverts under streets (street cross drains) shall be determined by design runoff and hydraulic capacity. The minimum allowable street cross drain diameter shall be 18 inches, with a minimum slope of one percent. 
(2)  Street cross drains shall be constructed of Class III reinforced concrete. 
(3)  Street cross drains shall be sized to handle the runoff of a 25-year, 24-hour storm. Cross drains shall be designed to handle the peak rate of discharge associated with a 100-year storm with at least one foot of freeboard from the top of the roadway shoulder. 
(4)  Velocity at design flow shall be sloped so as to maintain a minimum velocity of at least three feet per second but not more than the velocity that would cause erosion damage to the conduit. 
(5)  Street cross drain design is to be in accordance with the methods contained in the State Highway Standard 1030D, latest edition. 
(6)  Street cross drains carrying live streams shall extend to where the crown of the pipe intersects the street embankment slope and shall have flared end sections with a one-foot wide collar of six inch thick concrete. 
(7)  Maintain full shoulder width across all cross drains as the minimum length. 
(8)  Street water shall be limited to a maximum distance as follows: 400 feet on grade up to seven percent; 300 feet on grades from seven to ten percent; 250 feet on grade over ten percent. 
(9)  Bridges shall be designed to span a 100-year storm frequency. 
(10)  Junction boxes having access to the pipe shall be constructed to meet the requirements of Georgia DOT Standard 1030D (or most current). 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  Reserved. 
d.  Traffic and Erosion. Before any traffic over a storm drain is allowed the developer shall provide an adequate depth and width of compacted backfill to protect the structure from damage or displacement. The developer shall remove any debris or silt that constricts the flow through a pipe as often as necessary to maintain drainage. All pipe structures shall be cleaned before the work is accepted. Any damage or displacement that may occur due to traffic or erosion shall be repaired or corrected at the developer's expense. The developer's obligation to clean and repair pipes ceases after acceptance of the system by the proper authority. 
e.  Inlets and Catch Basins. 
(1)  Inlets and catch basins shall be designed in accordance with the Georgia Department of Transportation's Drainage Manual for Highways, latest edition and in accordance with the Standard Drawings. 
(2)  Frames and grates shall be as selected by the Public Works Director based upon site conditions. 
(3)  Stormwater catch basins shall be spaced as approved by the Public Works Department. 
(4)  Catch basins shall be located at all low points of streets and as approved by the Public Works Department. 
f.  Piped Systems. 
(1)  Design runoff and hydraulic capacity shall determine pipe size. The minimum allowable pipe diameter shall be 18 inches under a street and 15 inches under a driveway. 
(2)  Minimum Clearances. Minimum clearances are: One foot between the bottom of the roadway base and the exterior crown of the culvert, and a minimum of six inches between underground utilities and exterior crown of culverts. 
(3)  Trench Construction. Trench construction for storm drainage pipe shall be in accordance with standard drawings. 
(4)  Storm drainpipes shall be constructed of Class III reinforced concrete or aluminized Type II or steel corrugated culvert. 
(a)  Concrete Pipe. 
1)  Concrete pipe shall be reinforced within the right-of-way but may be plain pipe outside of the right-of-way. 
2)  Flat bottom and circular pipe sections shall be laid in a prepared trench with the socket ends pointing upstream. Sections shall be joined in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
(b)  Corrugated Aluminum or Steel Pipe. 
1)  Metal pipe shall be fully bituminous coated. 
2)  Corrugated aluminum or steel pipe and pipearches sections shall be laid in a prepared trench with outside laps of circumferential joints pointing upstream and with longitudinal joints at the sides. Coupling bands, fastened by two or more bolts, shall join the sections. The space between adjoining sections shall be not more than the width of one corrugation. 
3)  All damaged spots in galvanized coating that expose the base metal shall be repaired before the structure is backfilled. All damaged spots in bituminous coating that expose the base metal shall be re-coated with asphalt before the structure is backfilled. 
c.  PVC or HDPE Plastic Pipe. 
1)  PVC and HDPE plastic pipe shall be seamless with a smooth inner wall and corrugated outer wall. PVC pipe shall meet the requirements of ASTM F949. HDPE pipe shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M252 or M294, Type S. The pipe shall be manufactured as a single extrusion with annular corrugations. Joints shall be bell and spigot type with elastomeric gasket seals. 
2)  Plastic pipe shall be laid in a prepared trench and adjusted to grade in accordance with ASTM D2321. Connections to manholes or other structures shall be made with a flexible connector secured with stainless steel bands, or grouted in place according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(d)  Elongation. Elongation of metal pipes shall be as shown on the plans. The contractor shall order the elongation of the vertical axis of the pipe to be done in the shop. Corrugated metal pipe shall be shipped with wire-tie in the pipe ends. Wire-ties shall be removed as soon as possible after the fill is completed. 
(5)  The design of piped storm water collection systems shall be based upon conveyance of the peak rate of discharge associated with a 25-year, 24-hour storm. 
(6)  Storm water pipes that do not carry live streams shall extend at least 50 feet beyond the front building setback lines, and may be required to extend farther where necessary to provide an adequately protected building site on the property. 
(7)  Any storm drainage pipe dedicated to the public that extends outside of the street right-of-way shall be located within a 20-foot wide easement. 
(8)  All storm drainage pipes shall be at least 18 inches below the surface and shall have a slope of at least one per cent. Subdrainage will be installed to control the surplus ground water by intercepting sidehill seepage or by lowering or regulating the ground water level where such conditions exist. 
(9)  Pipe bedding shall be provided as specified in Design and Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers, prepared by the American Society of Civil Engineers (Manuals and Reports on Engineering Practice No. 37), latest edition. 
(10)  Development storm drain outlet systems shall connect to a public stormwater conveyance system or to a free-flowing stream. The developer shall be required to provide evidence of acceptable capacity to receive additional flow. 
(11)  Under no circumstances shall structures be constructed over an existing or proposed storm drain, whether public or private. 
(12)  Maximum continuous length of pipe shall be 300 feet. 
g.  Headwalls 
(1)  Headwalls or flared end sections with concrete collars are required at the inlet and outlet on all street cross drains and storm drain pipes. 
(2)  Headwalls are to be pre-cast concrete, stone masonry with reinforced concrete footings, or poured-in-place, reinforced concrete with reinforced concrete footings. 
(3)  Flared end sections shall be constructed of the same material as the drainage pipe to which they are being connected. 
(4)  High water elevation contour is to be based on a 25-year storm at the entrance of each head wall. 
(5)  Energy dissipation devices, such as splash pads, rip-rap, stilling basins, etc., shall be provided at the outlet of every street cross drain and storm drainpipe. 
h.  Open Channels. 
(1)  All storm water channels shall be designed to carry at least the 25-year frequency storm with one foot of freeboard. 
(2)  Velocity at design flow shall be not less than six inches per second but not greater than four feet per second. A higher velocity may be allowed if actions are taken that would avoid erosion or scouring of the channel. 
(3)  All storm water channels must be designed to convey flows that prevent dwelling flooding, property damage, or public access and/or utility interruption. 
(4)  The Public Works Director may determine that the expected long-term maintenance of a surface drainage system could prove impractical, and a storm water pipe collection system may be required. 
(5)  Any storm drainage channel that extends outside of the street right-of-way shall be located within a 20-foot wide easement. 
(6)  In cases in which a subdivision or development is traversed by a stream, there shall be provided an easement extending ten feet from each side of the stream bank. 
(7)  All drainage easements, natural ditches, and drainage areas shall be grassed and/or rip-rapped as necessary to control erosion. 
(8)  Cross drains under driveways shall meet the standards for street cross drains. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 03-7-10, § I, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 2003-10-5, § I, 10-6-03) 
6.7.10. - Curb ramp design standards. In order to comply with the curb ramp design standards established by the Americans with Disabilities Act, all new construction funded by the City of Rome shall require installation of curb ramps. All new private commercial development, multi-family development, and residential subdivision development shall require curb ramp installation. When existing sidewalks or intersections are disturbed by utility repair or installation, curb ramps shall be installed, and existing curb ramps shall be repaired. 
(Ord. No. 2013-8-2, § I, 8-26-13) 
6.8. - Off-street parking. 
At the time of the establishment of any use, or erection of any building, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area, there shall be provided permanent off-street parking spaces improved with an asphalt or concrete surface in accordance with the following requirements: 
6.8.1. - Central business district and urban mixed use parking. 
a.  Nonresidential uses. Due to the availability of on-street parking in the downtown and urbanized areas that is devoted to customer use, off-street parking shall not be required for any nonresidential use in the C-B-C and U-M-U zoning districts. 
b.  Residential uses. In the C-B-C and U-M-U districts, no off-street parking shall be required for three or fewer dwelling units on a property. For more than three dwelling units, off-street parking shall be provided for the property at the rate of 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit (rounded up to the nearest whole number of spaces). 
6.8.2. - Dedicated to parking use.Areas provided to meet the minimum requirements of this Section as to handicapped and other parking spaces, along with the aisles and driveways necessary to provide access to those spaces, shall not be used for any other purpose than the temporary parking of vehicles. Specifically, no such parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies. 
6.8.3. - Combination of required parking spaces.The required parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot but the required spaces assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except as follows: 
a.  One-half of the parking spaces required for a church, theater or assembly hall whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
b.  Parking spaces may be shared by more than one use if the Chief Building Inspector finds that the total number of spaces will be adequate at the peak hours of the uses they serve. 
a.  All required parking for all uses shall be either on the same lot or within a walking distance of 500 feet of the main entrance to the building or use it is to serve, provided, however, that no required parking spaces may be located across any State or U.S. highway or arterial street from the use they are intended to serve. 
b.  Where provision of the required parking spaces is not on the lot on which the principal use is located, the developer shall submit with his application for a development permit or building permit an instrument that subjects the parking spaces to the principal use they serve. The developer shall pay all necessary recording fees and the Building Inspection Department shall have the instrument recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court. Such parking spaces shall be within 300 feet of an entrance to the principal use. 

Handicapped Parking Spaces 
  
6.8.5. - Requirements for design of parking lots. 
a.  Backing into streets. 
(1)  Except for parcels of land devoted to one-family, two-family or townhouse residential uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain access. 
(2)  In all cases, including parcels of land devoted to one-family, two-family or townhouse residential uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into an arterial or collector street. 
b.  Off-street parking lots. 
(1)  No parking spaces may be located within the sight triangle required under Section 6.16. 
(2)  No parking spaces shall be accessible from an access driveway within the first 20 feet of the driveway back from the street right-of-way line. 
(3)  Every parking space shall provide a useable rectangular area at least nine feet wide by 18 feet long. Access aisles shall not encroach into this minimum rectangular area. Every parking space shall be clearly demarcated. 
(4)  Access aisles in parking lots must be at least 26-feet wide for two-way traffic, and 18-feet wide for one-way traffic. One-way traffic aisles must be clearly marked with directional arrows on the pavement at each intersection with another aisle. 
c.  Handicapped parking spaces. 
(1)  Handicapped parking spaces shall have an adjacent aisle five-feet wide, and one in every eight handicapped spaces shall be adjacent to an aisle eight-feet wide and the space shall be signed "van accessible." Handicapped parking space aisles shall be clearly demarcated. 
(2)  Handicapped spaces shall be provided in each parking lot in the following ratio to the total number of spaces required for the use: 
Table 6-9  Handicapped Spaces Required 

 
Source: Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines. 
(3)  In addition to the requirements of this subsection, all handicapped parking shall comply with the requirements of the federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
6.8.6. - Off-street parking requirements by use.In all zoning districts other than the C-B-C zoning district, the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for each type of land use shall be determined by the following, in addition to the number of spaces required for handicapped parking: 
a.  Residential uses: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family dwellings (including patio homes, manufacture and mobile homes): Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
(2)  Multi-family dwellings (dwelling unit types allowed in the M-R and C-C zoning districts): Two spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(3)  Retirement Community: One space per unit. 
(4)  Group residences, nursing homes, convalescent homes, personal care home: In residential districts (A-R, S-R, HT-R, LT-R, D-R): One space for each four beds plus two spaces for staff and visitors. In all other districts where personal care homes are allowed, the parking requirement shall be two spaces for each five beds or fraction thereof. 
b.  Office uses: 
(1)  General and professional offices, studios, insurance and real estate offices: Three spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)  Medical and dental clinics: Five spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
c.  Retail services and sales uses: 
(1)  Amusement parlor, recreational attraction, roller skating or ice skating rink: Five spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)  Automotive service station, automotive service business, auto and truck repairs or maintenance: Three spaces for each service bay, plus one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to retail sales or showroom. 
(3)  Automobile, truck, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, and utility structure sales: One space for each 600 square feet of gross floor area of indoor sales and showroom space, plus one space for each 2,500 square feet of outdoor display area, plus three spaces for each service bay devoted to vehicle repairs or maintenance. 
(4)  Banks and other financial service establishments: Four and one-half spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(5)  Bar or nightclub: One space for each three seats. 
(6)  Bowling center: Four spaces for each bowling lane. 
(7)  Daycare center: One space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
(8)  Funeral home: 35 spaces for each viewing room. 
(9)  Furniture or carpet sales: One and one-half spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(10)  Health club or fitness center: Four and one-half spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(11)  Hospital: One and three-fourths spaces for each bed licensed for patients' use, exclusive of bassinets. 
(12)  Motels, hotels, and bed and breakfast inns, rooming houses and boarding houses: One space for each room to be rented, plus spaces as required under this Section for meeting space or restaurants open to the public. 
(13)  Motion picture and other theaters: One space for each three seats. 
(14)  Restaurant with seating (indoor or outdoor): One space for each three seats. 
(15)  Restaurant without seating (indoor or outdoor): One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area, minimum ten spaces. 
(16)  Shopping center: 
(a)  Gross floor area of 25,000 to 100,000 square feet: Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of total, plus three spaces per 100 seats in a movie theater, plus ten spaces per 1,000 square feet of food service area. 
(b)  Gross floor area of 100,000 to 200,000 square feet: Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of total, plus three spaces per 100 seats above the initial 450 in a movie theater, plus six spaces per 1,000 square feet of food service area. 
(c)  Gross floor area of 200,000 to 400,000 square feet: Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of total, plus three spaces per 100 seats above the initial 750 in a movie theater. 
(d)  Gross floor area of 400,000 to 600,000 square feet: Four and one-half spaces per 1,000 square feet of total, plus three spaces per 100 seats above the initial 750 in a movie theater. 
(e)  Gross floor area of more than 600,000 square feet: Five spaces per 1,000 square feet of total, plus three spaces per 100 seats above the initial 750 in a movie theater. 
(17)  Supermarket: Four spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(18)  Retail sales and services businesses not listed above: One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area and permanent outdoor sales area. 
(19)  Mini-warehouses: One space for every 25 units, plus one space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to office use. 
(20)  Indoor athletic training or fitness facility: Three spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(21)  Recreational Vehicle Park and Campground: One and one-half (1 ½) spaces per campsite. 
d.  Semi-public uses: 
(1)  Auditoriums, places of worship, stadiums, and similar places of public assembly: One space for each three seats, or for each 12 feet of benches, or for each 25 square feet of usable floor area in the public assembly room (whichever is greater). 
(2)  Civic clubs, private clubs, lodges, libraries, museums, and fraternal lodges: One space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
(3)  Schools: 
(a)  Elementary and Middle School —Two spaces for each classroom. 
(b)  High School —Five spaces for each classroom. 
(c)  Two-year college, Business or Vocational School —20 spaces for each classroom. 
(d)  Four-year Colleges or Universities: Ten spaces per classroom. 
(e)  Other schools —As determined by the Director of Building Inspection. 
e.  Industrial and manufacturing uses: 
(1)  Wholesale and office-warehouse uses: One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to sales or office use, plus one space for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area devoted to storage. 
(2)  Warehouse, transfer and storage uses: One space for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area and outdoor storage area. 
(3)  Manufacturing uses: Two and one-half spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 05-12-2, § IV, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 06-6-2, § III, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 2011-6-4, § I, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 2012-10-3, § III, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 2014-7-2, § II, 7-28-14; Ord. No. 2016-12-03, § VI, 12-19-16; Ord. No. 2016-12-04, § III, 12-19-16) 
20 All fractions are to be rounded up to the next whole number of spaces. 
6.9. - Inter-parcel access requirements. 
6.9.1. - Internal access easements required.For any office or retail sales or services use, the property owner shall grant an access easement as described in this Section to each adjoining property that is zoned or used for an office or retail sales or services use. The purpose of the easement is to facilitate movement of customers from business to business without generating additional turning movements on the public street. 
a.  The easement shall permit automobile access from the adjoining property to driveways and parking areas intended for customer or tenant use; but parking spaces may be restricted to use by the owner's customers and tenants only. 
b.  The granting of such easement shall be effective upon the granting of a reciprocal easement by the adjoining property owner. 
c.  Upon the availability of access to driveways and parking areas of the adjoining lot, the pavement or other surfacing of the owner's driveways and parking areas shall be extended to the point of access on the property line. 
6.9.3. - Relief.The Governing Body's Manager or Director of Public Works or their designee may grant an exception to the requirements of this article upon a determination that the proposed land use is such that adverse impact of the required easement on use of the property would outweigh the reduced impact on the public street provided by the reciprocal easements; or that changes in grade or other physical obstacles make interparcel connection unreasonable. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 2008-7-7, § II, 7-7-08) 
6.10. - Street access control. 
6.10.1. - Approval required.No curbs or medians on public streets or rights-of-way shall be cut or altered for access without a curb cut permit issued by Public Works Department. 
_____
a.  Vehicular access from properties to streets shall comply with the following dimensional requirements, measured at the right-of-way line. 
Table 6-10  Driveway Width Requirements 

 
* Includes divided entrances with center islands. 
_____ 
b.  Driveway aprons. Driveway connections shall be provided between the edge of pavement or back of curb to the right-of-way line. No property may be afforded access from a public street except as follows: 
(1)  Curb and gutter streets shall be provided with a driveway apron constructed of 3,000 psi concrete at least six inches thick. Sidewalks, where provided, shall be warped to the driveway apron and are to be identified across the driveway apron by construction joints or control joints. 
(2)  Swale ditch section streets shall be provided with a driveway apron constructed of 3,000 psi concrete at least six inches thick, or asphaltic concrete of the same thickness and type as the paving course(s) for the street. 
(3)  All driveway aprons shall have a radius connecting the driveway to the curb line or pavement edge as follows: 
(4)  Reserved. 
Table 6-11  Driveway Apron Radii 

 
(5)  All driveway aprons shall slope away from the roadway to the right-of-way line (for curb and gutter streets) and to the centerline of the drainage ditch (for swale ditch sections). 

Limitations on access 
a.  Requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation shall apply whenever more restrictive than the standards in this Code. 
b.  No point of access shall be allowed within 35 feet of the right-of-way line of any street intersections for single-family and two-family residential lots and within 50 feet for multi-family and nonresidential properties. 
c.  In office, commercial and industrial zoning districts, no curb cut shall be less than 40 feet from another curb cut, measured along the right-of-way line, nor less than 20 feet from any property line. In cases of practical difficulty, these distances may be reduced upon approval of the Public Works Director if the right-of-way line, nor less than 20 feet from any property line. In cases of practical difficulty, these distances may be reduced upon approval of the Public Works Director if adequate traffic safety conditions can be maintained. 
d.  Along State or U.S. highways, no more than one point of vehicular access from a property shall be permitted for each 300 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof. 
e.  Along major streets other than State or U.S. highways, no more than two points of vehicular access from a property to each abutting public street shall be permitted for each 200 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof; provided however, that lots with less than 100 feet of frontage shall have no more than one point of access to any one public street. The Public Works Department shall determine whether the points of access may be unrestricted or will have to be designed for right-in, right-out traffic flow. 
a.  In addition to the aforementioned requirements of Section 6.10 Street Access Control, these standards are hereby enacted to supplement driveway access within unincorporated areas of the County. Before the grading, paving, construction and repair of any driveway, the Chief Building Official must be notified and must make, or cause to be made, an inspection thereof; and the proposed improvements must receive approval of Floyd County Public Works. 
b.  All work shall conform to the following specifications and standards. These standards are implemented by Floyd County for the purpose of ensuring proper driveway installation and avoiding future problems with the County Road System. 
(1)  Driveway Standards: 
(a)  Maximum driveway width shall comply with Section 6.10.2 Driveway Connections, table 6-10. 
(b)  Angle of driveway into the County road right-of-way must be between 60 and 90 degrees. 
(c)  Maximum grade, which shall be permitted, is 15 percent within the right-of-way. 
(d)  The driveway surface connecting with the County road must have a minimum of five percent slope down and away from the edge of pavement for the lesser of a distance of six feet, or to the centerline of a roadside ditch, to prevent surface water drainage from the driveway flowing onto the County road surface. 
(e)  The driveway shall not obstruct or impair drainage in roadside ditches or roadside areas. The driveway piping shall be adequate for surface water drainage along the roadway and in no case less than 15-inch-diameter pipe. 
(f)  Driveway pipe, if required, shall be Class III reinforced concrete and shall have a minimum installed length of 24 feet. 
(g)  No landscaping, fences, terraces, or other natural or artificial features adjacent to the driveway shall impair visibility from approaching vehicular traffic where that visibility is a threat to safety. 
(h)  The driveway shall be located on the property so as to provide proper sight distance. Minimum sight distance requirements must comply with Section 6.7.3 Vertical and Horizontal Alignment of Streets, table 6-3. 
(2)  Application for permit. 
(a)  The Office of the Floyd County Engineer shall be responsible for issuance of driveway permits separate from other building permits. 
(b)  Upon application for a driveway permit, the applicant will be given two stakes to mark the proposed driveway location at the site. 
(c)  Floyd County Public Works will inspect the location and state the required pipe size and other special notes on the location of the driveway. 
(d)  Any property with an existing driveway that requires a building permit for a new structure shall comply with these requirements herein. 
(3)  Driveway connection installation. With the exception of State Routes, all driveway connection installations within unincorporated Floyd County will be inspected by Floyd County Public Works. 
(a)  At the request of the Applicant, Floyd County Public Works will install driveway connections on the road right-of-way. A fee schedule for materials and installation shall be set by the Floyd County Board of Commissioners for any driveway with pipe up to 36 inches in diameter. All fees shall be paid in full at the Office of the Floyd County Engineer. 
(b)  The applicant may elect to install their own driveway connection; however, Floyd County Public Works must inspect and approve any driveway connection not installed by them. Any development that fails to comply with the driveway standards herein shall not receive a final electrical inspection until such time that the driveway has been inspected and approved by Floyd County Public Works. 
(4)  Maintenance of driveway. 
(a)  The Public Works Department will be responsible for the maintenance of the drainage pipe under the driveway and will also be responsible for providing a smooth transition from the County road to the driveway within the road right-of-way. 
(b)  The property owner is responsible for maintaining the surface of the driveway and any associated improvements to the property, which has encroached upon the County right-of-way such as landscaping, fences, etc. 
(c)  If any improvements encroaching on the county right-of-way are found to be in violation of this section or are a safety hazard, the property owner will be notified in writing to remove such improvement. If the property owner does not comply within a reasonable period of time, Floyd County Public Works will remove such improvement. 
(5)  Variances. 
(a)  A variance may be requested in cases where these requirements might create an undue hardship. 
(b)  Before a variance can be considered, a letter must be submitted to the Public Works Director stating the reasons for requesting a variance. 
(c)  Within five working days, a decision on granting the variance will be made by the Public Works Director. The party requesting the variance will be notified by letter if the variance is to be granted or not. Any special conditions attached to the variance will also be stated in this letter. 
(d)  The decision of the Public Works Director may be appealed to the County Manager, who shall have the authority to reverse the decision. An appeal to the County Manager shall be decided in a timely manner. 
(e)  If the decision of the Public Works Director is upheld by the County Manager, the applicant may further appeal to the Board of Commissioners by submitting a written notice of appeal. An appeal submitted to the Board of Commissioners shall be considered and decided within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 02-12-4, § I, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 04-3-5, § I, 3-1-04) 
6.11. - Sight triangle. 
a.  A sight triangle (typical) shall be defined at every street intersection with another street. 
(1)  At public street intersections, the sight triangle is delineated by the two intersecting street right-of-way lines and a line connecting the right-of-way lines at the points indicated in the Sight Triangle Table. The connecting points shall be measured from the right-of-way lines extended to their point of intersection. 
Table 6-12  Sight Triangle Table  (See Drawing) 

 
b.  Within the sight triangle, the planting of trees or other vegetation or the location of structures exceeding 30 inches in height that would obstruct the clear sight across the area of the easement shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
6.12. - Construction activities and sequencing. 
6.12.1. - General. 
a.  Clearing and grading shall not proceed until issuance of an approved development permit by the Building Inspections Department. 
b.  Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades drawn on the approved grading plan. 
6.12.2. - Erosion and sedimentation control measures (see section 6.13).Required erosion and sedimentation control measures must be installed in accordance with the most recent locally adopted erosion and sedimentation control ordinance and the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan prior to any major development activity and as development progresses. 
6.12.3. - Installation of storm drainage facilities.Construction of the storm drainage facilities shall be initiated as part of the grading of the site and in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed prior to the installation of any other site improvements, and may be utilized under proper design as sedimentation basins during development. Installation of all other storm drainage pipes, culverts, headwalls, and ditches, shall be coordinated with the construction of streets and other site improvements, as appropriate. 
6.12.4. - Earthen embankments.Earthen embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed a compacted thickness of six inches per layer and shall be compacted to a density of 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99 in all areas where structures, parking lots and drives, streets, and utilities are to be placed. All other embankments are to be compacted to at least 90 percent. Proofrolling shall be accomplished prior to placement of embankments to detect soft spots. 
6.12.5. - Slopes and shoulder improvements. 
a.  The maximum slope for all fill or cut slopes shall be 2:1. 
b.  The depth of cut shall be construed to be the maximum cut or fill occurring in any one section of cut or fill. The slope on cut or fill shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or fill. When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, slope may be changed to vertical slope upon the written approval of the appropriate City or County Engineer. 
6.12.6. - Street construction and utilities. 
a.  Basic Requirements for All Streets. 
(1)  Grading. 
(a)  All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full width by the developer so that pavement extensions or sidewalks, where required or if installed in the future, can be constructed on the same level plane. 
(b)  Preparation of roadway: Before grading is started the entire area to be paved shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials. In all areas to be graded or filled, the developer shall stockpile the topsoil later to be spread in all disturbed areas not paved. 
(c)  Grading shall be accurately done to the lines and grades shown on the plans. Embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed six inches and compacted to a density of 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by an approved method. Proofrolling shall be accomplished prior to placement of embankments to detect soft spots. 
(2)  Slopes and Shoulder Improvements. 
(a)  The minimum width for all shoulders from back edge of the curb shall be eight feet. All shoulders shall slope one-fourth inch to the foot toward the roadway. 
(b)  On streets with swale ditch drainage, the shoulders shall slope three-quarters inch to the foot away from the roadway for at least five feet to the drainage channel. 
(c)  When all construction is completed, all slopes and shoulders shall be cleared of all rubbish and shall have a stand of grass to prevent undue erosion, either by sprigging or seeding. 
(d)  If any sections of the subgrade are composed of unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the appropriate Public Works Department and replaced with suitable, thoroughly compacted material. 
(e)  When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed, a layer of No. 5 stone can be laid as a traffic surface if the developer so desires. 
1)  This material shall not be used as part of the base material. 
2)  It may be worked into the subgrade; or it shall be removed before the base course is set up for paving. 
3)  Provision shall be made to drain low points in road construction when the final paving surface is delayed. 
(f)  Abutting property shall be suitably sloped to the right-of-way line. 
(3)  Protection of Cut or Fill Slopes. Immediately after grading and filling and re-spreading of topsoil, all areas of disturbed soil shall be fertilized and seeded (or in steep areas sodded or otherwise appropriately treated) with suitable vegetative cover to retard erosion. 
(4)  Installation of Utilities. 
(a)  After grading is completed and approved, the curb lines or edge of pavement lines, as applicable, shall be staked by the developer's Registered Land Surveyor. Before any base is applied, all of the underground utilities—water mains, sewer mains, gas mains, or any other underground utilities, and all service connections related thereto—shall be installed completely and provided throughout the length of the street and across the flat section. Service connections for sanitary sewer and water shall be extended to the right-of-way lines. 
(b)  No private improvements, such as private lawn sprinkler systems, yard lighting, and the like, shall be installed within a public right-of-way except by authorization of the Public Works Director. Such authorization, if issued, shall require the owner to assume all repair costs of the owner's facilities should they become damaged. 
(5)  Preparation of subgrade. Prior to placement of the street base, the subgrade shall be compacted to 95 percent density. 
(6)  Street base, curbing and paving. Street base, curbing and paving shall be installed by the developer in accordance with the requirements and standards of this Development Code. 
b.  Testing Requirements. It is the responsibility of the developer to insure that all required tests are made and reported to the Public Works Department. The cost of all testing and quality control shall be performed at the expense of the developer by qualified testing laboratories. 
Table 6-13  Testing Requirements 

 
6.12.7. - Traffic control devices and street lights. 
a.  Street signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization, shall be provided through payment of fees to Public Works Department. Traffic control devices may also be installed by the developer after receiving written approval from the Public Works Director. 
b.  The installation of all street lighting fixtures within the City right-of-way must be approved by the Public Works Director prior to such installation. 
c.  Outside of the City, street lights are to be installed by the developer in accordance with the County's requirements regarding street lighting. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
6.13. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
6.13.1. - Exemptions. 
a.  This Section shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72. 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying. 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities, which result in minor soil erosion. 
(4)  Single-family detached dwellings, as follows: 
(a)  The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy; or 
(b)  The construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in this Section. 
For single-family detached dwelling construction covered by the provisions of this subparagraph, there shall be a greenway zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5, of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such greenway zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the greenway zone shall be at least 50-horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller greenway shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the greenway zone shall be at least 50-horizontal feet, but the EPD Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the greenway shall be at least 25-horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller greenway shall be granted. 
b.  Where this Section requires compliance with the minimum requirements of this Development Code and the most recently adopted local Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, issuing authorities shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a development permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by development permit holders. 
6.13.2. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control. 
a.  General Provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this Section shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sediment control measures. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sediment control plans. Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall conform to the requirements of this Section. The application of measures shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sediment pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
b.  Best Management Practices. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this Section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the EPD Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a development permit for the discharge of stormwater. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any development permit for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout streams. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines issued by the EPD Director. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any development for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The EPD Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board of Natural Resources, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
c.  Minimum Requirements. Land-disturbing activities shall, as a minimum, be undertaken using best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia in effect at the time the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practical. 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practical. 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this Section. 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible and provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in Subsection 6.13.2.b(2). 
(15)  Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within the 100-year flood plain except in compliance with Section 6.14 of this Development Code. 
d.  Greenways. 
(1)  Along State Waters: Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 100 feet of the banks of a major river or 40 feet of a river tributary as established under Section 6.19 of this Code, or within 25 feet of the banks of any other state waters, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except: 
(a)  Where the EPD Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment; or 
(b)  Where otherwise allowed by the EPD Director; or 
(c)  Where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; provided, however, that greenways of at least 25 feet established pursuant to the Metropolitan River Protection Act shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the EPD. 
(2)  Along Trout Streams: Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 100-horizontal feet, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, of the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" unless a variance for such activity is granted by the EPD Director, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
e.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a development permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Development Code or the terms of the development permit. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 02-12-5, § I, 12-9-02) 
6.14. - Flood damage prevention. 
The flood damage protection ordinances enforced by the City of Rome (adopted in October of 2009 as Section 10-1 thru 10-7 of the Code of the City of Rome) and Floyd County (adopted in September of 2009 as Section 2-6-30 thru 2-6-36 of the Code of Floyd County) were both approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in March of 2010. These ordinances may be revised from time to time and will be readopted every ten years, as mandated by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2-4, § I, 2-27-17) 
6.15. - Stormwater management. 
a.  All persons proposing development or construction in the jurisdiction shall prepare a Stormwater Management Plan. No final subdivision plat shall be approved and no development or building permit shall be issued until and unless the Stormwater Management Plan had been reviewed and approved by the Director of Public Works, except as exempt below. 
b.  The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this Section and the requirement of providing a stormwater management plan: 
(1)  Agricultural land management. 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family detached dwellings. 
(3)  Developments with a total land area of 0.4 (four-tenths) of an acre or less. 
(4)  Residential development consisting of single-family houses, each on a lot of three (3) acres or greater. 
(5)  Residential development consisting of single-family houses, each on a lot of 1 to 3 acres and where it is demonstrated that each lot will have no more than 10% impervious surface. 
(6)  Single-family residential construction on a lot platted prior to March 26, 1991. 
6.15.2. - Variances.Requests for variances from the requirements of this section shall be made in accordance with Article 2.11. 
a.  The Stormwater Management Plan shall be prepared under the supervision of, and certified by, a professional engineer registered in the state and consistent with all provisions of the most currently adopted local stormwater management ordinance. The Stormwater Management Plan shall also address Water Quality as required by General NPDES Stormwater Permit No. GAG610000, or the currently adopted General NPDES Stormwater Permit for the State of Georgia applicable to the City of Rome and Floyd County. 
b.  The Stormwater Management Plan shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed development on water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff. The developer shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, construction, and development shall be conducted in strict accordance with the plan. 
c.  The minimum information submitted for support of a Stormwater Management Plan shall be as follows: 
(1)  Site plan. Provide a site plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet with the following characteristics and information: 
(a)  Graphic scale, north arrow, and date. The north arrow shall be identified as magnetic, true, or grid north. 
(b)  Vicinity map showing the site location relative to surrounding landmarks, highway intersections, rivers, and streams. 
(c)  Topography showing existing and proposed elevations in accordance with the following: 
1)  For sites smaller than one (1) acre in size, show the direction of drainage and spot elevations at all breaks in grade and along drainage channels or swales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
2)  For sites of one (1) acre and larger with slopes of less than approximately two (2) percent, show contours at intervals of not more than two feet and spot elevations at all breaks in grade along drainage channels or swales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
3)  For sites of one (1) acre and larger with slopes of more than two (2) percent, show contours with an interval of not more than five (5) feet. 
4)  Elevations shall be based on the datum plane established by the United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey. 
(d)  Delineation of property lines and deed record names of adjacent property owners. 
(e)  Locations and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads and utility lines, either on or adjacent to the property to be developed. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or rights-of-way and show the location of towers and poles. 
(f)  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown. 
(g)  Location of existing buildings and other improvements. 
(h)  Proposed conditions: 
1)  Layout of proposed streets, roads, alleys, drives, paved areas and public crosswalks, with widths and road names or designations. 
2)  Preliminary plans of storm sewer system with grade, pipe size and location of outlet. 
3)  Location of proposed buildings and other improvements. 
4)  Certification by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer attesting that the site plan has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards of this Section. 
(2)  An adequate drainage system for the property or development, including necessary ditches, pipes, culverts, drains, inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. The location and size of all proposed drainage improvements shall be designed in accordance with and meet all standards relating to Stormwater Drainage under Article 6 of this Development Code. The Stormwater Management plan shall include: 
(a)  Location and profiles of all storm drainage pipes and slopes of receiving channels. Hydraulic grade lines to be shown on all pipes that cross streets and on all detention basin outfalls. 
(b)  Stormwater detention facility design and construction details. 
(c)  Location and typical construction details of all inlets and catch basins, headwalls and other drainage structures. 
(d)  The 100-year ponding limits above each street cross drain. 
(e)  The hydrologic and hydraulic analysis required for the system design under Article 6.15.4. 
(f)  When required by the Director of Public Works, provides a soils investigation for all sites proposed as ponds or impoundments or for stormwater detention. Locate all soil borings on the site plan required in section 6.15.3a(1) above. 
(g)  Provide a reconstruction schedule for both temporary and permanent facilities. Reference the schedule to other development activities such as clearing, rough grading, construction, final grading, and vegetation establishment. 
(h)  Provide a plan for maintenance of the Stormwater and/or Water Quality facilities. Describe specific actions and a recommended schedule of maintenance required to maintain the facilities at a satisfactory level of service. All Stormwater and/or Water Quality Facilities which will not be maintained by the City of Rome, or Floyd County, will require a Stormwater Facility Maintenance Agreement to be executed and placed on record in the Office of Clerk of Superior Court of Floyd County prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the project, or the approval of a Final Plat. 
(i)  Provide a cost estimate for construction of the Stormwater/Water Quality management facilities. Provide a separate estimate of the annual cost for maintenance of the proposed facilities. 
6.15.4. - Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis. 
a.  Analyses and design shall be performed in accordance with the publication entitled "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Soil and Water Conservation Commission, and the most recent edition of the "Georgia Stormwater Management Manual." 
b.  In order to obtain a Development Permit, a hydrology report shall be prepared that includes appropriate calculations for the 2-year, 10-year, 25-year, and 100-year design frequency storms. The report shall show detailed calculations indicating the formula used, along with co-efficient of run-off, the time of concentration, the rainfall intensity, the discharge velocity, and the source of all data used. 
c.  The hydrology report shall include a map outlining the areas and showing the acreage of all on-site and off-site drainage basins contributing flow through the project for both the pre- and post- development conditions. 
d.  Runoff peak rate of discharge for drainage areas up to 50 acres in size may be calculated using the Rational Method. Flows from drainage areas larger than 50 acres in size shall be calculated using the SCS Method. 
e.  Rainfall intensities used in hydrologic analyses shall not be less than those shown by applicable rainfall curves published within the most recent edition of the "Georgia Stormwater Management Manual." 
f.  Runoff coefficients used for pre- and post- development activity conditions for the Rational Method shall be consistent with local conditions. For the SCS method, the runoff curve numbers found in the most recent edition of the "Georgia Stormwater Management Manual." 
g.  Hydraulic capacity for open channel flow, pipes, and ditches shall be determined using the Manning Equation. 
h.  The controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required for all developments or construction in order to prevent any increase in excess of 10 percent of 1 cubic foot per second of the predevelopment rate of runoff for a ten-year frequency storm. Where controlled release is required, such releases shall prevent any increase in the predevelopment rate of runoff of less frequent storms up to and including the 100-year storm event. 
6.15.5. - Stormwater detention facilities. 
a.  Reservoir routing methods shall be used for all detention facility design. 
b.  The drainage system being developed shall have adequate capacity to bypass through the development the flow from all upstream areas for a storm of 25-year design frequency for the land off site and upstream under existing development. The 25-year flow rate of record or computed using a runoff coefficient of not less than 0.50. 
c.  The Public Works Department may permit several developers to construct joint facilities. The Public Works Department shall approve or disapprove the waiver of on-site drainage or detention facilities on the basis of the engineering feasibility of a combined facility. No use of land or occupancy of buildings within the properties served by these facilities shall be permitted until completion of the retention and drainage structures, except upon specific approval. 
d.  The Public Works Department shall be authorized to approve of alternative methods of stormwater detention based on appropriate engineering studies that do demonstrate equal or better performance in accordance with the jurisdiction's stormwater management practices. Approved alternatives may include well maintained and landscaped lakes that may be provided to act jointly as detention reservoirs and recreation facilities or aesthetic focal points within forest preserve areas, public or private parks, housing developments, shopping centers, and industrial parks. Other control methods to regulate the rate of stormwater discharge which may be acceptable include, but not limited to, detention on flat roofs, parking lots, streets, lawns, underground storage, and oversized storm drains with restricted outlets. 
e.  Detention facilities and drainage structures shall, where possible, use natural topography and natural vegetation. In lieu thereof these shall have planted trees and vegetation such as shrubs and permanent ground cover on their borders. All on-site facilities shall be properly maintained by the owner in such a way that they do not become nuisances. Nuisance conditions shall include: improper storage resulting in uncontrolled runoff and overflow; stagnate water with concomitant algae growth, insect breeding, and odors; discarded debris, and safety hazards created by the facility's operation. 
f.  Principal outlets such as weirs shall be constructed of concrete block or reinforced concrete with watertight joints. Outlet pipes shall be at least six (6) inches in diameter. Riser pipes, if used, shall be at least eight (8) inches in diameter. 
g.  No portion of any detention facility shall be located in any required buffer, street right-of- way, or within a flood hazard. 
h.  The 100-year ponding limits of a detention facility shall not encroach upon a public street. 
i.  Stormwater Detention Facilities. 
(1)  Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed on a separate lot from all buildings in the development, and shall be dedicated to the City or County as a public improvement for maintenance in areas zoned AR, SR, HTR, LTR, and DR. 
(2)  A dedicated access corridor of at least 25 feet in width shall be required to provide access to the detention facility from a public street. 
(3)  Facilities shall be located on tracts of land designated on the recorded plat, with sufficient area around the perimeter to provide access for maintenance purposes and shall have an all-weather access road constructed from the public street to the detention facility. Said all-weather access road shall at a minimum be constructed of gravel and shall be approved by the Director of Public Works or their representative. 
(4)  Facilities that do not exclusively serve residential developments located within areas zoned AR, SR, HTR, LTR, and DR, are the perpetual responsibility of the land owner. 
j.  Detention facilities shall be enclosed with a minimum 4-foot high permanent fence around all facilities having a maximum water or undercut depth of more than four (4) feet or a bank slope greater than 1.5 to 1 and shall be equipped with a gate of sufficient width to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities. Fencing may be waived by the Director of Public Works in areas zoned other than residential and where the pond is more than 500 feet from a residential district or single or multi-family residence. 
k.  Construction of the stormwater management facilities shall be initiated as part of the grading of the site. Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed prior to the installation of any other site improvements, and may be utilized under proper design as sedimentation basins during development. Installation of all other storm drainage pipes, culverts, headwalls, and ditches shall be coordinated with the construction of streets and/or other site improvements, as appropriate. 
6.15.6. - Maintenance responsibilities. 
a.  It shall be the responsibility of the developer to maintain all facilities required by the stormwater management plan during construction. The developer shall be responsible for removing temporary structures or facilities on the completion of the construction. The developer and all subsequent owners shall also be responsible for maintaining the permanent facilities identified by the stormwater management plan to remain after construction is complete except as provided in Section 6-15.8 for residential developments located within areas zoned AR, SR, HTR, LTR, and DR. 
b.  Should an owner fail to maintain the stormwater management facilities in a state of service intended by the stormwater management plan, then the Director of Public Works shall notify the owner in writing of the deficiencies and specific minimum maintenance requirements to remedy such deficiencies. 
c.  If the owner fails to perform the required maintenance work within a reasonable period of time (30 days maximum) the owner shall be in violation of the provisions of this Code. 
6.15.7. - Stormwater performance surety. 
a.  Upon approval of the Stormwater Management Plan, but before the issuance of a building permit or subdivision plat approval, the applicant shall be required to post a performance bond, cash escrow, certified check, or other acceptable form of performance. 
b.  The amount of the surety shall not be less than the total estimated construction cost of the facilities required by the Stormwater Management Plan. 
c.  The performance bond or other securities shall not be released until the following requirements have been met. The Director of Public Works shall: 
(1)  Perform a final inspection of the facilities and determine that they have been constructed in compliance with the Stormwater Management Plan. 
(2)  Determine that all provisions of the Stormwater Management Plan have been faithfully executed. 
d.  A provision may be made for partial release of the amount of the bond pro rata upon completion and acceptance of various stages of development as specifically delineated, described and scheduled in the Stormwater Management Plan. The applicant shall notify the Public Works Department upon completion of each stage that is ready for inspection. 
a.  Developments and properties inside the City of Rome: 
(1)  In the case of residential developments located within areas zoned AR, SR, HTR,LTR, and DR approved after December 2, 1985, the City shall assume responsibility for the functional maintenance of facilities one year after the release of the performance bond required by this Development Code. At the end of the developer's maintenance period all detention structures shall have a positive slope to the outlet in order to facilitate complete drainage. 
(2)  Detention facilities in residential areas zoned AR, SR, HTR, LTR, and DR, constructed prior to December 2, 1985, will not be accepted for maintenance, as provided in Subsection a.(1), unless individually approved by and at the discretion of the City Commission and unless suitable access easements are provided. 
(3)  Prior to acceptance of a detention facility for functional maintenance, an all-weather access road shall be constructed in accordance with Article 6.15.5. 
b.  Developments and properties in Unincorporated Floyd County: 
(1)  In the case of single-family residential subdivisions approved after March 26, 1991, the County shall assume responsibility for the functional maintenance of facilities one year after the release of the performance bond required by this Development Code. At the end of the developer's maintenance period all detention structures shall have a positive slope to the outlet in order to facilitate complete drainage. 
(2)  Detention facilities in single-family residential subdivisions constructed prior to March 26, 1991, will not be accepted for maintenance, as provided in Subsection b.(1), unless individually approved by and at the discretion of the County Commission and unless suitable access easements are provided. 
6.15.9. - Inspection and enforcement.The Chief Building Official shall have the power and authority to perform any inspection necessary to insure conformance with this section and to employ Stop Work and/or Cease and Desist Orders until compliance with this section has been satisfied. Such inspection and enforcement shall be conducted in accordance with Article 7.5 of this Code. 
6.15.10. - Violations and penalties.Any person or developer who fails to comply with the requirements of this section is subject to the penalties described in Article 7.5 of this Code, including but not limited to revocation of permits and forfeiture of performance surety. 
6.15.11. - NPDES requirements.All construction of off-site or on-site improvements shall adhere to National Pollution Discharge Elimination system (NPDES) best management practices to prevent deleterious material or pollutants from entering the City or County storm drain systems. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 2008-7-7, § III, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 2016-03-03, § I, 3-28-16) 
6.16. - Buffers. 
6.16.1 - Buffers required.A buffer shall be required in any multi-family or nonresidential development project along a side or rear lot line that abuts a less intense zoning district, as follows: 
Table 6-14  Situations Where Buffer Required 
Provide a buffer on the lot of this use ↓ 

 
■ = buffer required 
a.  General. Buffer areas shall contain no driveways, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities, or any other structures or accessory uses except for a fence, wall, or earthen berm constructed to provide the visual screening required to meet the standards of this Ordinance. Underground utilities may be permitted to cross a buffer if the screening standards of this Ordinance will be subsequently achieved. Required vehicular access through a buffer may be allowed as a condition of a zoning, Special Use or Planned Development approval by the Governing Body. 
b.  Natural Buffers. Natural buffers may contain deciduous or perennial vegetation, but shall contain evergreen shrubs and trees suitable to local growing conditions that will provide an opaque visual screen during all seasons of the year. 
c.  Structural Buffers. Structural buffers shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Structural buffers shall be vegetated throughout the minimum area required for the buffer around any fences or walls and upon any earthen berms, which may include grass, ground covers, shrubs, and trees. 
(2)  All earthen berms shall have a maximum side slope of two horizontal to one vertical. Earthen berms shall not be constructed within the drip line of any existing trees that will remain on the property. 
(3)  Trees shall be located or planted within any structural buffer at a density of no less than one tree for each 20 feet of Buffer length or portion thereof. New trees shall have a caliper of no less than two inches upon planting, and may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
(4)  Fences and freestanding walls shall present a finished and decorative appearance to the abutting property, and shall be located no closer to the property line than two feet. Shrubs, ground covers, or other vegetation shall be provided between the fence or wall and the property line so as to provide a decorative effect, following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location and design. 
(5)  Fences used in buffers must be made of rot-resistant material or protected from deterioration with water-proofing material. 
d.  Examples of Buffers. The following illustration provides examples of natural and structural buffers. Other solutions meeting the minimum requirements of this section are also acceptable if approved by the building official. 

 
■ = buffer required 
6.16.3. - Minimum buffer requirements.A buffer required by this Ordinance shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Width of Buffer. 
(1)  Side Lot Line. Buffers required along any side lot line shall be no less than the minimum required width of the side principal building setback, or ten feet, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Rear Lot Line. Buffers required along any rear lot line shall be no less than the minimum required width of the rear principal building setback, or ten feet, whichever is greater. 
b.  Minimum Required Screening. Minimum required screening shall consist of a natural buffer utilizing existing vegetation or a structural buffer, whichever provides an opaque visual screen to a height of six feet, or any combination of existing and replanted vegetation which can reasonably be expected to create an opaque visual screen six feet high within two growing seasons. 
c.  Maintenance. Every buffer required by this Ordinance shall be maintained by the owner of the property where the buffer is located, so as to provide an opaque visual screen to a height of six feet on a continuous, year-round basis. 
a.  The board of adjustments having jurisdiction may reduce the width of the buffer to no less than 15 feet if the structural buffer includes a combination of fence, vegetation, and berm that will provide effective separation and adequate visual and audial screening. 
b.  Buffers may be relocated on the site to best achieve the screening required. 
c.  The Board of Adjustments having jurisdiction may waive a buffer requirement if the Comprehensive Plan anticipates future development on the adjoining property in a land use category such that a buffer would not be required by this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 2008-2-2, §§ I—III, 2-4-08; Ord. No. 2008-2-3, § I, 2-4-08) 
6.17. - Landscaping. 
a.  Frontage Landscape Strips. A minimum 20-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along the full length of any street frontage of a multi-family or nonresidential development (except in the C-B-C zoning district). 
(1)  Frontage landscape strips shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities or any other accessory uses except for the following: 
(a)  Retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design. 
(b)  Pedestrian-oriented facilities such as sidewalks and bus stops. 
(c)  Underground utilities. 
(d)  Driveways required in order to access the property. 
(e)  Signs otherwise permitted by this Code. 
(2)  One tree shall be provided within the frontage landscape strip for every 40 feet of length of street frontage, or portion thereof. Such trees may be deciduous or evergreen, but must be of a type that is suitable to local growing conditions and that will normally reach at least 12 inches at diameter breast height upon maturity. The trees may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
(3)  All portions of a frontage landscape strip shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched or covered by permitted structures. 
(4)  Upon planting, new trees shall have a caliper of no less than two inches, and may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
(5)  Plant materials in the frontage landscape strip are not to extend into the street right-of-way unless specifically allowed by the Public Works Department. 
b.  Side Yard Landscape Strips. A minimum five-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along any side lot line of a nonresidential development (except in the C-B-C zoning district). The landscape strip is to extend from the front principal building setback line to the rear of the property (unless a buffer is required along the side lot line). 
(1)  Side yard landscape strips shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, storm-water detention facilities or any other uses except for the following: 
(a)  Retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design. 
(b)  Underground utilities. 
(c)  Driveways required to access neighboring property. 
(2)  All portions of a side yard landscape strip shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched or covered by permitted structures. 
(3)  The side yard landscape strip shall contain at least one tree for every 40 feet of length, or be planted in a continuous hedge or junipers (except for approved access drives and utility easements). 
6.17.2. - Parking lot trees.Deciduous shade trees shall be provided within any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate five cars or more, in accordance with the requirements of this Section. 
a.  One deciduous tree shall be provided within the parking lot for every 20 parking spaces, or portion thereof. There shall be a maximum distance of 100 feet between any parking space and a shade tree. Trees provided to meet the minimum requirements of any landscape strip or buffer may not be counted toward this requirement. 
b.  A landscaping island shall be located at the end of every parking bay between the last parking space and an adjacent travel aisle or driveway. The island shall be no less than eight-feet wide for at least one-half the length of the adjacent parking space. The island shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass, or ground cover except for those areas that are mulched. 
c.  Tree planting areas shall be no less than eight feet in width and shall provide at least 100 square feet of planting area per tree. No tree shall be located less than two and one-half feet from the back of the curb. All parking lot landscape islands shall be curbed with minimum six-inch high vertical curbs. The barrier may contain breaks to help manage stormwater runoff, if approved by the governing body's public works manager or director, or their designee. 
d.  Landscaping islands and tree planting areas shall be well drained and contain suitable soil and natural irrigation characteristics for the planting materials they contain. 
e.  Sustainable design features, such as the creation of stormwater swales, are encouraged for all landscaping islands. Such features that are designed to function as infiltration cells that are approved by the governing body's public works manager or director, or their designee, may be credited towards stormwater detention requirements. 
6.17.3 - Landscaping plan.For each multi-family residential and nonresidential development where front yard or side yard landscaping is required, a landscaping plan shall be approved as part of the permitting process. The landscaping plan shall show all existing and proposed features, including trees, buffer, and other relevant features of the landscape that will be part of the final landscape design. Native plan materials, protection of existing trees and vegetation, and retention of existing natural features should be integrated into the landscaping plan to the maximum extent possible. 
a.  Landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the approved landscape plan. 
b.  Landscaping shall be maintained as needed. Plants that have died shall be replaced in kind. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 2008-7-7, §§ IV—VI, 7-7-08) 
6.18. - Tree conservation. 
a.  Tree Conservation Zone. The tree conservation zone applies to the entirety of a tract of land for which no tree conservation plan has been approved. After such approval, the tree conservation zone shall correspond to that part of a tract of land designated as such on said approved plan. 
b.  Exemptions. Any construction, paving or other activity on a property that will damage trees in a public right-of-way is subject to the restrictions under "Protection of existing trees," below. 
Otherwise, the tree conservation zone shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A lot on which a single-family or two-family dwelling is being constructed. 
(2)  A lot on which this Code imposes no yard requirements and permits 100 percent coverage of the lot by buildings. 
(3)  Property already occupied by an owner-occupied single-family or two-family dwelling, unless non-residential uses or additional dwelling units are proposed for such property. 
(4)  Public utility companies conducting operations on public and utility rights-of-way and easements or on sites for electric power substations and similar facilities, which operations are for the purpose of assuring uninterrupted utility services. 
(5)  Property in use for the following: 
(a)  Tree farming: The planting, cultivating, and harvesting of trees in a continuous cycle as a regular practice on a tract of land; not including the removal of trees for purposes of development. 
(b)  Agricultural activities: 
1)  Good-faith commercial production of agricultural products, including horticultural, floricultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, and apiarian products; and 
2)  Clearing trees for the purpose of planting crops, providing pasture for livestock, or constructing buildings accessory to production of agricultural products. 
a.  The diameter of a tree's trunk will be measured and a value assigned in "tree units" in accordance with Tables 6-2 and 6-3. The values assigned to trees of the same size will be different for existing and new trees, as indicated in the two tables. 
b.  One "unit" is not the same as one "tree." For existing trees, the "units" assigned is the cross-sectional area of the trunk at DBH in square feet. For new trees, credit is given reflecting a size that will be achieved after several years of growth. 
Table 6-15  Table of Values for Existing Trees 21 

 
*Diameter Breast Height. 
21 An increase in unit value of 15 percent will be allowed for significant trees, as defined in this Section. 
Table 6-16  Table of Values for New (Replacement) Trees 

 
22 A "large species" is one that will have a height at maturity of 40 feet or more. 
a.  A tree in fair or better condition which has been determined to be of a high value by a knowledgeable person because of its species, size, age or other professional criteria. A tree is considered in fair or better condition if: 
(1)  Its life expectancy is greater than 15 years; 
(2)  It has a relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or hollow with less than 29 percent radial tip die-back; and 
(3)  It has no major insect or pathological problems. 
b.  Hardwood trees such as oaks and hickories and soft-wood trees such as pines and cedars whose diameters are 18 inches DBH or more and small hardwoods such as dogwoods, red-buds or sourwoods whose diameters are eight inches DBH or more shall be considered significant trees due to size. A tree of lesser size than the preceding shall be significant if it is a rare or unusual species or is of historical significance or is specifically used by design as a landscape focal point of the project. 
6.18.4. - Number of trees upon completion of development. 
a.  Upon completion of development, all properties shall have a number of trees equivalent to 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings). 
b.  Existing significant trees or any other trees ten inches DBH or larger that are in excess of the required 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings) but outside the construction area (buildings, accessory uses, parking area) shall not be removed unless adjacent development would cause irreparable damage to the critical root zones. 
c.  Where the proposed construction area (the buildings, accessory uses, and parking area) is so large that the number of trees equivalent to 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings) can't be accommodated, the tree conservation area shall be established by removing parking spaces in excess of the minimum number required, placing additional planting islands within the development area, or reducing the area to be occupied by buildings. 
d.  Counting Parking Lot and Buffer Trees. Trees required by this Code in relation to parking lot landscaping or the provision of a structural buffer may be included in calculating the required 15 units per acre. However, trees existing or planted in a natural buffer required under this Article are not to be counted as part of the minimum 15 units per acre requirement. 
6.18.5. - Criteria for replacement trees. 
a.  Spacing and the potential size of species chosen shall be compatible with spatial limitations of the site. 
b.  The species must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing site. 
c.  The trees must have the potential for size and quality comparable to those removed. 
d.  The trees must be compatible in extent of crown and root systems at maturity with nearby utilities. 
e.  Planting preference shall be given to specimens of no more than three inches DBH. 
f.  Where trees must be added to achieve the required 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings), pines may not comprise more than 50 percent of the required units. Where existing pines already comprise fifty percent or more of the required units, no more pines may be credited toward the required units. 
g.  Authority for questions of tree characteristics shall be publications of the Georgia Forestry Commission, publications of the Cooperative Extension Service of the University of Georgia College of Agriculture, or other authority acceptable to the Planning Director. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
6.19. - Protection of natural waters. 
6.19.1. - Watershed protection. 
a.  Protected Water Supply Watersheds; Defined. The Oostanaula River. Etowah River, Armuchee Creek, and Woodward Creek watersheds are recognized as drinking water supply watersheds above their respective City of Rome and Floyd County municipal water supply intakes. All lands within the Oostanaula River, Etowah River, Armuchee Creek and Woodward Creek watersheds located within a seven-mile radius upstream of the City of Rome and Floyd County municipal water supply intakes are established as protected watershed areas. 
b.  Protected watershed areas; restrictions. 
(1)  Within a protected watershed area: Any new facility that handles hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by DNR. 
(2)  For Large Water Supply Watersheds, the corridors of all perennial streams within a seven-mile radius of the reservoir boundary shall be protected as follows: 
(a)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(b)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(c)  Septic tanks and septic tank drain-fields are prohibited in the 150-foot setback. 
(3)  Small Water Supply Watersheds are protected as follows: 
(a)  The corridors of all perennial streams within a seven-mile radius upstream from a public water supply intake of a reservoir: 
1)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3)  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the 150-foot setback. 
(b)  The corridors of all perennial streams beyond a seven-mile radius upstream from a public water supply intake of a reservoir are protected as follows: 
1)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3)  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the 75-foot setback. 
(c)  No new sanitary landfills are allowed unless they have synthetic liners and leachate collections systems. 
(d)  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
6.19.2. - River corridor buffer. 
a.  Major River Corridors Recognized. The portions of the Coosa, Etowah and Oostanaula Rivers, flowing through Floyd County, are hereby recognized as natural and cultural resources requiring conservation under Section 12-2-8, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
b.  River Tributary Corridors Recognized. All portions of Horseleg Creek, Silver Creek, Armuchee Creek, Dry Creek, Big Cedar Creek, Johns Creek, Dykes Creek, and Woodward Creek flowing through Floyd County, are hereby recognized as natural and cultural resources requiring conservation under O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
c.  River Corridor Greenway Established. In order to preserve the quality of the water and the viability of the rivers as animal habitats and important recreation resources to the region, a natural vegetative greenway is established as follows: 
(1)  The greenway shall include all lands within 100 feet of each major river and 40 feet of each river tributary, inclusive of any islands, as measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the river bank. 
(2)  No land may be used, and no vegetation shall be disturbed, within the greenway by building construction, development activity, septic tanks or septic tank drainfields, the handling of hazardous wastes, or for any other purpose except for the following permitted uses: 
(a)  Land uses existing prior to the adoption of this Code. 
(b)  A single-family dwelling, provided that: 
1)  Each dwelling shall be located on a lot having an area of at least two acres, not including any area that lies between the banks of the protected area. 
2)  Only one dwelling is located on the lot. 
3)  No septic tank drainfield may be located within the River Corridor Greenway. 
(c)  Timber production and harvesting subject to the following conditions: 
1)  Forestry activity shall be consistent with Best Management Practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
2)  Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(d)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of Section 12-2-8, as amended, of Article 1, Chapter 2, Title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 
(e)  Public road and utility crossings meeting all requirements of the Georgia Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act. 
(f)  Recreational usage consistent with either the maintenance of a natural vegetative greenway or with river-dependant recreation such as a boat ramp. 
(g)  Agricultural production and management, provided that the activity is consistent with Best Management Practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, will not impair the drinking quality of the river water, will be consistent with all State and federal laws, and will be consistent will all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(h)  Public wastewater treatment and natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(i)  Utilities, other than public water or sewerage facilities, provided that: 
1)  The utilities shall be located as far from the riverbank as reasonably possible. 
2)  Installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the greenway as is reasonably possible. 
3)  Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(j)  Other uses permitted by the zoning district and by DNR under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(3)  The natural vegetative greenway shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity within the River Corridor Greenway. 
6.19.3. - Wetlands protection. 
a.  Protected Wetlands; Defined. 
(1)  "Wetlands" are freshwater areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar freshwater areas. 
(2)  Protected wetlands are those wetlands identified and mapped in the Comprehensive Plan, based on criteria defined, identified and mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR), or based on other credible data provided by a qualified Professional Engineer. 
b.  Protected Wetlands; Restrictions. Within any protected wetlands area, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Alteration or degradation of a protected wetland requires prior approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act. 
(2)  Hazardous or toxic waste receiving, treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(3)  Sanitary landfills are prohibited. 
(4)  Land uses that may be allowed if permitted by the zoning district and by the Section 404 permit include: 
(a)  Timber production and harvesting. 
(b)  Wildlife and fisheries management. 
(c)  Camping, hiking, hunting and fishing recreation activities. 
(d)  Public wastewater treatment and natural water quality treatment or purification facilities. 
(5)  Other uses permitted under Section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act. 
6.19.4. - Groundwater recharge area protection. 
a.  Protected Groundwater Recharge Areas; Defined. 
(1)  Significant recharge areas. Significant recharge areas are defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) using criteria developed by them, and have been mapped on DNR's Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition, or as may be amended by DNR from time to time). 
(2)  Pollution susceptibility category. Categories of relative vulnerability of an aquifer to pollution (classified as "higher," "average" or "lower") are defined by the DNR using criteria developed by them, and have been mapped on DNR's Hydrologic Atlas 20 along with the most significant recharge areas. 
b.  Protected Groundwater Recharge Area Restrictions; General. Within any significant recharge area, as defined and delineated by the DNR, the following shall apply: 
(1)  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(2)  New sanitary landfills, if permitted, shall have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(3)  Any new facility that involves the treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste, if permitted by DNR and the zoning district, shall perform such operations on an impermeable surface having a spill and leak collection system. 
(4)  Any new facility that handles hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by DNR. 
(5)  A new above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tank must have secondary containment of 110 percent of the volume of the tank or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. This requirement does not apply to: 
(a)  Any tank having a maximum capacity of less than 660 gallons; and, 
(b)  Any tank used for agricultural purposes, provided it complies with all Federal requirements. 
c.  Protected Groundwater Recharge Area Restrictions; By Classification. 
(1)  Lower Pollution Susceptibility Areas. Within a significant recharge area classified as having "lower" susceptibility to pollution, the following applies: 
(a)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites larger than 50 acre-feet must be lined. The liner must be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than five × ten -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Natural Resource Conservation Service. 
(b)  A new home served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot that is at least 110 percent of the minimum lot size required by Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(c)  A new manufactured home park served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot or space that is at least 110 percent of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(2)  Average Pollution Susceptibility Areas. Within a significant recharge area classified as having "average" susceptibility to pollution, the following applies: 
(a)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites larger than 15 acre-feet must be lined. The liner must be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than five × ten -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Natural Resource Conservation Service. 
(b)  A new home served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot that is at least 125 percent of the minimum lot size required by Table MT-1 of the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(c)  A new manufactured home park served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot or space that is at least 125 percent of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(3)  Higher Pollution Susceptibility Areas. Within a significant recharge area classified as having "higher" susceptibility to pollution, the following applies: 
(a)  All new agricultural waste impoundment sites must be lined. The liner must be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than five × ten -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Natural Resource Conservation Service. 
(b)  A new home served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot that is at least 150 percent of the minimum lot size required by Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(c)  A new manufactured home park served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot or space that is at least 150 percent of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(d)  Spray irrigation of wastewater or the land spreading of wastewater sludges must be approved by DNR. 
(e)  Permanent storm water infiltration basins are prohibited. 
(f)  New wastewater treatment basins (except for mining settling basins) must have an impermeable liner and be approved by DNR. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 05-6-8, §§ I, II, 6-20-05) 

Standard Detail for Utility Placement 

Pavement Replacement for Utility Installations and Other Cut-ins 

Typical Residential Roadway Cross-section with Curb and Gutter 

Typical Residential Roadway Cross-section without Curb and Gutter 
6.20. - Residential Cluster Subdivision Option. 
6.20.1. - Purpose and intent.It is the purpose and intent of Article 6.20 to encourage the preservation of open space within residential development; to protect culturally and environmentally critical resources; to provide flexibility to allow creative developments; to provide for a permanent, interconnected open space network; to encourage efficient development that minimizes removal of vegetation, disturbance of soil, and encroachment into environmentally sensitive areas while reducing the need for infrastructure construction; to encourage street design that decreases traffic speed; to encourage neighborhood interaction; and to promote construction of convenient and accessible trails and sidewalks within a subdivision and connecting to adjacent communities, businesses and other facilities in order to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
6.20.2. - Applicability.The Residential Cluster Subdivision Option is available for the following zoning districts: 
a.  H-TR High-density Traditional Residential, 
b.  L-TR Low-density Traditional Residential, 
c.  NOC Neighborhood Office Commercial (where small scale, low activity, neighborhood oriented businesses may be permitted in a residential setting), 
d.  S-R Suburban Residential (where public water is available), and 
e.  A-R Agricultural Residential (where public water is available) zoning districts. 
6.20.3. - Compliance with applicable ordinances.Compliance with all applicable City of Rome and Floyd County ordinances, regulations, or codes is required; however, when in conflict, this Article shall prevail. Final plat and Cluster Development Plan approval shall be by the Planning Commission. 
6.20.4. - Land reserve area requirement. 
a.  Each subdivision developed under this option shall include Land Reserve Area equal to no less than 40 percent of the gross acreage 1 of the parcel. The Land Reserve Area shall be designated on the Cluster Option Plan and recorded on the final plat. 
b.  Definition: The Land Reserve Area is defined as the portion of the subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within Land Reserve Areas are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
c.  Land Reserve Area Configuration: The minimum standards for Land Reserve Areas are: 
(1)  The minimum dimension at any point shall be 50 feet (measured along the chord if on an arced boundary) and at least 75 percent of the Land Reserve Area shall be in a contiguous tract. 
(2)  All lots within the subdivision shall be provided with safe, convenient pedestrian access to the Land Reserve Area. 
(3)  The Land Reserve Area shall provide connectivity with any adjacent Land Reserve Areas. 
(4)  Where trails and sidewalks connecting the Land Reserve Area cross internal subdivision streets or public streets, access points shall be directly across from each other. Crossings and access points shall be clearly identified to pedestrians and motorists and may include traffic control devices, bridges, and tunnels. 
(5)  Natural vegetation and soils within the Land Reserve Areas shall be protected from disturbance during development activities, except as permitted in Article 6.20. 
(6)  Development in the Land Reserve Area designated as Primary and Secondary Critical areas shall be limited to passive recreation facilities such as trails/sidewalks, picnic areas, benches, fishing and non-power boat launching platforms, or playgrounds. 
(7)  Non-critical areas approved for Land Reserve Area protection by the Planning Department staff may also be used as community gardens, playing fields, landscaped storm water management areas (ponds, swales, rain gardens, etc.), drain or drip field for a community sewage treatment system, crop growing, or pastures. 
(8)  In no case shall more than ten percent of the Land Reserve Area so used be covered with impervious surface. 
(9)  Improvements must be constructed and maintained using methods and materials designed to be low impact and to have little or no adverse impact on the environment. 
(10)  Mature trees within the Land Reserve Area shall not be harvested or removed, unless such harvesting or removal is recommended by a Certified Forester or by the Georgia Forestry Commission in order to control disease or insect infestation, or to eliminate danger to persons or property. 
(11)  No motorized vehicles, including, but not limited to, motor bikes, four wheelers, and motorcycles, shall be allowed within the Land Reserve Area, except that maintenance vehicles shall be permitted to carry out activities approved by the owner; and electrically powered scooters, wheelchairs, and golf carts shall be permitted to use hard surfaced trails and facilities within the Land Reserve Area. 
d.  Form of Land Reserve Area: The Land Reserve Area shall consist of Primary Critical Preservation Areas, Secondary Critical Preservation Areas, and Other Preservation Areas (as approved by the Planning Department Staff). 
Primary Critical Preservation Areas: Primary Critical Preservation Areas form the core of the Land Reserve Areas and are required, if present, to be included within the Land Reserve Area. These include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Cemeteries, historic sites, archaeological sites, and other culturally important areas. 
(2)  Habitat for rare, threatened or endangered species as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(3)  Wetlands as identified by the National Wetlands inventory maps prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the County Soil Survey maps prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resources Conservation Service, or by means of a certified wetlands delineation using data from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  Alluvial soils and 100-year floodplains as identified by the federal Emergency Management Agency; however, floodway areas shall not count toward the Land Reserve Area minimum because development is not allowed. 
(5)  Existing lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, as approved by the governing body; however, such areas shall not count toward the Land Reserve Area minimum because development is not practical. 
(6)  Riparian and watershed protection buffers as required by Article 6.19 of this Code. 
(7)  Existing slopes that exceed 25 percent over a contiguous areas of at least 5,000 square feet. 
Secondary Critical Preservation Areas: Secondary Critical Preservation areas shall also be counted as part of the Land Reserve Area to the maximum extent possible. Secondary Critical Preservation Areas include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(8)  Stands of significant trees as defined by Article 6.18.3 of this Code. At least 50 percent of the trees in the stand must meet the definition of "significant tree". 
(9)  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line. 
(10)  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds, with the approval of Planning Department Staff. 
Other Preservation Areas: With Planning Department Staff approval, land that does not meet the definition of "Primary Critical Preservation Area" or "Secondary Critical Preservation Area" may be set aside as part of the Land Reserve Area. 
e.  Land Reserve Area Protection: The required Land Reserve Area shall be protected in perpetuity from further development or unauthorized use by a conservation easement held by a qualified conservation organization as defined in the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; or by the local government. The easement documentation shall include photos and maps to record the status and condition of the Land Reserve Area. 
f.  The City of Rome and Floyd County reserve the right to enforce all instruments and conservation easements, and to charge the cost of enforcement or corrective activities to the responsible party. Such costs shall become a lien on any properties titled in the name of the owner of the Land Reserve Area. 
g.  Ownership of Land Reserve Areas: All Land Reserve Areas shall be permanently protected and held in fee simple interest by: 
(1)  a qualified conservation organization as defined in The Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; 
(2)  a homeowners association established in accordance with the Georgia Property Owners Association Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq.; or 
(3)  a land trust. 
1 These standards are designed to apply to subdivisions of many sizes; placing a minimum acreage requirement on the Land Reserve Area would restrict the range of sizes for these subdivisions. 
6.20.5. - Development standards. 
a.  Housing Density: The maximum number of lots in the subdivision shall be determined by either one of the following two methods: 
(1)  Calculation: The maximum number of building lots shall be determined by dividing the area of the parcel, minus property located within the floodway, required river and tributary greenway buffers, bodies of open water that exceed 5,000 square feet of contiguous area, wetlands as defined by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act, or existing utility easements, by the minimum lot size specified by the zoning district. 
(2)  Yield Plan: The maximum number of building lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the area of the parcel, minus property located within the floodway, required river and tributary greenway buffers, bodies of open water that exceed 5,000 square feet of contiguous area, wetlands as defined by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act, or existing utility easements, is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet all of the formal requirements of a subdivision plan, but must show a plan capable of actual construction. 
Density Bonus: Regardless of which of the above density determination methods is used, up to ten percent more lots may be created under the cluster option, provided that lot width, frontage, and setback requirements are met. 
b.  Lots: All building lots created under this subdivision option shall front on an open, publicly maintained interior road that is classified as a "local" or a "collector" road. 
c.  Lot Area: No minimum building lot area shall apply, as long as lot width, lot frontage, and building setback requirements are provided; except that lot sizes are subject to approval by the Floyd County Health Department if private sewer systems are used. 
d.  Lot Dimensions: The minimum building lot width shall be 50 feet, the minimum frontage requirement shall be 25 feet. 
e.  Setbacks: Front building setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet from the property line along local roads, 15 feet from the property line along collector roads, and 25 feet from the property line along arterial roads. Rear building setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet from the property line. 
Side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of five feet from the property line; however, at the discretion of the developer, side yard setbacks may be reduced below five feet if a minimum separation of ten feet between structures is provided. If side yard setbacks are reduced below five feet, the final plat shall delineate the buildable area of each building lot that will accommodate ten feet of separation between structures. 
All structures shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from the outer boundary line of the subdivision. 
f.  Sidewalks: If sidewalks are provided on both sides of all streets adjacent residential lots, the width of the paved street may be reduced to 20 feet for local streets, and 25 feet for collectors. Subdivision sidewalk systems shall connect with existing, adjacent sidewalks. Provision shall be made for sidewalk connection with future, adjacent development if practical. 
g.  Multi-Use Trails: If a Multi-Use Trail at least ten feet wide, with separation from driving lanes, is provided on one side of all streets adjacent residential lots, with safe and convenient, marked crossing points; the width of the paved street may be reduced to 20 feet for local streets, and 25 feet for collectors. Where sidewalks would otherwise be required, a Multi-Use Trail at least ten feet wide on one side with safe and convenient, marked crossing points may be provided in lieu of sidewalks. 
h.  Streets: New streets shall follow a rectilinear or curvilinear pattern to ensure interconnectivity and walkability. New streets shall align with existing, adjacent streets. Street segments ending in cul-de-sacs shall serve no more than eight buildings lots. Provision shall be made for street connection with future, adjacent development if practical. 
Excepting specific design standards listed in Article 6.20, streets and sidewalks shall be constructed in conformance with the standards listed in Article 6.6 and 6.7. 
i.  Within the area of the subdivision that is designated for building lots, all reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve mature vegetation and other natural features. 
6.20.6. - Required documents.An application for Planning Commission approval of the cluster option subdivision shall include the following documents. Planning Department Staff shall ensure the completeness of the submitted documents. 
a.  Cluster Development Plan: A Cluster Development Plan shall be created by the Developer and shall include the following elements: 
(1)  Property boundaries 
(2)  Streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands as described elsewhere in this Article, and all other hydrologic features 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than ten feet intervals 
(4)  All Primary and Secondary Critical Preservation Areas labeled by type, as described elsewhere in this Article; photographed and described 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics 
(6)  General soil types 
(7)  Planned location of Land Reserve Areas, with dimensions and areas 
(8)  Existing and proposed roads, sidewalks, trails, and transit stops 
(9)  Locations and dimensions of any developed areas within Land Reserve Areas, 
(10)  Connections with existing streets, green space, trails, public areas, commercial areas, recreation areas, or Land Reserve Areas within adjacent developments 
(11)  Location, size, and number of proposed lots with buildable area delineated. 
(12)  Proposed utility sites and corridors if outside of ROW area. 
The Cluster Development Plan, as amended and approved by the Planning Commission, shall be binding on the developer. 
b.  Land Reserve Area Maintenance, Management, Ownership and Protection Plan (MMOPP): The MMOPP shall include the following elements and shall be recorded as a permanent instrument following approval of the Cluster Option Subdivision by the Planning Commission. 
(1)  Clearly delineated Land Reserve Areas with clear description of the property boundary by survey with a written legal description 
(2)  Description of features to be permanently protected 
(3)  Legal name and address of owner 
(4)  Legal name and address of easement holder 
(5)  List of parties with rights to enforce the easement (owner of the property, holder of the easement (if any), and the governing body) 
(6)  Method of transferring the easement if necessary 
(7)  Proposed uses, with restrictions as applicable 
(8)  Provision for inspections of the property by the owner, the holder of the easement (if any), and the governing body 
(9)  Provision for maintenance of the Land Reserve Area including responsible party and projected budget 
(10)  Provision for amendment only with the express written permission of the property owner, the holder of the easement (if any), and the governing body. 
(11)  Provision for transfer of the Land Reserve Area ownership if necessary. 
The MMOPP shall be approved by the Planning Department staff prior to final approval by the Planning Commission. 
c.  Homeowners Association Requirements: If the Land Reserve Area will be held, protected and managed by a Homeowners' Association, the developer shall include in the MMOPP a Description of the Homeowners' Association that includes: 
(1)  By-laws 
(2)  Method and plan for maintenance of the Land Reserve Areas 
(3)  Mandatory membership of each landowner 
(4)  Responsibility for maintenance, insurance and taxes on the Land Reserve Area 
(5)  Provision for transfer of ownership of the Land Reserve Area in case of dissolution of the association 
The Description of the Homeowners' Association shall be approved by the Planning Department Staff prior to final approval by the Planning Commission. 
6.20.7. - Approval of final plat.Approval of the final plat and subdivision by the Planning Commission shall be conditioned on the acceptance of the conservation easement by a qualified conservation organization, as described in Article 6.20.4. 
6.20.8. - Tax assessment of land reserve areas.Once an approved, legal instrument for permanent protection of Land Reserve Areas is in place, and the final plat and subdivision have been approved by the Planning Commission, the Floyd County Tax Assessor shall reassess the value of the open space. 
6.20.9. - Variances and special exceptions.Not withstanding the provisions of Article 2.11, variances, special exceptions, or appeals from any of the requirements, standards, and conditions of this article must be approved by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-9-7, § I, 9-6-05) 
ARTICLE 7. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

7.1. - Purpose of Article 7. 
This Article sets out the structure for administering and enforcing this Development Code, including the creation, powers and duties of the Planning Commission, and the responsibilities and procedures of the Chief Building Official in carrying out enforcement activities. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
7.2. - Schedules and fees. 
From time to time, the City Commission and the County Board of Commissioners may adopt fees for the issuance of permits, the submission of applications, and such other activities and authorizations as regulated by this Development Code, and may adopt schedules of dates, times and places as appropriate and necessary to regulate the application, review and hearing processes required by this Development Code, as applicable within each jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
7.3. - Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission. 
7.3.1. - Creation.The Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission is hereby created and established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, of the 1983 state constitution. The planning commission shall be organized and empowered as set out in this Article. 
a.  The planning commission shall consist of ten voting members, none of whom is a member of either the City Commission or the County Board of Commissioners, and two nonvoting ex officio members, one of whom shall be a member of the City Commission, appointed by that body, and the other shall be a member of the County Board of Commissioners, appointed by that body. Five of the voting members shall be appointed by the City Commission, and five of the voting members shall be appointed by the County Board of Commissioners. 
b.  The members shall serve for five-year staggered terms and until their successors are appointed as provided for in this Section. 
c.  Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing body that originally appointed that member. The appointing governing body shall also have the authority to remove its appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
a.  The planning commission shall elect its chair, first vice-chair, and second vice-chair from among its appointed members. The term of the officers shall be one year, or until they are re-elected or their successors are elected. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the city, the county, or the planning commission. The planning commission shall determine its time of meetings and shall make its own rules of procedure, including any rule providing for termination of membership by reason of nonattendance at meetings. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the planning commission shall be of public record. 
b.  The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for such work and may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, or local, public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations; may expend such funds; and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts and contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing bodies of the City and the County. 
a.  The Planning Commission may adopt such by-laws, rules or procedures as appropriate and not in conflict with this Development Code. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall meet each month in accordance with its schedule of meeting dates, times and places. Other meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman if there is business to be brought before it, or at such other times as the Planning Commission may determine. All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be open to the public. 
c.  All Planning Commission members attending a meeting shall vote on each matter placed before it. A member may abstain from voting only in the instance of a conflict of interest, the nature of which must be stated for the record. 
d.  A majority of the entire Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum. 
e.  The Director of Planning shall serve as secretary to the Planning Commission. The secretary shall cause minutes of its proceedings to be kept, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall cause records of its examinations and other official actions to be kept, all of which shall be of public record. 
f.  The results of each Planning Commission meeting as to their actions and recommendations shall be forwarded by the Director of Planning to the City Commission or County Board of Commissioners, as appropriate, and posted in a public place at the Planning Department's office. 
a.  The Planning Commission shall have the duty and responsibility to conduct a public hearing on each application for rezoning or special use approval, to review the application in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth elsewhere in this Development Code, and to make such recommendations to the City Commission or the County Board of Commissioners as it deems appropriate on each application. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall also have the duty and responsibility to conduct a public hearing on any proposed amendment to the text of this Development Code, to review such proposed amendment in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth elsewhere in this Development Code, and to make such recommendation to the City Commission or the County Board of Commissioners as it deems appropriate. 
c.  The Planning Commission shall also have the authority to initiate on its own motion a zoning change or an amendment to the text of this Development Code when, in its determination, such changes are appropriate for consideration. 
d.  The Planning Commission shall also have the authority and responsibility to review the provisions of the City's Comprehensive Plan from time to time, and to make such recommendations to the City or County as it deems appropriate. 
e.  The Planning Commission shall also have such other powers, duties or responsibilities as assigned to it by the City Commission or the County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 04-3-6, § I, 3-1-04) 
7.4. - Board of Adjustments. 
a.  A Board of Adjustments for the City of Rome and for Floyd County is hereby created. The board of adjustments shall consist of seven members, who shall be residents of the jurisdiction they serve. 
b.  Each governing body shall appoint three members. The seventh member will be alternately appointed by the city or county commissions with each successive term beginning with the county. Each member shall serve for terms of three years. 
c.  A member of the board of adjustments may be appointed to successive terms and shall continue to serve if their term expires until a successor is appointed. 
d.  A member may be removed from the board of adjustments by a majority vote of the governing body for cause, for absenteeism at three successive called meetings, or for other reasons the governing body may deem appropriate upon written charges and after public hearing. 
e.  A chairperson shall be appointed every two years in alternate terms by the City and then by the County, such that each jurisdiction has its respective appointment in the Chairperson's position every other two years. 
f.  When a position becomes vacant before the end of a term, the Governing Body shall appoint a new member for the duration of the term remaining consistent with the original appointment. 
a.  Each Board of Adjustments shall elect a Chairperson from its members, such that each jurisdiction has its respective appointment in the Chairperson's position every other one year period. The Chairperson shall serve for one year or until re-elected or until a successor is elected. Each jurisdiction shall have its appointment in the Chairperson's position every other two year period. 
b.  Each Board of Adjustments shall elect a Vice-Chairperson from its members, who shall serve for one year or until re-elected or until a successor is elected. The Vice-Chairperson shall be from among those appointments of the jurisdiction opposite the Chairperson's appointment and may be expected to succeed the Chairperson for the full term appointment as Chair. The Vice-Chairperson shall preside at meetings in the absence of the Chairperson. 
c.  The Chairperson or, in their absence, the Vice-Chairperson or other member designated to conduct an official meeting, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
d.  Each Board of Adjustments may adopt such by-laws, rules or procedures as appropriate and not in conflict with this Development Code. 
e.  Each Board of Adjustments shall meet each month in accordance with its the schedule of meeting dates, times and places. Other meetings of the Board of Adjustments shall be held at the call of the Chairman if there is business to be brought before it, or at such other times as the Board of Adjustments may determine. All meetings of the Zoning Boards of Appeals shall be open to the public. 
f.  All Board of Adjustments members attending a meeting shall vote on each matter placed before it. A member may abstain from voting only in the instance of a conflict of interest, the nature of which must be stated for the record. 
g.  A majority of the entire Board of Adjustments shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of at least three members of the Board of Adjustments shall be necessary to approve any decision or recommendation. 
h.  The Director of Planning shall serve as secretary to each Board of Adjustments. The secretary shall cause minutes of its proceedings to be kept, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall cause records of its examinations and other official actions to be kept, all of which shall be of public record. 
i.  The results of each Board of Adjustments meeting as to their actions and determinations shall be posted in a public place at the Planning Department's office. 
a.  Each Board of Adjustments shall have the duty and responsibility to conduct a public hearing and to make a final decision in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this Development Code on each application for an appeal from an administrative decision, a special exception, a hardship variance, a flood protection variance or an interpretation. 
b.  Each Board of Adjustments shall also have such other powers, duties or responsibilities as assigned to it by its appointing Governing Body. 
c.  In exercising its powers regarding an appeal of an administrative decision, the Board of Adjustments may, in conformity with the provisions of this Development Code, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determination of the administrative official, and to that end shall have the power to direct issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 2008-2-3, § I, 2-4-08; Ord. No. 2008-4-3, §§ I, II, 4-7-08) 
7.5. - Inspection and enforcement. 
a.  The Chief Building Inspector shall have the power to conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to assure or compel compliance with the requirements and provisions of this Development Code, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property for the purpose of investigation and inspection. 
b.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the City, the County, the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District, or the Georgia Environmental Protection Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
a.  Periodic Inspections. The Chief Building Official will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, with development permit conditions, or with the provisions of this Development Code, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this Development Code. 
b.  Stop-Work Orders. Upon notice from the Chief Building Inspector, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this Development Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where in the opinion of the Chief Building Inspector an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
a.  Inspection. If the Chief Building Inspector finds that a provision of this Development Code relating to the use or occupancy of land or buildings, or relating to the site design standards of this Development Code, or relating to a condition of approval established in connection with a grant of variance or zoning change is being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Upon continuing noncompliance, or initially in the case of an immediate threat to the public health or safety, the Chief Building Inspector shall have authority to issue citations and to prosecute violations before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
b.  Cease and Desist Orders. The Chief Building Inspector shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal or relocation of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of illegal work being done; or shall take any other appropriate or necessary action to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions of this Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
7.6. - Violation and penalties. 
a.  Failure to obtain a development permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a development permit as prescribed in this Development Code without first obtaining said development permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of both the City and County. 
b.  Bond Forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this Development Code and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of this Development Code. The Public Works Director may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
c.  Fine or Imprisonment. Any person violating any provisions of an approved erosion and sediment control plan, development permit authorization, or stop-work order shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both, or sentenced to community service, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
a.  Violation of any provision of this Development Code relating to the use of land or applicable site design standards, including violation of conditions of approval established in connection with grants of variance or zoning changes, or any other provisions of this Code, shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
b.  Any person found guilty of violating such land use provisions or site design standards of this Development Code shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both, or sentenced to community service, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
c.  Additional remedies. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the City or County, as appropriate, from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, such as injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01) 
ARTICLE 8. - DEFINITIONS 
The following is a list of all definitions of terms included within the text of this Unified Land Development Code. Refer also to Section 1.5. regarding the interpretation of figures, words and phrases as used in this Code. Any word or phrase not herein defined but defined elsewhere in this Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Academic School: See under "School." 
Access: A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
Accessory Apartment: A second dwelling unit incorporated within either a single-family detached dwelling or a private garage for use as a complete, independent living unit with facilities within the accessory apartment for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping, separate from such facilities within the primary residence. 
Accessory Farm Structure: Any building or other structure commonly used for agricultural purposes in relation to an active farming operation, such as a barn or stable, poultry house, silo, water tank, farm equipment storage shed, or irrigation system. 
Accessory Structure Setback Line: A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between a property line or the right-of-way line of an abutting street and an accessory structure. 
Accessory Use or Structure: A use or structure that is permitted on a property in conjunction with a principal use. An accessory use is incidental to the principal use and would not exist independent of the principal use. 
Addition (to an existing building): Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter, load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Agricultural operations: The raising, harvesting, marketing or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock (including but not limited to cattle, swine, equine, goats, sheep and rabbits) or poultry (including but not limited to chickens, ducks, turkeys and ratites); producing and/or storing feed for use in the production of livestock or poultry; the production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; forestry land management practices including harvesting trees; and constructing farm buildings and farm ponds. These activities may also involve the application of pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, and animal wastes and irrigation, tillage of the soil and harvesting of crops. Execution of these activities may create noise, odors and dust at any time of any day of the week. 
Amusement or Recreational Attraction: A business establishment offering leisure time activities such as a billiard or pool hall, bingo parlor, go-cart track, miniature golf, golf driving range, judo or karate instruction, softball field, batting cage or skating rink. 
Amusement Park: A business establishment that groups together a number of leisure time activities such as mechanical rides, amusement devices, refreshment stands and picnic grounds. 
Amusement Parlor: A business establishment providing leisure entertainment utilizing video games, pinball machines or other coin-operated amusement devices. 
Animal feeding operation: A lot or facility where animals are stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period. Growth or post-harvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility. 
Animal unit: As determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and periodically revised. Currently, one animal units consists of: 
One slaughter or feeder cattle. 
Seventh-tenths mature dairy cows (milked or dry). 
Two and one-half swine each weighing over 55 pounds. 
One-half horses. 
Ten sheep or lambs. 
55 turkeys. 
100 laying hens or broilers in facility with continuous watering. 
30 laying hens or broilers in facility with liquid manure system. 
Five ducks. 
Note: Dry litter poultry houses not included. 
Applicant: A property owner or their authorized representative who has petitioned the City or County for approval of a zoning change, development permit, building permit, hardship variance, special exception or appeal, or any other authorization for the use or development of their property under the requirements of this Development Code. 
Application: A petition for approval of a zoning change, development permit, building permit, hardship variance, special exception or appeal, or any other authorization for the use or development of a property under the requirements of this Development Code. 
Aquifer: Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated AO or VO zone on the city's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly deemed channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Artisans or Crafts Studio: A facility for: 
• Creation or production of unique, hand-made, or one of a kind works or products for individual retail or special order purchase by professional painters, drawers, sketchers, sculpters, costumers, jewelers, musicians, dancers, potters, carpenters, or other artists or craftspeople, as differentiated from mass production; where the production of such goods employs six or fewer full-time individuals; and where the production process is characterized by no emissions of noxious odors, dust, fumes, gas, noise or vibration outside of any building. 
• Teaching of artistic or craft process by professional artists or craftspeople. 
Automobile Parking Lot, Commercial: An area or structure dedicated to the temporary storage of automobiles or other vehicles for periods of less than 24 hours for a fee, operated as the principal use of the property or structure. 
Automobile Sales and Service: The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used automobiles, panel trucks, vans or busses, and which may include any repair service conducted as an accessory use. See also "Boat Dealers," "Motorcycle Sales and Service," and "Recreational Vehicle Dealer." 
Automobile Service Station: Buildings and premises where gasoline or diesel fuel is dispensed at retail for automobiles, recreation vehicles and motorcycles, and where in addition at least one of the following services is rendered: 
(1)  Sale, replacement, or servicing of spark plugs, oil, water hoses, brake fluids, batteries, distributors, tires, carburetors, brakes, fuel pumps, or other automotive parts or accessories, etc. 
(2)  Uses permissible at an automobile service station shall not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or storage of automobiles not in mechanically operable condition. See "Automotive Repair Shop" where major mechanical and body work activities are allowed. 
Automotive Repair Shop: The use of a building or premises for the repair of automobiles or other motorized vehicles, or the installation or repair of equipment or parts on motorized vehicles such as mufflers, brakes, tires, radios, transmissions, glass, and engines or engine parts. Automotive Repair Shops also include: 
(1)  Automotive Paint or Body Shop: The use of a building or premises for the repair of automotive bodies and/or major mechanical works, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or storage of automobiles not in operable condition. 
(2)  Tire Retreading or Repair Shop: The use of a building or premises for the repairing or retreading of automotive tires. 
Automotive Service Business (excluding repair): The use of a building or premises for the servicing of automobiles, including sales, installation, and servicing of minor parts such as lights, belts, hoses, wipers, tires, batteries, air or oil filters, spark plugs, fuses, brakes, glass radios, and air conditioners; diagnostic and emissions testing; and replacement of fluids such as oil, water, brake fluid, transmission fluid, Freon, wiper fluid, etc. 
Awning: A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, walkway, or window from the elements. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame, and may be retracted into the face of the building. 
Awning or Canopy Sign: See "Building Sign." 
Bank, Savings and Loan or Credit Union: A financial depository institution or related banking facility that accepts money for deposit into accounts from the general public or other financial institutions, and may include personal or business loans, wire transfers and safe deposit boxes as accessory uses. 
Banner: A sign other than an official flag, made of paper, cloth, thin plastic, or similar lightweight material and usually containing a message or logo. 
Bar or Tavern: An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic drinks, such as beer, ale, wine and liquor, for consumption on the premises, and which may also serve food as a substantial portion of its business. 
Base Flood: The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Bed and Breakfast Inn: A business establishment operated within a dwelling by the owner-occupant, offering one to ten units for temporary lodging and one or more meals to the traveling public while away from their normal places of residence. See also "Hotel or Motel." 
Berm: A mound of earth, or the act of pushing earth into a mound. 
Best Management Practices (BMP's): A collection of structural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sediment control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Block: An area of land bounded by such features as streets, rivers, railroads or the development project boundary. 
Board of Adjustments: The duly appointed Board of Adjustments of the City of Rome or the duly appointed Board of Appeals of Floyd County, as appropriate to the jurisdiction within which an appeal is taken. 
Boarder: An individual who lives in a part of a dwelling unit at the behest of the resident family and is provided lodging or lodging and meals for pay or other consideration on a temporary basis. 
Boarding House: See "Rooming or Boarding House." 
Boat Dealer: The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used motorboats or other watercraft, and which may include the sale of marine supplies or outboard motors and repair service conducted as accessory uses. 
Breakaway Wall: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
Brewpub: As defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to production limits—10,000 barrels per year for on-site consumption and 5,000 barrels per year for sale to a licensed wholesale dealer—for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. As used in this definition, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food; provided, however, that barrels of beer sold to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution to retailers and retail consumption dealers, as authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36(2)(c), shall not be used when determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales. 
Buffer: An area of natural vegetation or man-made construction, which is intended to provide a visual and dimensional separation between dissimilar land uses. 
(1)  Natural Buffer: A visual screen created by vegetation of such density so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year. 
(2)  Structural Buffer: A visual screen created through construction of a solid wooden fence, decorative masonry wall, earthen berm, or combination of fence or wall with an earthen berm, which may be supplemented with vegetation, so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year. 
Buildable Area of Lot: That portion of a lot bounded by and interior to the required rear, side and front building setback lines. 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Building Code: The technical codes approved for enforcement under the Georgia Uniform Codes Act (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.) by the respective Governing Bodies. 
Building Floor Area: The total floor area of all heated spaces within a building as measured within the outside of the exterior walls, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and unheated stairwells, storage areas, garages and loading docks. 
Building Height: The vertical distance measured to the highest point of a building from the average finished grade across those sides of a building that face a street. 
Building Inspections Department: References to action by the "Building Inspections Department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Building Inspections Department of the City of Rome to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Chief Building Inspector also known as the Chief Building Official. 
Building Materials Sales: An establishment offering lumber or other construction materials used in buildings for sale to contractors or the general public. 
Building Sign: A sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed or painted upon the exterior wall, window, door, or roof of a building. The term "building sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Awning or Canopy Sign: A sign imposed or painted upon or suspended beneath any awning or canopy. 
(2)  Facade or Wall Sign: A sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior wall of a building and extends from the surface of the wall no more than 18 inches. 
(3)  Incidental Sign: An announcement or other display providing information about the occupancy or conduct of business permitted on a premises, such as logos of credit cards accepted on the premises, hours of operation, a "closed" or "open" sign, emergency contact person name and telephone number, street address, "help wanted," "no loitering or solicitations," security system notices, notices required by law, and similar information. 
(4)  Projecting Sign: A sign affixed to a wall and extending more than 18 inches from the surface of such wall, usually perpendicular to the wall surface. 
(5)  Roof Sign: A sign that is mounted on, applied to, or otherwise structurally supported by the roof of a building. 
(6)  Window Sign: A sign that is placed on or behind a window pane and intended to be viewed from outside the building. 
Building Tree Line: The lines extending from the corners of a building nearest a street to the side lines of the lot (not including a street right-of-way), parallel to the right-of-way line or to the chord of that line. 
Business or Vocational School: See under "School." 
Business, Professional or Trade Association: See under "Membership Organization." 
Business Service: The use of a building or premises primarily for rendering a service to other business establishments on a contract or fee basis, such as advertising, credit reporting, computer programming, photocopying, and employment services. 
(1)  Miscellaneous Business Service Establishment: An establishment offering such business services as private security, photo finishing, appraisals, map drafting, paralegal, press clipping, recording studio, repossession, and telephone answering. 
Caliper: The diameter of a tree (usually nursery stock) measured at a point six inches above the ground or top of root ball for up to and including four-inch caliper trees, and at a point 12 inches above the ground or top of root ball for larger sizes. 
Canopy: A roof-like structure supported by columns or projecting from a building and open on at least three sides. 
Carwash: The use of a building or premises primarily for washing automobiles, recreation vehicles and motorcycles, whether by hand or mechanical means. 
Cemetery: A facility for the burial of deceased human beings or animals. 
Center Line: That line connecting the succession of midpoints between the identifiable limits of any improvements on the ground or of any easement. 
Chief Building Inspector: The Chief Building Inspector of the City of Rome and Floyd County, also known as the Chief Building Official. 
Church or Place of Worship: See under "Membership Organization." 
Civic, Social or Fraternal Association: See under "Membership Organization." 
Clinic: An establishment where medical or dental patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination or treatment requiring less than an hour recovery time. 
Common party wall: A wall used jointly by contiguous structures, erected upon a line dividing two parcels of land, each of which is a separate real estate entity. 
Community Garden: Land used to grow flowers, vegetables, or fruit; cultivated and managed by members of a community for their own use or to produce food to donate to other community members; with a minimum lot size of 7,500 square feet, and ten feet of setback on any side adjacent a residentially-zoned property. Such a garden may have plots for individual use or plots for communal use; and have as accessory uses small sitting areas, gathering areas, no more than four off-street parking spaces, and no play areas. 
Comprehensive Plan: The Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, which includes Floyd County and the City of Rome, as amended from time to time. 
Concentrated or Confined Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO): A lot or facility, together with any associated treatment works, where animals have been, are or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period; and where crops, vegetation, forage growth, or post-harvest residues are not sustained over any portion of the confinement area; and where 1,000 animal units (as defined in this Article 8) or more are confined, as currently defined by the State of Georgia, Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391. 
Condition of Zoning Approval: A requirement adopted by the governing body at the time of approval of a zoning change, placing greater or additional requirements or restrictions on the property than provided in this Development Code in order to reduce an adverse impact of the zoning change and to further the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
Condominium: A multi-family unit, the interior of which is owned by an individual. Common walls and exterior common space of the development is maintained in undivided ownership of all individual unit owners. 
Congregate Personal Care Home: See under "Personal Care Home." 
Construction Contractor: An establishment engaged in the construction of buildings, engaged in heavy construction (such as streets, bridges or utilities), or specialized in such construction trades as plumbing, heating and air-conditioning, electrical wiring, masonry, roofing or gutters, well drilling, or house painting. 
Construction Sign: A sign identifying the contractors, engineers, architects or financial institutions involved in the building construction or development of a property. 
Convalescent Home: An intermediate care facility primarily engaged in providing inpatient nursing and rehabilitative services to residents who require watchful care and medical attention or treatment, but not on a continuous basis, although staff is on duty 24-hours per day. 
Convenience Gas Station: A building or premises where gasoline, diesel fuel and oil may be dispensed at retail with no automobile repair facilities. Uses permissible also include the sale of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco and similar household convenience goods for station customers. 
County Health Officer: The Floyd County Health Department officer responsible for approval of on-site sewage disposal systems. 
Critical Root Zone: The land area circular in shape and centered on the trunk of a tree, the radius of which circle is determined by the farthest extent of the drip line from the trunk. 
Cul-de-sac: A dead-end street that terminates in a permanent turnaround and not intended for future extension. 
Curb Break or Curb Cut: Any interruption or break in the line of a street curb for the purpose of connecting a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
Custom Order and Specialty Shop: A business establishment that offers handmade or special order merchandise, one of a kind original art work, home furnishings or similar merchandise, but which maintains no inventory on site other than display items. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Cutting: The removal of any soil or other solid material from a natural ground surface. 
Day Care Facility: The use of a building or premises for the care and supervision of children or elderly adults who do not reside on the property, for periods of less than 24 hours. 
(1)  Day Care Center: A day care facility that enrolls for pay, supervision and non-medical care, 19 or more children or elderly adults with no overnight stays. 
(2)  Family Day Care Home: An accessory use within a private residence operated by the occupant of the dwelling that enrolls for pay, supervision and non-medical care, five or fewer children or elderly adults with no overnight stays, or no more than six children or elderly adults if the structure meets the Building Code requirements for institutional uses. 
(3)  Group Day Care Home: A day care facility that enrolls for pay, supervision and non-medical care, seven to 18 children or elderly adults with no overnight stays. 
Day Labor Hiring Center: A facility at which job seekers congregate to be hired by the day or by the job for short periods of time by third parties. Job seekers must be present to receive and accept a job offer or to be transported to a job site, and typically return to the facility for payment. Related support and/or personnel services may be offered to job seekers. 
Dead-End Street: A street connected to another street at only one end. 
Deflection Angle: The angle between a deviation in the direction of the centerline of a street and the extension of the centerline along a straight course from the point from which the centerline changed direction. (See illustration below) 

Deflection Angle Illustrated 
Design Variance: An alteration or relaxation of the terms of this Chapter where such alteration will not be contrary to the public interest, convenience and welfare, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property over which the applicant for a variance has no control, a literal enforcement of these regulations would create unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant in the use of the property. 
Developer: The person, corporation or other legal entity that undertakes the subdivision of property, the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity, or the construction of streets, utilities, buildings or other improvements required for the habitation or use of property. 
Development: (1) A land development project involving the construction of streets, utilities, buildings, or other improvements required for the habitation or use of property, such as a residential neighborhood, an apartment complex, a store, or a shopping center; (2) any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials; (3) the act of constructing or carrying out a land development project, including the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Development Permit: The authorization necessary to initiate and conduct a land-disturbing activity and to carry out the planned development of land and structures. 
Diameter Breast Height (DBH): The diameter of a tree trunk (usually a mature tree) measured at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Director of Planning: The Director of the Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission. 
Director of Public Utilities: The Director of the Water and Sewer Department of the City of Rome or the Floyd County Water Department, as appropriate to the jurisdiction where a development is proposed. 
Director of Public Works: The Director of the Department of Public Works of the jurisdiction within which a development project is located. 
District: The Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Drainage Structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erosive material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Drip Line: A perimeter formed by the points farthest away from the trunk of a tree where precipitation falling from the branches of that tree lands on the ground. 
Drive-in Motion Picture Theater: See under "Theater." 
Dwelling : A building or portion of a building arranged or designed to provide living quarters for one or more families on a permanent or long-term basis. 
(1)  Single-Family Detached Dwelling: A residential building, whether site-built or a manufactured home or an industrialized building, designed for occupancy by one family. 
(2)  Site Built Single-Family Detached Dwelling: A single-family detached dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials and pre-assembled components delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the Building Codes as adopted by the Governing Body and, if applicable, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
(3)  Single-Family Attached Dwelling: A zero-lot line single-family dwelling unit constructed on an individual lot attached to a dwelling unit on an adjoining lot where the units are attached by common party wall. The common party wall in all units, including Type V construction, must be a parapet wall that meets the standards adopted by the Governing Body and, if applicable, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
(4)  Site-Built Single-Family Attached Dwelling: A single-family attached dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials and pre-assembled components delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the Building Codes as adopted by the Governing Body and, if applicable, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
(5)  Two-Family Dwelling (Duplex): A residential building whether site built, or manufactured or industry built home, designed for or occupied exclusively by two families, respectively, in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(6)  Site-Built Two-Family Dwelling: A dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials and pre-assembled components delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the Building Codes as adopted by the Governing Body and, if applicable, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
(7)  Multi-Family Dwelling: A residential building designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(a)  Townhouse: A multi-family dwelling in which the dwelling units may adjoin one another only at the vertical walls and no dwelling unit may be located above another. Also referred to as a "townhome." 
(b)  Three-Family Dwelling (Triplex): A residential building designed for or occupied exclusively by three families, respectively, in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(c)  Garden Apartment Building: A multifamily dwelling in which a dwelling unit may be located above another. 
(d)  Loft Dwelling: In a building originally constructed for nonresidential purposes, a dwelling unit located in a building above the first floor, the first floor being used for nonresidential purposes such as stores or offices. 
Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment with complete provisions for cooking, eating, sleeping, bathing and personal hygiene, and physically set apart, whether by doors, stairs, walls or partitions, from any other dwelling unit in the same structure. 
Easement: A strip of land on which the property owner has granted to another entity the right to use such land for specific purposes. 
Electronic Message Board: A type of sign that presents its message through illumination of flashing, intermittent, or moving lights forming the letters, numbers, or symbols of the message, whether or not the message appears to move across the sign face. 
Elevated Building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill; solid foundation perimeter walls; pilings, columns, posts and piers, shear walls; or breakaway walls. 
Employment or Personnel Agency: An establishment engaged in providing information and placement services to candidates seeking employment and/or clients looking for qualified employees. Candidates seeking employment register with the agency, but do not wait on-site or at a central location for assignments. 
EPD: The Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
EPD Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan: A plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. 
Existing Construction: Any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the original ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
Family: An individual or two or more persons living together as a household. 
Family Day Care Home: See under "Day Care Facility." 
Family Personal Care Home: See under "Personal Care Home." 
Farm Equipment Sales and Service: The use of a building or premises primarily for the retail sale of vehicles and equipment used in agriculture, such as tractors, combines, brooders or thrashers, and which may include the sale of seed and feed or any farm equipment repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
Farm Winery or Distillery: A facility in which wine or alcoholic spirits are produced from non-animal agricultural products (fruits, grains, or vegetables), at least some of which are grown on the premises. Such facility shall be operated in conjunction with an operating, conforming agricultural operation, and subject to production limits of 60,000 gallons per year. 
Farming: See [under] "Agricultural operations". 
Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of wood, wire, wire mesh, or decorative metal erected to enclose, screen or separate portions of a lot. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Filling: The placement of any soil or other solid material, either organic or inorganic, on a natural ground surface or excavation. 
Finished Grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Fire Department: A reference to action by the "Fire Department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Rome Fire Department to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Fire Chief or the State Fire Marshall, as applicable. 
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
a.  Overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
b.  Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement, i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Free-standing Sign: A sign permanently attached to the ground, which is wholly independent of any building or other structure. The term "free-standing sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Pole Sign: A sign that is mounted on a free-standing pole or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face is at least six feet above the ground. 
(2)  Ground Sign: A free-standing sign, other than a pole sign, in which the bottom of the sign face is less than six feet above the ground but not directly in contact with the ground. 
(3)  Monument Sign: A free-standing sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign. 
Freight Agency or Shipping Coordinator: An establishment primarily engaged in the remote arrangement of freight or cargo transportation, and not located where the freight or cargo is handled, stored or transported. 
Frontage or Street Frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any street from which access may be directly gained. 
Functionally Dependent Facility: A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term "functionally dependent facility" does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Funeral Home: A building used for the preparation of deceased human beings for burial or cremation and for conducting funeral ceremonies, and where cremations may be conducted as an accessory use. 
Furniture or Equipment Rental Establishment: A business establishment that rents or leases items of personal property such as furniture, tools, medical equipment, appliances and construction equipment to the general public, but not including automobiles or trucks. 
Garden Apartment Building: See under "Dwelling." 
Garment Services: A business establishment engaged primarily in such activities as linen supply, dressmaking, custom tailoring, or fur cleaning and storage. 
General Business Office: See under "Office." 
General Merchandise Store: A retail establishment that sells a number of lines of merchandise, such as dry goods, apparel, furniture, small wares, hardware and boutique foods. Such stores are also known as "department stores," "variety stores" and "country general stores." 
Governing Body: The Floyd County Commission or the Rome City Commission, whichever is appropriate to the context. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenhouse: A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment. 
Greenway: An area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, or which may contain limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. 
Gross Floor Area: The total area of all floors of a building, measured from the outside planes of the exterior walls. 
Ground Anchor: Any device at the manufactured home space designed to secure a manufactured home to the ground. 
Ground Elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Group Day Care Home: See under "Day Care Facility." 
Group Home for the Elderly: See "Retirement Community." 
Group Personal Care Home: See under "Personal Care Home." 
Group Residence: A dwelling unit occupied by several unrelated persons as their normal place of residence, but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons. The term "group residence" includes but is not limited to the term's "fraternity house" or "sorority house." A retirement community, nursing home, personal care home, hotel or motel, rooming or boarding house, or bed and breakfast inn shall not be deemed to be a group residence as herein defined. 
Guest House: An accessory use to a dwelling designed and intended for the temporary housing of visitors to a property at the behest of the property residents for no fee or other consideration. 
Handicapped Parking Space: A space laid out and designated by signage in accordance with the requirements of the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Health Club or Fitness Center: A business that provides facilities for aerobic exercises, such as running and jogging tracks, exercise equipment, game courts, gymnasium, or swimming facilities. 
Health Department: The Floyd County Health Department. 
Health Services Facility: An establishment primarily engaged in outpatient health services and counseling, such as a kidney dialysis center, blood bank, alcohol or drug treatment center, or childbirth preparation center. 
Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
Home Occupation: Any activity carried out for profit by the resident and conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. 
Home Office: A home occupation that is limited to an office use and does not involve visits or access by the public, suppliers or customers, and does not involve the receipt, maintenance, repair, storage or transfer of merchandise at the home. 
Hospital: The use of a building or premises for the provision of diagnostic health services and medical or surgical care to inpatients and out patients suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other physical or mental afflictions, and including as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities. 
Hotel or Motel: A business establishment offering temporary lodging to the traveling public while away from their normal places of residence, and often including a restaurant as an accessory use. See also "Bed and Breakfast Inn." 
Household: An individual living alone or a group of individuals living together in a single dwelling unit, sharing common use of and access to all living and eating areas, bathrooms, and food preparation areas, who mutually combine their efforts and share responsibilities for domestic chores such as child rearing, cleaning and cooking in a permanent and long-term relationship, as contrasted to one in a transient relationship who pays for lodging such as a boarder. 
Impermeable: Something (such as a layer of rock) that water cannot pass through or be absorbed by. 
Impervious Surface: A man-made structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface, such as a building, paved road or driveway, parking lot, deck, swimming pool or patio. 
Improvements: The physical addition and changes to land that may be necessary to produce usable, desirable and acceptable lots or building sites. 
Indoor Athletic Training or Fitness Facility: A facility that provides low density and/or guided athletic training or fitness activities such as CrossFit training, cheerleading, and gymnastics. 
Industrialized Building: See under "Modular Home." 
Industrialized Home: A dwelling manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act (O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 2, Part 1) and the Rules of the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs issued pursuant thereto. State approved buildings meet the State Building and Construction Codes and bear an insignia of Approval issued by the Commissioner. 
Inflatable Sign: A sign that is intended to be expanded by air or other gas for its proper display or support. 
Intersection: (1) The place where two streets cross; (2) The point at which the centerline of a street intersects the centerline of another street or railway. 
Junkyard or Salvage Yard: A building or premises used primarily for the collecting, storage or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or other discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, or salvage of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof. 
Jurisdiction: That area over which each governing body has authority for planning, zoning and development permitting under the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
Kennel: A shelter where dogs or cats are bred, raised, trained or boarded as a business. 
Land-Disturbing Activity: Any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in Section 8.3.2.a.(5). 
Livestock: Animals used for the production of food or products or for recreation, such as cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, poultry, ratites or equines. 
Loft Dwelling: A dwelling unit located in a building above the first floor, the first floor being used for nonresidential purposes such as stores or offices. 
Lot: A parcel or tract of land held in single ownership. 
Types of Lots 
(1)  Corner Lot: Any lot bounded by two streets at their intersection. 
(2)  Double-Frontage Lot: A lot bounding on two or more streets, but not at their intersection, so that it is not a corner lot. 
(3)  Interior Lot: A lot having frontage on only one street. 
Lot Area: The total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
Types of Lot Lines 
Lot Lines: The boundary dividing a given lot from the street, an alley, or adjacent lots. 
(1)  Front Lot Line: Any boundary line of a lot that abuts a street right-of-way line. A lot adjacent to more than one street will have more than one front lot line. 
(2)  Rear Lot Line: Any boundary line of a lot that does not intersect with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 
(3)  Side Lot Line: Any boundary line of a lot that intersects with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 
Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Clerk to Superior Court, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
Lot Width: The distance measured along the front principal building setback line between intersecting lot lines. 
Major Street or Major Thoroughfare: An arterial or collector street (see under "Street Classifications.") 
Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia: A publication of the same name published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, and as amended or supplemented from time to time. 
Manufactured Home: A structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and has been designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation. This structure, when connected to the required utilities, which includes plumbing, heating air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein, bears a label certifying that is constructed in compliance with the national Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards act, U.S. Public Law 93-383. This definition is different than that of a "mobile home" below. 
Manufactured Home Development: A general category of development that includes manufactured home subdivisions and manufactured home parks. 
Manufactured Home Lot/Site: A plot of ground within a manufactured home park designated for the placement of not more than one manufactured home of single-family occupancy. 
Manufactured Home Owner: The person who has legal title to the manufactured home. 
Manufactured Home Park: A parcel of land designed and/or intended for the lease or rental of spaces for the placement of two or more manufactured homes. 
Manufactured Home Park Street: A street that affords principal means of access to manufactured home lots/sites or auxiliary buildings from any adjacent county-maintained street. 
Manufactured Home Sales Lot: A premise on which manufactured homes are displayed for sale. 
Manufactured Home Skirting: Installation of approved material from the exterior base of the manufactured home to the ground, that may or may not provide support to the home. Acceptable materials include masonry, brick, rock, materials manufactured for such purposes or other appropriate durable materials. The materials shall be secured, as necessary, to assure stability, to minimize vibrations, to minimize susceptibility to wind damage, and to compensate for possible frost heave. An access opening not less than 18 inches in any dimension and not less than three square feet in area shall be provided and shall be located so that any water supply and sewer drain connections located under the home are accessible for inspection. Such access panel or door shall not be fastened in a manner requiring the use of a special tool to remove or open same. 
Manufactured Home Underpinning. See "manufactured home skirting" above. 
Manufacturing: The creation of finished goods from raw materials or intermediate component parts. 
(1)  Heavy Manufacturing: The extraction of natural resources or the transformation of raw materials through mechanical or chemical means into basic products for subsequent assembly, fabrication or use in the production of finished goods. 
(2)  Light Manufacturing: The finishing, fabrication or assembly of previously manufactured parts into a final product or component products ready for retail sale. Light manufacturing is characterized by no emissions of noxious odors, dust, fumes, gas, noise, or vibration outside of any building. 
Mean Sea Level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the flood plain or for airport zone elevations. For purposes of this Section, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Medical or Dental Office: See under "Office." 
Membership Organization: An organization that operates on a membership basis for the promotion of the members' interests. 
(1)  Business, Professional or Trade Association: A private organization that promotes the interests of business groups, such as the Chamber of Commerce; professions, such as the Bar Association; or members of a trade, such as a labor union. 
(2)  Church or Place of Worship: A religious organization operated for worship, religious training or study, and including convents, monasteries, shrines and temples. 
(3)  Civic, Social or Fraternal Association: An organization dedicated to public activities of a civic and non-profit nature, such as an alumni association, American Legion, Hibernian Society, Masonic Lodge or Oddfellows. 
(4)  Political Organization: An organization established to promote the interests of a local, State or national political party or candidate. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Mini-Warehouse: A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis to the general public. 
Miscellaneous Business Service Establishment: See under "Business Service." 
Miscellaneous Personal Service: See under "Personal Service Establishment." 
Miscellaneous Retail Stores: See under "Retail Store." 
Mobile Food Vehicle: A unit mounted on or pulled by a motorized vehicle where food including prepackaged foods and beverages for individual portion service are prepared, stored, served, or dispensed. 
Mobile Food Vehicle Park: Any property allowing as a primary use a site for more than one mobile food vehicle to serve food and/or drink to customers for consumption on- or off-site; where rent is charged. A set-up fee, registration fee, or participation fee for a special event shall not be considered rent. 
Mobile Home: A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, that became effective June 15, 1976. In many cases mobile homes were built to a voluntary industry standard of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)—A119.1 Standards for Mobile Homes. This definition differs from that of a "manufactured home" above. 
Mobile Home Court: See "Manufactured Home Park." 
Mobile Home Inspection: An inspection conducted according to the requirements set forth in this article. 
Modular Home: A factory fabricated, transportable structure, consisting of a single section or multiple sections called modules, to be constructed on top of a permanent foundation at the site for residential use. This structure is constructed in compliance with the standards adopted by the State Commissioner of Community Affairs in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Buildings Act. A label bearing the Commissioner's insignia will be affixed to the structure certifying the design and construction of the structure complies with the requirements of the Commissioner's rules. 
Motion Picture Theater: See under "Theater." 
Motor Freight Truck Terminal: A building or premises where trucks load and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation. 
Motor Vehicle Dealers, Miscellaneous: A business establishment primarily engaged in the sale of motorized vehicles and related equipment other than automobiles, motorboats, motorcycles or recreation vehicles, such as aircraft, dunebuggies, go-carts, snowmobiles and utility trailers, and which may include a repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
Motorcycle Sales and Service: The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used motorcycles, scooters or mopeds, and which may include any repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
Multi-Faced Sign: A sign structure that contains two or more sign face surfaces that are located on different sides of the structure and are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than three feet. 
Multi-Tenant Nonresidential Development: A single office, commercial or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more separately owned principal businesses having no corporate relationship. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): As corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the flood plain. 
Natural Ground Surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extend of turbidity in water in which colloidal dispersed particles are present. 
New Construction: Any structure for which the start of construction commenced after the effective date of this Development Code. 
Nonconforming Lot: A lot of record whose area, frontage, width or other dimensions, or location were lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Ordinance, and which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, no longer meets or exceeds one or more such requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
Nonconforming Sign: A sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Ordinance, and which by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this Ordinance. 
Nonconforming Structure: A structure or building whose size, dimensions or location on a property were lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Ordinance, but which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, no longer meets or conforms to one or more such requirements of this Ordinance. 
Nonconforming Use: A use or activity that was lawfully established prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Ordinance, but which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, is no longer a use or activity permitted by right or no longer meets or conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
Nursery School: See "Day Care Facility." 
Nursing Home: A skilled nursing care facility primarily engaged in providing full-time convalescent or rehabilitative care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves and require continuous care under the direction of a physician. See in contrast "Convalescent Home." 
Office: The use of any building or premises primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government, and generally furnished with desks, tables, files, and communication equipment. 
(1)  General Business Office: An office used primarily for the administrative or legal affairs of a company. 
(2)  Medical or Dental Office: An office occupied and maintained for the provision of services by a person licensed by the State of Georgia to practice in the healing arts for humans, such as a physician, surgeon, dentist, or optometrist. 
(3)  Professional Office: An office occupied by a member of a recognized profession and maintained for the provision of professional services, such as a lawyer, architect, city planner, landscape architect, interior designer, or engineer. 
One-Hundred Year Floodplain: A land area subject to a one percent or greater statistical occurrence probability of flooding in any given year. 
Opaque: Impenetrable to view, or so obscuring to view that features, buildings, structures, and uses become visually indistinguishable. 
Open Space: An essentially unimproved area of land or water permanently set aside through dedication, designation, or reservation for passive recreation or enjoyment. 
(1)  Common Open Space: Useable land area of a site that is available to all occupants of a development on a continuing and permanent basis and is not covered by buildings (except recreational structures) or public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Public Open Space: Land reserved for leisure and/or recreational use but dedicated in fee simple to a governing body or agency to be responsible for operation and maintenance; therefore, such land is not for the exclusive use of the residents of a specific development. 
Operator: The entity that is legally responsible for operation of the mobile food vehicle or mobile food vehicle park. 
Outdoor Display Area: A portion of a property outside of any building where merchandise, goods or other items are placed in public view for the purpose of direct sale or lease to customers. 
Outdoor Storage: The keeping within an unroofed and unenclosed area of any goods, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
Outparcel: A lot deeded separately from a larger tract for individual development, but generally sharing access with the larger tract. Outparcels are most generally associated with shopping centers. 
Overlay Zone: A geographical area that encompasses one or more underlying zoning districts and that imposes additional requirements above that required by the underlying zone. 
Parking Aisle: The traveled way, which is not the public right-of-way, by which cars enter and depart parking spaces. 
Parking Area: Any public or private area at grade or within a structure used for the express purpose of temporarily parking automobiles and other vehicles otherwise in operation for personal or business use. 
Parking Bay: Three or more parking spaces adjacent to one another and aligned side-by-side. 
Parking Garage: An accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles as an accessory use. See also "Automobile Parking Lot, Commercial." 
Parking Space: A space identified and set aside for the temporary parking of an automobile or other motor vehicle. 
Passive Park: A publicly or privately owned greenspace where recreational opportunities are limited to walking/running/biking trails or sidewalks, roofed or open picnic facilities, children's playgrounds, fishing piers, interactive fountains, park benches, artistic exhibits, and open space; as opposed to athletic playing fields, sports complexes, neighborhood or community recreation centers, or commercial amusement or recreational attractions. 
Pawn Shop: A type of used merchandise store in which merchandise is offered as collateral for obtaining loans and wherein such merchandise is offered for sale in recompense for default of loan repayment. 
Perennial Stream: A stream that flows throughout the whole year. Perennial streams may be identified as shown as such on a United States Geologic Service Quad map. 
Performing Arts Theater: See under "Theater." 
Personal Care: Protective care and watchful oversight of a resident who needs a watchful environment but who does not have an illness, injury, or disability that requires chronic or convalescent care such as medical or nursing services. Protective care and watchful oversight means a 24-hour responsibility for the well-being of the resident, which includes at least a daily awareness by the management of the resident's functioning and whereabouts, the making and reminding a resident of appointments, the ability and readiness to intervene if a crisis arises for the resident, supervision in areas of nutrition and medication, and actual provision of transient medical care. 
Personal Care Home: A place of residence for adults where lodging, meals, and personal care are provided 24 hours per day, seven days per week and where federal and/or state licensing or permitting is required. 
(1)  Family Personal Care Home: A personal care home in a family type residence, non-institutional in character, that offers care for two to six adults. 
(2)  Group Personal Care Home: A personal care home in a residence or other type of building that is non-institutional in character and offers care for seven to 15 adults. 
(3)  Congregate Personal Care Home: A personal care home that offers care to 16 or more adults. 
Personal Enrichment School: See under "School." 
Personal Service Establishment: A business primarily engaged in providing a service generally to individuals, such as a laundry, portrait photographic studio, or beauty or barber shop. 
(1)  Miscellaneous Personal Service: An establishment offering such personal services as tax return preparation, clothing or costume rental, dating service, hair removal or replacement, or tanning salon. 
Planning Commission: The duly appointed Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission. References to the Planning Commission pertain only to the appointed board acting in their official capacity. 
Planning Department: References to action by the "Planning Department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Director of Planning or the Planning Commission. 
Plant Nursery: Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs, trees, and other plants for sale to distributors or for subsequent replanting by the owner, a landscape company or others. 
Political Organization: See under "Membership Organization." 
Pollution Susceptibility: The relative vulnerability of a aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundment, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in a recharge area. 
Premises: An area of land with its appurtenances and buildings, which, because of its unity of use, is one unit of real estate. 
Presiding Official: The person chairing a meeting of the Planning Commission, Board of Adjustments or the Governing Body in their official capacity. 
Principal Building: A building in which is conducted a principal use. 
Principal Building Setback Line : A line delineating the required allowable distance between a property line or the right-of-way line of an abutting street and a principal building on a lot. 
(1)  Front Building Setback : The required allowable distance between the right-of-way line of any abutting street and any part of a principal building on a lot. The front setback distance is applied along the full length of the right-of-way line and is parallel to it. If the required lot width is not achieved at the required front setback then the front setback is to be established at that point beyond the required at which the required lot width is achieved. 
(2)  Rear Building Setback : The required allowable distance between a rear lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The rear building setback extends along the full length of the rear lot line. 
(3)  Side Building Setback : The required allowable distance between a side lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The side building setback extends along the side lot line between the front building setback an a rear building setback (if any). 
Principal Freestanding Sign: The main freestanding sign on a property, other than a billboard. 
Principal Use: The specific, primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
Professional Engineer: An engineer licensed and registered to perform the duties of a professional engineer (P.E.) by the State of Georgia. 
Professional Office: See under "Office." 
Prohibited Use: A use that is not permitted in a zoning district by right, as an accessory use, or as a conditional use. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Project Entrance Sign: A sign located at a discernible entrance into a particular subdivision, development, or office or industrial park. 
Projecting Sign: See "Building Sign." 
Property or Parcel of Land: See "Lot." 
Property Owner: Person(s) having a fee simple interest of 50 percent or more in real estate. 
Public Improvement: The construction, enlargement, extension or other construction of a facility intended for dedication to and maintenance by the public, including but not limited to a street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, cross drain, catch basin, traffic control and street name sign, or other roadway appurtenance other than a driveway apron connection; domestic water supply system main, fire hydrant, valve or other appurtenance other than a supply line to a building; or sanitary sewerage main or outfall, lift station, force main, manhole or other appurtenance other than a drain line from a building. 
Public Open Space: See under "Open Space." 
Public Utility: A utility owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
(1)  Public Sewerage System: A sanitary sewerage system for the collection of water-borne wastes complete with a sewage treatment plant that is owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
(2)  Public Water System: A system for the intake, treatment and distribution of potable water that is owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
Public Utilities Department: References to action by the "Public Utilities Department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Water and Sewer Department of the City of Rome or the Floyd County Water Department, as appropriate to the jurisdiction where a development is proposed, to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Director of the respective Departments. 
Public Works Department: References to action by the "Public Works Department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Rome or Floyd County Public Works Department to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Director of the respective Public Works Departments. 
Public Works Director: The Director of the Department of Public Works of the Jurisdiction, or his designee, whose duties include the review and approval of construction plans for public streets. 
Publicly Dedicated: Land or improvements that has or have been transferred by plat or deeded to and accepted by the Jurisdiction for public use and maintenance. 
Real Estate Sign: A sign offering a property or premises for sale or lease. 
Recharge area: Any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Record and Video Tape Sales: A business establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale (but not rental) of prerecorded music, movies or other audio or video programs. See also "Video Tape Rental Store." 
Recreation Facility, Community: A swimming pool, tennis court, or other recreation facility owned by or provided for the use of the residents of a subdivision, apartment project, or other residential development. 
Recreation Facility, Private: An accessory use to a dwelling designed and equipped for the conduct of personal leisure time activities such as a swimming pool, tennis court, deck, or patio. See also "Community Recreation Facility." 
Recreational Vehicle: A motorized camper, converted bus, tent trailer, motor home, or other similar vehicular or portable structure used or designed for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation or other recreational trip and provided with sleeping accommodations. 
Recreational Vehicle Dealer: The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used recreational vehicles, and which may include any repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
Recreational Vehicle Parks or Campgrounds: A commercial operation designed for temporary lodging where members of the travelling public possessing recreational vehicles or tents may rent a campsite by the night or week; and where the intent is not to establish permanent residence. 
Recycling Center: A use operated exclusively for the collection and temporary storage of used paper, glass, metal, and similar materials suitable for reprocessing, which are transported elsewhere for separating, processing, or storage. 
Registered Land Surveyor: A land surveyor licensed and registered to perform the duties of a registered land surveyor (R.L.S.) by the State of Georgia. 
Repair Shop, Miscellaneous: A business establishment primarily engaged in specialized repair services such as bicycle repair, leather goods repair, lock and gun repair, musical instrument repair, septic tank cleaning, furnace cleaning and taxidermists. 
Reserve Strip: A strip or tract of land reserved for the purpose of controlling or limiting access from properties to abutting streets. 
Residential Cluster Development: A cluster of attached and detached single-family dwelling units developed on a single lot. 
Restaurant: An establishment in a site built or "brick and mortar" structure where food is prepared and served on the premises for consumption on or off the premises: 
(1)  Custom Service: An establishment where food and drink are prepared to individual order, ordered and served at the table, and consumed primarily within the principal building or in established outdoor dining areas. 
(2)  Drive-In or Drive Through: Any establishment, building, or structure where food or drinks are served for consumption, either on or off the premises, by order from or service to persons either over an interior counter, outside the structure or from an outdoor service window or automobile service window, or by delivery. This definition shall not include otherwise permitted restaurants where outdoor table service is provided to customers in established outdoor dining areas or where drive-through or take-out service is provided incidental to a Custom Service Restaurant. 
Retail Store: An establishment principally engaged in offering a category of similar goods or products for sale to the general public, such as a grocery store, hardware store, pharmacy, clothing shop, home furnishings store, office supplies store, and the like. 
(1)  Miscellaneous Retail Stores: Retail stores such as florists, tobacco stores or newsstands, optical goods stores, artists' supplies, stamp and coin shops, pet stores, telephone stores, and home swimming pool or hot tub stores. 
Retirement Community: An age-restricted residential development that offers significant services and facilities for the elderly, including social and recreational activities, personal care services, or health facilities limited to use by the development's residents. At least 80 percent of the units must be occupied by residents 55 years old or older. 
Right-of-Way: Land reserved for and immediately available for use as a street or other public purpose. 
Roadbed: That portion of a street improved for vehicular travel, including the curbs and shoulders. 
Roadway: The paved portion of a street improved for vehicular travel, measured from back of curb to back of curb, or from edge of pavement to edge of pavement for swale ditch roads. 
Roadway Drainage Structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Roof Sign: See "Building Sign." 
Rooming or Boarding House: A dwelling unit within which a resident family or manager offers lodging or lodging and meals to two or more unrelated adults in exchange for monetary compensation or other consideration. 
School: A facility used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. 
(1)  Academic School: A private educational facility offering instruction following the same curriculum used in a public kindergarten, elementary, secondary, trade or technical, or higher education facility, and accredited to award diplomas as such. 
(2)  Business or Vocational School: A business establishment offering courses of instruction oriented to improving business skills or securing employment in a specific field, such as data processing, secretarial or office services, banking, commercial art, nursing, real estate, truck driving, or other trade or vocation. 
(3)  Personal Enrichment School: A business establishment offering courses in the arts or personal skills, not necessarily related to employment, such as automobile driving, drama, ceramics, cooking, diction, languages, modeling, music, public speaking or reading. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Semi-Public Use: A use owned or operated by a nonprofit, religious, or eleemosynary institution for the purpose of providing educational, cultural, recreational, religious, or social services to the general public. 
Setback: The shortest straight line distance between a street right-of-way or lot line and the nearest point of a structure or building or projection therefrom (excluding roof overhangs of 18 inches or less). 
Setback, Minimum: The shortest distance allowed between a street right-of-way line or any other lot line and any principal or accessory building on a lot. Minimum setback requirements for buildings are associated with the type of lot line from which the setback is taken; for instance, a "side yard setback" is measured from a side lot line. 
Shade Tree: A broadleaf tree having an average height at maturity of a least 20 feet and having a broad spread relative to its height (excluding trees with pyramidal, conical, or columnar crowns) and a dense canopy, so as to provide shade to structures or parking areas in the summer months. 
Shopping Center: A commercial development containing at least three retail sales or services establishments located in one building, the total gross floor area of which is 25,000 square feet or greater. 
Sign: The term "sign" shall mean any structure, display, or device that is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement, or illumination. 

Sign Types 
  
Sign Face: That portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
Sign Face Module: Each portion or unit of a sign face that is clearly separable from other such units by virtue of the expression of a complete thought, message, logo, or idea. 
Sign Height: The vertical distance to the highest point of a sign structure, as measured from the average grade at the base of the structure or directly below a projecting structure. 

Sign Height Limitation Illustrated 
  
Sign Structure: All elements of a freestanding sign, including the sign face, background or decorative elements related to the presentation of the sign's message, and the structural supports. 
Single-Family Detached Dwelling: See under "Dwelling." 
Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan: An erosion and sediment control plan approved in writing by the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Solar Farm: Multiple solar panels converting the energy of the sun into electricity and selling it for distribution through a utility company's service grid. 
Solar Panel Array: Single or multiple solar panels converting the energy of the sun into electricity almost entirely for the use of an office, residential, industrial, or agricultural development or operation as an accessory use. 
Solar Panel Installation: Less than ten solar panels or 300 square feet, whichever is less, converting the energy of the sun into electricity for the sole use of a single-family dwelling or duplex as an accessory use. 
Solid Waste Transfer Station: A facility where refuse and garbage (but no hazardous waste) is delivered for compaction or aggregation and loaded on trucks for shipment to a remote landfill or other disposal facility. 
Special Outdoor Event: A festival, carnival or exhibition produced for a limited time by or on behalf of a non-profit organization or in conjunction with special promotional activities of a business. 
Sports Facility, Commercial: The use of any building, structure or premises for the conduct of a professional or semi-professional sport, such as a boxing pavilion, racetrack, stadium or sports field where admission is charged in order to pay the players or fund a prize purse. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Start of Construction: The initiation of new construction or a substantial improvement, as follows: 
(1)  For New Construction: The date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a building, including a manufactured home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; the excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. 
(2)  For a Substantial Improvement: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural parts of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State Waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Storage: The placement, keeping, or retention of vehicles, equipment, materials, goods, or products on a temporary basis for intermittent use or subsequent distribution or transfer. 
Street: An improved way for the conveyance of motor driven, rubber-tired vehicles, such as automobiles and trucks. The term includes streets that have been opened and accepted by the jurisdiction as a "public" street, streets otherwise maintained by the jurisdiction, and streets that have been approved and designated by the jurisdiction as a "private" street. 
Street Classifications: Streets are classified according to the function that they are to serve, the type, speed, and volume of traffic they will carry and the required standards of design. The classifications of streets and roads are as follows: 
(1)  Major streets include the following: 
(a)  Arterial Roads (Major). A road intended to move through traffic to and from major areas of activity and/or as a route for traffic between communities or large areas. A minor function is to provide direct access to abutting property. 
(b)  Arterial Roads (Minor). A road intended to collect and distribute traffic in a manner similar to major arterials, except that these roads service major activity centers, and/or are designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the major arterials. A minor function is to provide direct access to abutting property. 
(c)  Collector streets —Major streets that carry traffic between minor streets and arterial streets. 
(2)  Minor streets include the following: 
(a)  Local streets —Streets in residential subdivisions that primarily provide access to individual lots, do not carry through traffic, and serve fewer than 100 dwelling units. 
(b)  Alleys —A public or private right-of-way that affords only secondary means of access to abutting properties and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Street Jog: the incidence where two streets or two portions of a single street are separated by a relatively short distance, usually at their intersection with another street. (See illustration below) 

Street Jog 
Structural Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sedimentation control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, water-ways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include but are not limited to buildings, driveways, parking lots, walls, fences, signs, and swimming pools. 
Structure Height: The vertical distance to the highest point of a structure, as measured from the average grade at the base of the structure or directly below a projecting structure. 
Subdivision: (1) The division of a property or tract of land into two or more tracts or lots; (2) A land development project in which two or more lots are created, along with the streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots. 
Substantial Improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during the life of a building, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building prior to improvement. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. 
For the purposes of this definition, the term does not include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
Tangent: The straight-line distance between the ending of one curve of a line (center line of a street) and the beginning of another curve of the same line (center line). (See illustration below) 

Tangent Illustrated 
Temporary Special Event: An activity that occurs sporadically for definitive periods of time or until a definitive ending, such as a grand opening or special sale, or a festival or bazaar. 
Temporary Use: A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. 
Tenant: One who possesses or occupies land or buildings by title, under a lease, or through payment of rent; an occupant, inhabitant, or dweller of a place. 
Theater: A building or premises devoted to showing motion pictures, or for live dramatic or musical performances. 
(1)  Drive-In Motion Picture Theater: An open lot with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures or other prerecorded productions to patrons seated in automobiles. 
(2)  Motion Picture Theater: A building primarily used for the exhibition of movies or other prerecorded productions to the general public in an indoor setting. 
(3)  Performing Arts Theater: A building primarily used for the presentation of live performances of plays or music. 
Tiny Home: A custom-built, transportable structure designed to provide living quarters that may be constructed for one of the following uses: 
(1)  Modular Home: This structure, when it bears a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the Georgia Industrialized Buildings Act and meets standards in this Code, is allowed wherever site-built single-family dwellings are permitted if: 
•  The structure is placed on continuous footings and foundations; and 
•  Exterior walls of modular buildings are supported by continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete footings and foundations; and 
•  The towing tongue and wheels are removed from the structure. 
(2)  Manufactured Home: This structure, when it bears a label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, U.S. Public Law 93-383 and meets standards in this Code, is allowed wherever manufactured housing units are permitted. 
(3)  Recreational Vehicle: This structure is used or designed for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation or other recreational trip and provided with sleeping accommodations. 
Tire Retreading or Repair Shop: See under "Automotive Repair Shop." 
Townhouse: See under "Dwelling." 
Travel Trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight feet. 
Triplex: A three-family dwelling. See under "Dwelling: Multi-Family Dwelling." 
Trout Streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Truck Loading Docks: A portion of a building designed for the loading and unloading of trucks. 
Truck Terminal: See "Motor Freight Truck Terminal." 
Two-Family Dwelling: See under "Dwelling." 
Uniform Sign Plan: Coordinated drawings and specifications that establish a unified design concept with regard to the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all signs to be placed on a property. 
Unrelated: When referring to persons, two or more people not related by blood, marriage or adoption. 
Use: The purpose for which land or a building or other structure is designed or arranged, or for which it is occupied. See also "Principal Use" and "Accessory Use or Structure." 
Used Merchandise Store: The use of a building or premises primarily for the retail sale of used merchandise or secondhand goods, such as used clothes, antiques, secondhand books or rare manuscripts, or items of architectural salvage, but not including used cars or other motorized vehicles. A pawn shop is a type of used merchandise store. 
Utility Company: A private business providing electricity, natural gas, telephone, wireless communications or other services under the regulation of the Georgia Public Services Commission or license of the federal government. 
Utility Company Substation: A facility used for the transmission or distribution of services provided by a utility company, such as an electrical transformer station, telephone junction box, cable television box or natural gas regulator station. 
Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Veterinary: A hospital or clinic providing medical care and treatment for animals. 
(1)  Large Animal Veterinary: A place where horses, cattle, sheep or other animals normally kept in agricultural settings are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care. 
(2)  Small Animal Veterinary: A place where dogs, cats, birds or other animals normally kept as household pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care. 
Video Tape Rental Store: An establishment primarily engaged in renting movies or other entertainment programs prerecorded on tape, disks or other media, to the general public for personal or household use. 
Wall Sign: See "Facade or Wall Sign" under "Building Sign." 
Warehouse or Indoor Storage Facility: A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. See also "Mini-Warehouse." 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Water Supply Intake: The point at which water is withdrawn from a river, stream or lake to be sent to a treatment plant for public consumption. 
Water Supply Watershed: The area upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
(1)  Large Water Supply Watershed: One with 100 or more acres of land in the drainage basin upstream of the intake. 
(2)  Small Water Supply Watershed: One with fewer than 100 acres of land in the drainage basin upstream the intake. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Wholesale Trade Establishment: A place of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. 
Window Sign: See "Building Sign." 
Yard: An area that lies between the principal building on a lot and the nearest lot line. 
(1)  Front Yard: A yard situated along any public street right-of-way or private street easement. 
(2)  Rear Yard: A yard situated along a rear lot line. 
(3)  Side Yard: A yard situated along a side lot line, but not extending into a front or rear yard. 

Yard Lot Lines 
Zoning Change: An amendment to the Zoning Map (rezoning), approval of a special use, or approval of a change in the conditions of approval associated with a rezoning or special use. 
Zero-Lot Line: The location of a building on a lot in such manner that one or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-2, § I, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 02-4-10, § I, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 02-11-10, § I, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 04-6-4, §§ I, II, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 05-6-9, § IV, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 06-2-4, § II, 2-20-06; Ord. No. 2008-2-3, § I, 2-4-08; Ord. No. 2008-9-3, § I, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 2010-6-5, § I, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 2011-6-5, § I, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 2012-3-5, § III, 3-19-12; Ord. No. 2012-10-3, § IV, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 2013-3-3, § IV, 3-25-13; Ord. No. 2013-8-3, § I, 8-26-13; Ord. No. 2014-7-2, § III, 7-28-14; Ord. No. 2014-7-3, § IV, 7-28-14; Ord. No. 2015-06-01, § III, 6-8-15; Ord. No. 2016-11-04, § I, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 2016-12-04, § VI, 12-19-16; Ord. No. 2017-2-5, § II, 2-27-17) 
ARTICLE 9. - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 

9.1. - Purpose of article. 
This Article establishes overlay zoning districts to guide development in specific areas within the City of Rome and unincorporated Floyd County. The purpose of overlay zoning districts is to allow the Governing Body to establish special land use regulations, standards, or procedures in areas with unique land use, site planning, building design, or environmental resource issues. Overlay zoning districts are also an appropriate mechanism to implement long-term goals and land use requirements of the City and County for a specific property, location, or to coordinate land use and design requirements unique to a large tract of land. Overlay zoning districts are intended to be applied only where special circumstances justify the modification of base zoning district regulations to achieve specific land use and design objectives. 
9.2. - Establishment and designation. 
Overlay zoning districts are established through "zoning change" procedures as established in Article 2 of this Code and in conjunction with base zoning districts. Except as modified by the overlay zoning district, the provisions of the applicable base-zoning district shall apply to all development within the boundary of the designated area. If regulations conflict, the applicable overlay zoning district regulations shall prevail. 
Whenever an overlay district is established, any subsequent application to change the base-zoning district shall not be construed to be an application to eliminate the overlay district for the property covered by the application. An intent to eliminate the overlay district on a given property shall be expressly stated to be part of the application. 
9.3. - South Rome Redevelopment District. 
9.3.1. - Purpose.The purpose of this district is to provide such additional standards and uses to the underlying zoning districts as needed to promote appropriate redevelopment in the South Rome Redevelopment District (SRRD), in conformance with the South Rome Redevelopment Master Plan, adopted by the City of Rome in August of 2004. 
9.3.2. - South Rome Overlay Districts Map.Boundaries of the South Rome Overlay District and redevelopment areas shall be amended to and shown on the official zoning map of the city and county on the respective dates of adoption for this ordinance, and as subsequently amended thereafter from time to time in conformance with this code. The South Rome Overlay District Map is hereby made a part of this Code, and all notations, references and other information shown on it shall be a part of this Code. 
9.3.3. - South Rome Overlay District Defined.The South Rome Overlay District shall include that property designated by the City of Rome as the South Rome Redevelopment Area. The overlay district shall be further divided into six distinct redevelopment areas: Hillsboro Residential Neighborhood, Etowah Heights Area, Blacks Bluff Neighborhood, Northern Commercial Mixed-use, Central Commercial Mixed-use, and Southern Commercial Mixed-use. 
The six redevelopment areas are established to insure that new development is attractive, pedestrian oriented, and compatible with the existing neighborhoods; while promoting the preservation of heritage resources and sense of place. 
a.  Hillsboro Neighborhood Area (HNA). 
(1)  The HNA Area is bounded by the Coosa River on the north and west, South Broad Street and East Main Street to the east, and City of Rome municipal property to the south. 
(2)  The HNA Area is a traditional residential neighborhood built along a grid pattern. Residential architectural styles reflect the residential neighborhoods established prior to and during the 1940s with steeply pitched roofs and modest, but varied, architectural detailing. Single-family residences predominate, with scattered duplexes and some multi-family residential. Commercial development includes retail and service businesses, located mostly along the South Broad Street corridor. One legal non-conforming industry (zoned L-TR) occupies two lots adjacent the Coosa River, south of the residential area. 
(3)  Large tracts of institutional property are located within the HNA Area; including the Coosa Country Club, Myrtle Hill Cemetery, Shadyside Cemetery, Parks Hoke Park, and Anna K. Davie Elementary School. 
b.  Etowah Heights Area (EHA). 
(1)  The EHA Area is bounded by the South Broad Street corridor on the west, the Northern Commercial — Mixed Use Area to the north, the Etowah River and Silver Creek to the east, and East Main Street/East 12th Street to the south. 
(2)  The EHA, which includes the Mount Aventine neighborhood, is one of the oldest established residential areas in Rome. Due to the area's unique topography, this single-family residential neighborhood was developed along a curvilinear design. Residential architectural styles reflect the residential neighborhoods established prior to and during the 1940s with steeply pitched roofs and varied architectural detailing. Several excellent examples of Victorian, Queen Anne, and Craftsman architecture are located in this area. Commercial uses are limited in this area, and are located mainly in the South Broad Street corridor. The Jewish cemetery is the only institutional use. The land on the eastern side is largely within the floodplain and is undeveloped. 
(3)  The Etowah Heights area includes a strip of residential property along both sides of Etowah Terrace. This neighborhood of historic, but generally run down houses, is further identified as the Etowah Terrace Arts Village (ETAV). Its location between the Mt. Aventine residential neighborhood and the Northern Commercial/Mixed Use Area; and between the river and Broad Street makes it an ideal area for redevelopment as a mixed use/residential neighborhood. 
c.  Blacks Bluff Neighborhood Area (BBNA). 
(1)  The BBNA Area comprises the southern extremes of the South Rome Overlay District including the Blacks Bluff Road Corridor, Cave Spring Street Corridor, and the Anchor Duck mill houses. 
(2)  This area is comprised mainly of mixed density, strip residential development and large tracks of institutional uses including City of Rome municipal property (zoned HI to accommodate a waste water treatment plant) and the Darlington School. No distinct architectural pattern is evident in this area with the exception of the Anchor Duck mill houses along Cave Spring Street and South McLin Street; and the Darlington School campus. Industrial and commercial development is interspersed with residential development along the street corridors. 
d.  Northern Commercial Mixed-use Area (NCMA). 
(1)  The NCA is bounded on the north and west by South Broad Street, on the east by the Etowah River, and on the south by the Mt. Aventine Neighborhood Area. 
(2)  The NCA Area includes a strip of mostly vacant commercial buildings along South Broad Street, and vacant lots. The buildings located in the commercial strip along South Broad Street are architecturally and geographically related to the downtown commercial district across the Charles Graves Bridge. 
e.  Central Commercial Mixed-use Area (CCMA). 
(1)  The CCMA Area is centered on South Broad Street and the intersection of Black Bluff Road and East Main Street. The area is bounded by the Hillsboro, Etowah Heights, and Black Bluff Neighborhood Areas. The area currently includes a church, a contractor office and storage yard, and single-family residences. 
f.  Southern Commercial Mixed-use Area (SCMA). 
(1)  The SCMA is bounded on the north by Etowah Terrace Area, on the east by the exiting rail line, on the west by Silver Creek, and on the south by the Black Bluff Neighborhood Areas. 
(2)  The area is developed with several large unused industrial buildings. Some of these are empty, and some are used for a variety of commercial uses. The Silver Creek trail ends near this complex. The Floyd County Health Department building is located in the SCMA. 
9.3.4. - Underlying Zoning Districts in Designated Areas.This section establishes appropriate underlying zoning district designations for each redevelopment area. Underlying zoning districts are shown in Table 9-1. 
TABLE 9-1  APPROPRIATE ZONING DISTRICTS IN DESIGNATED AREAS 

 
9.3.5. - Design Requirements in Designated Areas. 
a.  The provisions regarding design standards of the applicable underlying zoning district shall apply to all development within the boundary of the Overlay District; however, if regulations conflict, the applicable Overlay District regulations shall prevail. 
b.  The following general standards shall apply to all redevelopment areas within the Overlay District: 
(1)  Requests for rezoning of property within the South Rome Overlay District shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the development proposed for the site. The site plan shall meet the requirements of Article 2.2.2, and include elevations for all primary structures. 
(2)  In addition to site plans and building plans that meet the requirements of Article 2.8.2, building permit applications shall include elevations for all primary structures. Permits for renovation, repair, or remodeling where the cost of the work does not exceed 50 percent of the structural value, as determined by the Chief Building Official, shall be exempt from this requirement. 
The determination by the Chief Building Official as to whether or not the total cost of renovations is at least 50 percent of the structural value may be appealed to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments. 
For commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential developments a Uniform Sign Plan that meets the requirements of Article 5.4.3 shall also be submitted. 
(3)  Infill on vacant lots shall be compatible in use, scale, height, exterior material, roof pitch, landscaping, orientation, setbacks, and design with existing development of a similar use on surrounding lots within 100 feet or on the same or opposite block. 
(4)  Existing structures within the Overlay District should be preserved and adaptively reused. Demolition shall be undertaken only in response to health and safety issues as determined by the Building Official, or if specific redevelopment projects have special merit in terms of providing benefit to the community. 
(5)  Sidewalks shall be placed along all street frontages when development occurs. Sidewalks that meet the requirements of this code; the standards for streetscaping, as defined in the South Rome Redevelopment Master Plan; and the designs, patterns, and materials used on adjacent and opposite properties are required on all streets adjacent to new non-residential and multi-family residential construction or renovation of non-residential and multi-family residential property in which the total cost of renovations are at least 50 percent of the total property value. 
(6)  Unless otherwise specified, streets and sidewalks shall be constructed in conformance with the standards listed in Article 6.6 and 6.7. 
(7)  Parking requirements shall be those associated with the underlying zoning district and use. However, requests for Special Exceptions to reduce the parking requirements for commercial and mixed use developments shall be considered favorably if adequate and feasible alternatives are proposed, such as available on-street or public parking, centralized shared parking, pedestrian/bike accessibility, and/or location on transit routes. The number of off-street parking spaces shall not exceed the minimum requirement by more than five percent unless the spaces will be shared. Shared parking arrangements shall be approved by the Building Official. 
All parking for Multi-family and non-residential development shall meet the standards for required parking found in Article 6 of this Code, including but not limited to surfacing, landscaping, and dimensions. These regulations shall apply to new parking areas, redeveloped parking areas, and to any enlargement of parking areas by ten percent or more. The enlargement of any existing parking area by ten percent or more shall require that existing and new parking areas conform to the standards for required parking found in Article 6. Multi-level parking structures are exempt from the interior planting requirements. 
(8)  New construction, demolition, and renovation (in which the total cost of renovations are at least 50 percent of the structural value, as determined by the Chief Building Official) require review and approval by a panel consisting of the South Rome Redevelopment Agency Director or their designee, plus at least three of the following staff members; Director of Planning, Historic Preservation Planner, Director of Community Development, or the Chief Building Official; or their designee as required. 
The determination by the Chief Building Official as to whether or not the total cost of renovations is at least 50 percent of the structural value may be appealed to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments. 
The Chief Building Official shall notify the panel when a complete application for a permit has been submitted. The applicant may, at their request or at the request of the Chief Building Official, meet with the panel to discuss the project. 
Failure of the panel to approve or deny an application within 14 days of submittal of a completed application shall constitute approval. 
c.  Variations in development standards (from the standards listed in this Code for each zoning district) are shown in Table 9-2. 
TABLE 9-2  VARIATIONS IN DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

 
d.  Variations in sign regulations (from the standards listed in this code for each zoning district) are shown in Table 9-3. 
TABLE 9-3  PERMITTED SIGNS-BY ZONING DISTRICT OR SPECIAL USE 
Principal Freestanding Sign — One Use or Two or More Uses on Property 

 
NOTE: Height of sign means, in the case of freestanding signs, the distance in vertical feet measured from the level of an adjacent street centerline to the highest point of the sign structure. The sign measured at its base shall not extend over 40 ft. in height above the centerline of any adjacent road. 
Building Sign: Wall Signs and Awning, Canopy, Projecting, Incidental, Roof and Window Signs, etc. 

 
Note: Street frontage is defined in this Code as being a street "from which access may be directly gained." 
9.3.6. - Permitted Uses in Designated Areas. 
a.  The uses permitted by right and by special use permit, with or without limitations, of the applicable underlying zoning district shall apply to all development within the boundary of the Overlay District; however, if regulations conflict, the applicable Overlay District regulations shall prevail. 
b.  Variations in use from those permitted in each underlying zoning district are shown in Table 9-4. 
TABLE 9-4  PERMITTED USES IN DESIGNATED AREAS 

 
(Ord. No. 06-2-4, § I, 2-20-06; Ord. No. 2007-8-5, §§ I, II, 8-6-07) 
9.4. River Corridor District. 
9.4.1. Purpose. The rivers of Rome are an important but limited resource that should be utilized and protected for the benefit of the community. The intent of this district is to establish such additional standards and uses to the underlying zoning districts that will promote appropriate and sustainable development within the River Corridor; preserve the scenic, natural, cultural, and recreational resources within the corridor; and protect the health and ecological diversity of the Etowah, Oostanaula, and Coosa Rivers. 
9.4.2. River corridor overlay district map. Boundaries of the River Corridor Overlay District (RC) shall be amended to and shown on the Zoning Districts Maps, Rome-Floyd County, Georgia on the respective dates of adoption for this ordinance, and as subsequently amended thereafter from time to time in conformance with this Code. The River Corridor Overlay District Map is hereby made a part of this Code, and all notations, references and other information shown on it shall be a part of this Code. 
9.4.3. River corridor overlay district defined. The River Corridor Overlay District (RC) shall include that property designated by the City of Rome as shown on the Zoning Districts Maps, Rome-Floyd County, Georgia. This area shall include all property within 200 feet of the Etowah, Oostanaula, and Coosa Rivers. 
9.4.4. Applicability. No structure or land within the River Corridor Overlay District (RC) shall hereafter be developed, extended, converted or structurally altered except in full compliance with the provisions of this ordinance section regardless of previous development status. Legal non-conforming uses and structures shall be treated as specified in Article 1 of this Code. Agricultural operations shall be exempt from this overlay zone. 
9.4.5. Review of development plans by special review panel. Review of new construction, demolition, renovation, and land disturbance is required. A Special Review Panel consisting of at least three of the following staff members; Assistant City Manager, Director of Planning, Historic Preservation Planner, Director of Community Development, Environmental Services Director, and Chief Building Official or their designee shall accomplish such reviews. The Chief Building Official shall be responsible for distributing all plans and elevations to each member of the review panel. No permit shall be issued prior to approval by the special review panel. Decisions of the Special Review Panel may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
9.4.6. Building and site design. The following standards shall apply to all development in the corridor, except single-family dwellings and duplexes on individual lots. 
a.  Minimum building setbacks, landscaping requirements, and buffers shall conform to the requirements of the underlying zoning district. Additionally, no building shall be allowed within 100 feet of the Etowah, Oostanaula, and Coosa Rivers, except on previously developed property. On previously developed property, new development may infringe on the 100-foot river buffer only to the extent of the infringement by the previous development, including depth and area, and only if granted a variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals and Adjustments. 
b.  All office buildings and retail sales and service establishments shall have a customer entrance facing the river or other architectural design addressing the river that is approved by the Special Review Panel. 
c.  The outdoor storage of equipment and/or merchandise, when permitted, shall not be visible from public property or the rivers. The outdoor display of sales merchandise is permissible so long as it meets with other requirements of the code. 
d.  In order to ensure the permanency of buildings, reduce the need for periodic maintenance and maintain a character which is commensurate with the public interest, the following materials shall be used as primary exterior building wall finishes on portions of the building which are visible from the River right-of-way: brick, stone, glass, wood, stucco, imitation stucco, pre-cast concrete, poured concrete, and/or split-face concrete block. Materials should be sealed or otherwise treated if they will be subject to wet conditions in order to maintain a clean and finished appearance. Other materials may be used if approved by the Special Review Panel. 
e.  Service and loading areas, outdoor sales and storage areas, trash receptacles, utility equipment, mechanical units and similar appurtenances shall be located so as to minimize visibility from the rivers and shall be visually screened from view from off the premises. Trash receptacles shall be located within a four sided structure which completely conceals the trash receptacle. The color and architecture of the structure shall be compatible with that of the building which it serves. Building orientation shall be such that loading and service areas do not face the river or public road, except in the case of double frontage lots, where such areas must be located in a rear or side yard, which faces the highway. All loading and service areas shall be screened from view from off the premises. 
f.  Screening walls and fences shall match the color and materials of the building on the premises. Fences designed to create privacy or separation shall be made of masonry, ornamental metal, durable wood, vinyl that is designed and fabricated to appear as wood, or a combination of these materials. Chain link, plastic or wire fencing is not permitted for fences visible from public property, unless screened by landscaping. 
g.  Development plans shall include site amenities that enhance safety and convenience of pedestrians and promote walking or bicycling as an alternative means of transportation. Site amenities may include bike racks, drinking fountains, canopies and benches. 
h.  When multi-use trails exist or are planned, pedestrian access lanes shall link the multi-use trail with street sidewalks and with building entries through parking lots. Special paving, raised surfaces, bollards, or landscaping shall be used to separate pedestrian access lanes from traffic. Such lanes shall be a minimum of six feet in width. 
9.4.7. Appropriate land uses and zoning. 
a.  Appropriate land uses may include residential, multi-family residential, office, retail sales and service, historical education/interpretation, and some light industrial uses. Heavy industrial uses are not appropriate in the River Corridor Overlay Zone. Other uses allowed in the underlying zoning district shall be allowed on property within the district. 
b.  Appropriate zoning districts in the River Corridor Overlay Zone may include Suburban Residential, Agricultural Residential, High Density Traditional Residential, Low Density Traditional Residential, Duplex Residential, Multifamily Residential, Neighborhood Office Commercial, Office Institutional, Community Commercial, Central Business Commercial, Urban Mixed Use, Planned Development and Light Industrial zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2007-5-14, § I, 5-21-07) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1959 CODE 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1959 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1959 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the Code Comparative Table—Ordinances. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1981 CODE 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1981 Code, as updated through August 19, 1991, which are included herein. Sections of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1981 Code, as updated through August 19, 1991, which are included herein. This table contains some ordinances which precede August 19, 1991, but which were never included in the 1981 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since August 19, 1991 and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
RELATED STATE LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the Related State Laws and any amendments thereto. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table gives the location within this Charter, Related State Law, and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 