THE CODE OF DOOLY COUNTY, GEORGIA
____________
Published by Order of the Board of Commissioners
____________
M MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION
CC Tallahassee, Florida     2005
OFFICIALS
of
DOOLY COUNTY, GEORGIA
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION
____________
Wayne J. West, Chairman
A.C. Daniels, Vice-Chairman
Charles Anderson
Terrell Hudson
Harry Ward
Board of Commissioners
____________
Stephen C. Sanders
County Administrator
____________
John Davis
County Attorney
____________
Janet P. Joiner
County Clerk
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Dooly County, Georgia.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
2/137
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances subsequently adopted by the Board of
Commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The
absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of
the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter
have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law
have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of
this Code.
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government
codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number,
and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is
numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the
same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new
material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section
would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be
placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article
embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included
by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained
when including new chapters.
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which
represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that
portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of
an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are
typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:
CODE CD1:1
CODE APPENDIX CDA:1
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1
CODE INDEX CDi:1
Index
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of
which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government
officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
3/137
to the particular item in which the user is interested.
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this
system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page
or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the
manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are
received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached
instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid
misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Diana Harper, Senior Legal
Technician/Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the
publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Stephen C. Sanders, County Administrator, and Mr. John Davis, County Attorney for their
cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the
publisher have resulted in a Code that will make the active law of Dooly County readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a
valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of Dooly County's affairs.
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Dooly County, Georgia. Editorial
enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses;
editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and
index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal
Code Corporation and Dooly County, Georgia.
© Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and Dooly County, Georgia. 2005.
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Dooly County,
Georgia," and may be so cited.
State law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19.
Sec. 1-2. - Denitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be
observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which
shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be
repugnant thereto.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
4/137
(1)
(2)
(3)
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular
trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such
subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the
old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to
when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(a), (b).
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions
contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the board of commissioners may be
fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any
provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision
imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general.
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the
circumstances.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(5).
Board of Commissioners. The term "Board of Commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of the County.
Code. The term "Code" means Code of Dooly County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only
the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall
have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such
action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the
following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven
days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(3).
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction
"and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and
"or" are interchangeable:
The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply.
The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any
combination.
The term "either . . . or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly,
but not in combination.
County. The term "County" means Dooly County, Georgia.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a County officer or County employee to do some act, it is to
be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act.
Following. The term "following" means next after.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(8).
Gender. Words of one gender include words of all other genders.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
5/137
State law reference— Gender, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(4).
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is
otherwise declared.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(5)
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" means persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a
servant, agent or employee.
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive.
State law reference— Definition of "may," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(10).
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(11).
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Number. The singular and plural number includes the other, unless expressly excluded.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(6).
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(12).
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended.
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards,
commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other
agencies of the County.
Ordinance. The terms "ordinance" and "resolution" are interchangeable.
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land.
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or
body politic and corporate, as well as an individual.
State law reference— Definition of "person," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(14).
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property.
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(15).
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(16).
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate.
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
6/137
(a)
(b)
(c)
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for
the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
Signature or subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of an illiterate or infirm person.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(19).
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia.
Street or road. The terms "street" and "road" include any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other
public highway in the County, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof.
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or
oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference— Tense of words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(7).
Week. The term "week" means seven days.
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(23).
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(24).
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, eect of history notes, references in Code.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such
sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the
catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal
effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, cross
references, and state law references which appear after sections or subse
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
7/137
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(d)
All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be
numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of
these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or
omitted are readopted as a new Code.
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference
to the section number of this Code in the following language:
"Section ____________ of The Code of Dooly County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may
then be set out in full as desired.
If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used:
"The Code of Dooly County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as
appropriate) to be numbered ____________, that reads as follows:…." The new material may then be set out in full as desired.
All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by
section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be, or by setting them out at length in the
repealing ordinance.
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code.
Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the County. A
supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the
period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be
so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code
will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the
Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal,
nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the
supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may:
Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in
the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles.
Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where
necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers.
Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this
division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________/____________/____________ to
____________/____________/____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that
embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code).
Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into
the Code.
In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the
supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
8/137
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means:
Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by
rule or regulation authorized by ordinance;
Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by
ordinance; or
Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by
rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a County officer or County employee
to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this
section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the
officer or employee.
Except as otherwise provided:
A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof.
With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation
continues is a separate offense.
With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act is a separate
offense.
The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other
administrative sanctions.
Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by
injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty
does not prevent equitable relief.
State law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b).
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of Code.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the
incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time
of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-10. - Prior oenses, penalties, contracts or rights not aected by adoption of Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any
penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.
The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any
use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this
Code.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
9/137
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not aected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any of the following ordinances or portions of
ordinances, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at
length in this Code:
Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments
of indebtedness.
Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement.
Granting any right or franchise.
Making or approving any appropriation or budget.
Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code.
Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan.
Levying or imposing any special assessment.
Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any
street, sidewalk or alley.
Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision.
Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code.
Pertaining to zoning.
That is temporary, although general in effect.
That is special, although permanent in effect.
The purpose of which has been accomplished.
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— County government, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— County governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.
Secs. 2-31—2-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Secs. 2-61—2-90. - Reserved.
(1)
(2)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
10/137
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Local government finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; local government budgets and audits,
O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq; local government bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.
Secs. 2-91—2-120. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-121. - Board of commissioners to serve absent appointments.
Except as otherwise provided by law, whenever an ordinance establishes or references a board or commission and such board
or commission has not been established or the membership of such board or commission has not been appointed, the board of
commissioners shall serve as such board.
Secs. 2-122—2-140. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - MIDDLE GEORGIA SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Regional Solid Waste Management Authorities Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-50 et seq.
Sec. 2-141. - Activation of Authority.
The County, after diligent study and review, hereby joins with the other Participants in finding and declaring that there is a
need for an authority to function in the area of solid waste management. In conjunction with the other Participants, the County
hereby activates the Middle Georgia Regional Solid Waste Management Authority, a public corporation created as an institution of
purely public charity, to perform an essential governmental function in the exercise of the power conferred upon it by this division
and the Regional Solid Waste Management Authorities Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-50 et seq.).
(Ord. of 8-30-1993, § 1)
State law reference— Resolution of need required to activate authority, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-52.
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. - Denitions.
(3)
(4)
(5)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
11/137
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(b)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(b)
The definitions in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 apply to this chapter.
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.
Secs. 6-2—6-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGES
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; local licensing of sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-41 et seq.
Sec. 6-31. - Authorized.
The Board of Commissioners of the County will issue retail licenses for the sale of malt beverages within the County outside
the corporate limits of the several municipalities located in the County and wholesale licenses for the distribution of malt
beverages within the County outside the corporate limits of the several municipalities located in the County, subject to the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. of 5-15-1979)
Sec. 6-32. - Retail licensee qualications.
No retail alcoholic beverage license shall be issued unless:
The retail licensee must be a resident of the State, unless otherwise provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a).
The licensee shall not have been convicted within five years of the date of his application of a felony, or any
violation of the laws of this State, or any other State, relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages.
The licensee shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is
granted.
If the application covers a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license
and must make sworn statements of these qualifications.
The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications according to the above on forms prescribed
by Board of Commissioners of the County and shall place same on file with the Clerk of the Board of
Commissioners before any license is issued.
Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued.
(Ord. of 5-15-1979, § I)
Sec. 6-33. - Regulations.
No holder of a license issued pursuant hereto authorizing the sale of malt beverages at retail nor any agent or
employee of the licensee shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises:
Sell or possess for the purpose of sale in the County outside the corporate limits of the several municipalities
therein, any malt beverages where such person does not have a license from the Board of Commissioners of
the County to sell or possess for sale such beverages;
Receive at or accept delivery to the premises of the retail licensee malt beverages by any means other than by
a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the Board of Commissioners of
the County to make deliveries in the County;
Any violation of the provisions of this section or of State law regulating the sale applicable to the licensed business
(6)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
12/137
(a)
(b)
shall be grounds for immediate revocation of a license by the Board of Commissioners of the County.
(Ord. of 5-15-1979, § III)
Sec. 6-34. - License fees and excise tax.
An excise tax is hereby imposed on, and shall be paid by, wholesale dealers licensed hereunder on the sale or
disposal of malt beverages in the County as authorized and directed under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80, the
tax to be in the maximum sums as provided for in such section and the tax shall be reported and remitted to the
County by each wholesale dealer licensed hereunder in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81.
The applicant for a retail license shall pay to Board of Commissioners of the County at the time his license is
received the sum of $100.00 for a license authorizing the retail sale of beer only and $175.00 for a license
authorizing the retail sale beer and wine as annual license fee for operation for one year beginning on the first day
of January or one-half of this amount if the license is issued during the last six months of the license year. Such
licenses shall not be transferable from one person to another and shall not be transferable from one location to
another except with the expressed approval of the Board of Commissioners of the County.
(Ord. of 5-15-1979, § IV)
Sec. 6-35. - Hours of operation.
The hours of operation of retail licensees for the sale of malt beverages licensed hereunder shall be between the hours of 6:00
A.M. and midnight. The hours of operation of wholesale licensees for the distribution of malt beverages within this County shall be
between the hours of 6:00 A.M. and midnight.
(Ord. of 5-15-1979, § V)
Sec. 6-36. - Authority to issue licenses.
All applicants for such licenses hereunder shall be presented to the Board of Commissioners of the County for approval by
filing same with the Clerk of the Board, and if approved, the licenses shall be issued by the Board of Commissioners of the County
upon the payment of the required fee.
(Ord. of 5-15-1979, § VI)
Sec. 6-37. - Transfer of licenses.
All such retail alcoholic beverage licenses shall be nontransferable, except with express approval of the Board of
Commissioners of the County.
(Ord. of 5-15-1979, § VII)
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶III(a)(3); animals generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et
seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved.
(7)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
13/137
(1)
(2)
ARTICLE II. - DOGS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 10-31—10-50. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOGS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20; local regulation of dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-22, 4-8-29.
Sec. 10-51. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority:
Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property at anytime after
March 31, 1989; or
Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been
classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification.
Dog Control Officer means the Emergency Management Agency Director and such employees of the Emergency Services
Agency acting under his supervision and control, or such other individual or individuals who from time to time may be selected by
the governing authority to aid in the administration and enforcement of this division.
Local government means Dooly County, Georgia, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia.
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust
owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog within the territorial boundaries of the County.
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that without provocation bites a human being on public or private property at
anytime after March 31, 1989.
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's
property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of
young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure
top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be
constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such
enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any State, County, or municipal law enforcement agency, records of any
County or municipal animal control agency; records of any County Board of Health; records of any Federal, State, or local court; or
records maintained by the Dog Control Officer pursuant to this division.
(8)
(9)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
14/137
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(c)
(d)
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or
cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death.
(Ord. No. 89-2, § 1, 9-21-1989)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21.
Sec. 10-52. - Duties of Dog Control Ocer with respect to dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs; notice of classication; right
to hearing.
Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog from a law enforcement agency, animal
control agency, or County Board of Health, it shall be the duty of the Dog Control Officer and his designees to make
such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
division. Whenever the Dog Control Officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, or
reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, notice shall be given the dog's owner in writing by
certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification or reclassification. Such notice shall be
deemed complete upon its mailing.
The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements:
The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address;
The notice shall include a summary of the Dog Control Officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's
classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog;
The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has
a right to request a hearing before the Dooly County Board of Health on the Dog Control Officer's
determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the Board having been
designated to conduct such hearings;
The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the Dog Control Officer's determination that the dog is
a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this section on
the day after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and
The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the Dooly County Board of Health, and shall
provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering the form to the Dooly County Board of Health.
When the Dooly County Board of Health receives a request for a hearing, it shall schedule such hearing within 30
days after receiving the request. The Dooly County Board of Health shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified
mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the
hearing. At the hearing the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and in
addition thereto, the Dooly County Board of Health shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony
as the Dooly County Board of Health may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain,
modify, or overrule the Dog Control Officer's classification of the dog. Within ten days after the date of the hearing,
the Dooly County Board of Health shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the
matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall
specify it is effective on the third day following the date of receipt by the owner.
Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail or
statutory overnight delivery of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous
dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective.
(Ord. No. 89-2, § 2, 9-21-1989)
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
15/137
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Sec. 10-53. - Certicates of registration; requirements and issuance.
Subject to the requirements of this division, the Dog Control Officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the
owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the Dog Control Officer, or if the
Dog Control Officer finds sufficient evidence of:
A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog;
The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly
visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the premises; such sign shall conform substantially to the
design provided by the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Georgia; in addition to the annual fee
required by Subsection (c) of this section, the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall pay
the cost of the sign and the cost for a replacement sign if the original is lost, destroyed or damaged; and
Payment to the County of an annual fee in the amount of $50.00 to defray the cost of administering and
enforcing this division.
In addition, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present evidence to the Dog Control Officer of:
A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business
within the State insuring the owner of the dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the
dangerous dog; or
A surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact
business in this State payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog.
Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of
registration, the Dog Control Officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be
necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper
enclosure, and that the owner is continuing to comply with the other provisions of this division. The annual fee of
$50.00 shall be due at the time of annual renewal.
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the Dog Control Officer within 24 hours if
the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has
been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of
the dog. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall further notify the Dog Control Officer if
the owner is moving from the Dog Control Officer's jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 89-2, § 3, 9-21-1989)
Sec. 10-54. - Possession of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog without certicate; keeping of dog in violation of conditions of
certicate; conscation and impoundment; destruction of animal.
It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the County a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous
dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with Section 10-53
It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the
dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible
person.
It shall be unlawful for an owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure
unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person.
It shall be the duty of the Dog Control Officer and any person under his employ to impound the dog if:
The owner does not secure a certificate of registration in accordance with Section 10-53
The owner does not secure liability insurance or meet the bond requirement of Section 10-53
The owner does not keep the dog within a proper enclosure or permits the dog to roam or run free.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
16/137
(e)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Any dog impounded under the provisions of this section shall be returned to the owner upon the owner's compliance w
provisions of this division and upon payment of reasonable impoundment cost, as fixed by a schedule approved by the
authority, as from time to time amended. Notice of impoundment under this section shall be given the owner, in writin
certified mail, at his last known address. The notice shall state that if the owner has not complied with the provisions o
division within 20 days from the date of confiscation, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manne
(Ord. No. 89-2, § 4, 9-21-1989)
Sec. 10-55. - Penalties.
Violations of Sections 10-53 and 10-54 of this division shall be punished by the issuance of a State warrant pursuant to O.C.G.A.
§ 4-8-28.
(Ord. No. 89-2, § 5, 9-21-1989)
Sec. 10-56. - Jurisdiction.
Jurisdiction under this division shall extend to all the unincorporated areas of the County, and to the territory within the
corporate limits of such municipalities located in the County which desire to enter into agreements with the County for dog control
services.
(Ord. No. 89-2, § 6, 9-21-1989)
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1. - Water conservations requirements for plumbing xtures.
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Commercial means any type of building other than residential.
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or
renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning,
unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building.
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or
motel.
Requirements. No construction may be initiated within the unincorporated areas of the County for any residential
or commercial building of any type which:
Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of
1.6 gallons of water per flush;
Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60
pounds per square inch of pressure;
Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush;
(10)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
17/137
(4)
(5)
(c)
(d)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
1.
2.
3.
(2)
(e)
Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water pe
Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water
per minute.
Repair, renovation, and addition requirements. The requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall apply to any
residential construction and to any commercial construction which involves the repair or renovation of, or addition
to, any existing building when such repair or renovation of, or addition to, such existing building includes
replacement of toilets or showers or both.
Exemptions.
New construction and the repair and renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements
of Subsection (b) and (c) of this section when:
The repair or renovation of, or addition to the existing building does not include the replacement of the
plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or shower heads within such existing building;
When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or
installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or shower heads required by this section
were installed;
When such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use is
such individual's personal residence; or
When units to be installed are:
Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities;
Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or
Toilets for juveniles.
The owner, or agent thereof, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled
to an exemption as specified in Subsection (d)(1) a., b. or c. of this section shall obtain the exemption by
applying at the office of the Dooly County Planning Department.
Enforcement. This article shall be enforced by the office of the Dooly County Permit Office citations for violations
may be issued by the Building Inspector of Dooly County or his designee.
(Ord. of 6-18-1998, §§ 1—4, 6)
State law reference— Water conservation requirements for plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3.
Secs. 14-2—14-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— State mandated technical codes, O.C.G.A. § 9-2-20 et seq.
Sec. 14-31. - Adopted.
DOOLY COUNTY, GEORGIA All Codes, promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 8, ch 2, art. I, pt. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.),
together with all provisions for implementation and enforcement as contained therein, are hereby adopted by reference as though
they were copied herein fully.
(Ord. of 3-7-1996, § 1)
(11)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
18/137
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Sec. 14-32. - Enforcement.
Within the codes adopted in this article, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, the
designated official of the County, who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed to be
the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the codes.
(Ord. of 3-7-1996, § 3)
Chapter 18 - COURTS
Sec. 18-1. - Additional sums collected from oenders to cover jail construction and stang.
The Jail Construction and Staffing Act is hereby placed into effect in the County.
In every case in which any court in the County shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any
offense against a criminal or traffic law of this State or any offense against a County ordinance, there shall be
imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine.
At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this State or a
violation of a County ordinance, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall
be posted. In every case in which any court in the County shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional
sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be collected.
The additional penalties set forth above shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be
paid into the Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund, by O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 to be paid into the Judges of Probate
Courts Retirement Fund of Georgia, or by any other provision of law.
The additional penalties as herein prescribed shall be assessed and collected by the Clerk or Court Officer charged
with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds. Such additional penalties shall be paid
over to the Board of Commissioners by the tenth day of the month following the month in which these sums are
collected.
All such sums collected and paid over to the Board of Commissioners of the County shall be deposited into a special
account which shall be known as the "County Jail Fund."
All monies collected pursuant to this section and placed in the County Jail Fund shall be expended solely and
exclusively for construction, operating, and staffing the Dooly County Jail, or for such other purposes as specified in
O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95.
The additional penalties provided for by this section shall not be imposed or collected in any court operated by any
municipality located in the County.
(Res. of 12-14-1989)
State law reference— Fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93.
Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
19/137
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local ordinances governing land
disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4.
Sec. 22-31. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Best Management Practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly
designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and
including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event.
Board means the Board of Natural Resources.
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of State waters in its natural state of vegetation, which
facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.
Commission means the Georgia Soil & Water Conservation Commission.
Cut, excavation means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation;
the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface.
Department means the Department of Natural Resources.
Director means the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources.
District means the Ocmulgee River Soil and Water Conservation District.
Division means the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources.
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such
material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water
management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
Erosion and sedimentation control plan and plan mean a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from
a land disturbing activity.
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground.
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed
design.
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling,
stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the Director of the
Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources as an Issuing Authority, pursuant to the Erosion and
Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or the Division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the
Division.
(12)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
20/137
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of
sediments into State waters or onto lands within the State, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating,
transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in Section 22-32(5).
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for
measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent
of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present.
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article.
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch composed of a virtually nonerodible material
such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of
a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on
the other side.
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved
from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or
gravity.
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by
the Ocmulgee River soil and water conservation district.
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or
permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by
wind, water, ice or gravity.
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells,
and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State
which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation.
Structural erosion and sedimentation control measures means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment
producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or
storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control
practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures,
sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in
Georgia.
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of
the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et
seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or
brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction,
but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow
except springs.
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment producing
areas by covering the soil with:
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
21/137
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or
Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
Such practices be found in the publication Manual For Erosion And Sediment Control In Georgia.
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain,
waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed
and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated our saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
(Ord. of 9-20-2001, § II)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.
Sec. 22-32. - Exemptions.
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following:
Surface mining, as same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72.
Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying.
Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance
work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion.
The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner
for his or her own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted
subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots
and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such
residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in Section 22-33 of this article. For singlefamily residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone
between the residence and any State waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5, of
the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed
between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave
action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50
horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer
zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variance to no less that 25 feet. Regardless
of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which
no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a
smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of Section 22-33 of this article and the buffer
zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the Issuing Authority.
Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the
field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the
production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for
use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chicken, hens, and turkeys; producing plants,
trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian
products; forestry land management practices, including harvesting and farm buildings and farm ponds.
Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
22/137
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(1)
practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in
Subsections (15) and (16) of Section 22-33(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for
normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry
practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices.
Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the
United States Department of Agriculture.
Any project involving one and one-tenth acres or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply
to any land-disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any State waters, and for purposes of this
paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and
immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round;
provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves one and one-tenth acres or less,
which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or
drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such
project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuing authority from
regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by Subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (8), or (9) of
this section.
Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part or both, by the
Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the Georgia Tollway Authority; or any road
construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however,
that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in Section 22-33 of this article.
Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system
or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, provided that any such
land-disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in Section 22-33 (b) and (c).
Pubic water system reservoirs.
Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in Section 22-33(b) and (c) of this
article, issuing authorities shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued
and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders.
(Ord. of 9-20-2001, § III)
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17.
Sec. 22-33. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices.
General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing
activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain
provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be
incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures
and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of Section 22-33 (b) and (c) of this article. The application
of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage
facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control
erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity.
Minimum requirements/BMPs.
Best management practices as set forth in Section 22-33(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all landdisturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall
constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegations of noncompliance with
subsection (2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
23/137
(2)
(3)
(4)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and
"properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and
including a 25-year, rainfall event.
A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been
properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit
issued by a local issuing authority or by the Division or of any general permit for construction activities issued
by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of
receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm
water fisheries or by more that ten nephelometruc turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The
turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director.
Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any
land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the Division or of any general permit for
construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such
failure occurs.
The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent
monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur.
Practices of chapter to be no less stringent than Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission practices. The
rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing
land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation
and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with,
and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia"
published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1st of the year in which the landdisturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following:
Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to
minimize erosion.
Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum.
Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion
potential.
Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented.
The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum.
Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development.
Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable.
To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment
basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a
disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements
of this chapter.
Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations
or the sloping surface of fills.
Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property.
Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely
affect other property owners.
Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods
are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
24/137
(14)
(15)
(16)
(d)
(e)
Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or con
source of sediments and adequate sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in Section 22-33
article.
Except as provided in Subsection (16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all
State waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream
flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of
natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-
8, or where a drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measure are
incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of
at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 12, ch. 4, art. 5, pt. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.) shall
remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following
requirements shall apply to any such buffer:
No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural,
undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed.
Once the final stabilization of the is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long
as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural
canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the steam bed; provided, however, that any person
constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the
owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as
protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is
left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed.
There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been
wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, of the banks of any State waters classified as "trout streams"
pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), except where a roadway drainage
structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams
which discharge an a average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they
may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general
variance promulgated by the Board, so as long as any such pipe stops short of the down stream landowner's
property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The Director
may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control
measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following
requirements shall apply to such buffer:
No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural,
undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed.
Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as
long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural
canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person
constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the
owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as
protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is
left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed.
Adoption of provisions that exceed minimum requirements. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent an
issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that
exceed the minimum requirements in Section 22-33 (b) and (c) of this article.
Injury to property of another.The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
25/137
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
a.
b.
(c)
injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the
standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit.
(Ord. of 9-20-2001, § IV)
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6.
Sec. 22-34. - Application/permit process.
Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general
development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area
surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance,
flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land
within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing Authority. However, the property owner is the only party that can
obtain a permit.
Application requirements.
No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the County without
first obtaining a permit from the Dooly County Building Inspector's Office to perform such activity.
The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Building Inspectors Office and must include the
applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. The plans shall include,
as a minimum, the data specified in Section 22-34 (c) of this article. Soil erosion and sedimentation control
plans shall conform to the provisions of Section 22-33 (b) and (c) of this article. Applications for a permit will
not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control
plans.
A fee, in the amount of $25.00 per acre shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area.
Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the Issuing Authority shall refer the
application and plan to the District for it's review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the
erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the Issuing
Authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances
required by Section 22-33 (c) (15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per Section 22-34 (b) (5) b., have been
obtained. Such review will not be required if the Issuing Authority and the District have entered into an
agreement which allows the Issuing Authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without
referring the application and plan to the District.
Violations of previous permits; bond.
If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and
Sedimentation Act, as amended within three years prior to the date of filling of the application under
consideration, the Issuing Authority may deny the permit application.
The Issuing Authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government
security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00
per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the
applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the
Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited an may use the proceeds to hire a
contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These
provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for
hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the Issuing Authority with respect to alleged
permit violations.
Plan requirements.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
26/137
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Section 22-33 (b) and (c) of this articl
with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Ma
and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; o
use of alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for E
Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference in this article. The plan for the land-disturbing a
consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed
proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water m
facilities, local ordinances and State laws.
Data required for site plan.
Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general
notes or in erosion and sediment control notes.
Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project.
Name, address, and phone number of the property owner.
Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation
controls.
Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres.
Activity schedules showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the
statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and
practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities."
Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and
calculations, including off-site drainage areas.
Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates,
and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round
seeding.
Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for
Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.
Maintenance statement "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times.
Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed
necessary by onsite inspection."
Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified
professional in engineering, architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified
plans shall contain:
Graphic scale and north point or arrow indications magnetic north.
Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets.
Boundary line survey.
Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary.
Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the
following:
Map Scale Ground Slope Contour
Interval, ft.
1 Inch=100 ft. Flat 0-2% 0.5 or
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
27/137
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
(4)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
or larger scale Rolling 2-8% 1 or 2
Steep 8%+ 2, 5 or 10
Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected
should be indicated on the plan.
Proposed structure or additions to existing structures and paved areas.
Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to State waters and the specified width in MRPA areas.
Delineate the specified horizontal along designated trout streams, where applicable.
Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the
Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6
Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall
be at all times the responsibility of the property owner.
Permits.
Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by
the Issuing Authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where
necessary.
No permit shall be issued by the Issuing Authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been
approved by the District and the Issuing Authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance
with this article, any variances required by Section 22-33 (c) (15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements,
if necessary, as per Section 22-34 (b) (5) b. are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within
the jurisdictional boundaries of the Issuing Authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial
shall be furnished to the applicant.
If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase.
The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the Issuing Authority, as to all or any portion of the
land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the
approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of
this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land
affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit.
No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the County certifying that all ad
valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid.
(Ord. of 9-20-2001, § V)
State law reference— Permits, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 et seq.
Sec. 22-35. - Inspection and enforcement.
The County Building Inspector will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have
been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures
required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, It is deemed that
a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with
permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
28/137
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such
measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time
specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article.
The County Building Inspector's Office shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably
deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times
upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing
activities.
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the Issuing Authority, the
Commission, or District, or Division who request entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate
credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of
carrying out his official duties.
(Ord. of 9-20-2001, § VI)
Sec. 22-36. - Penalties and incentives.
Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity
requiring a land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first
obtaining the permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other
authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the
Issuing Authority.
Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the Issuing Authority or its agent, work on any project that is being done
contrary to the provisions of this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such
notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person or
persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required.
State law reference— Stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-12.
Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed
to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set
forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such
measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time
specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have
forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of Section 22-34 (b) (5) b. The Issuing
Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to
stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance.
Monetary penalties.
Except as provided in Subsection (2) below, any person who violates any provisions of this article, the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article
or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director
issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in and City charter to the
contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation.
Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of County
ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as
violations of this article under County ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose
penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or
failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
29/137
(2)
a.
b.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
The following penalties shall apply to land-disturbing activities performed in violation of any provision of this artic
regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition limitation established pursuant to this article:
There shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of
single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy; and
There shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each violation involving land-disturbing
activities other than as provided in Subsection (d)(2)a. above.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-15.
(Ord. of 9-20-2001, § VII)
Sec. 22-37. - Administrative appeal, judicial review.
Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the
Issuing Authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control
plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any section; shall
entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Dooly County Board of
Commissioners within 30 days after receipt by the Issuing Authority of written notice of appeal.
Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Issuing Authority, after exhausting his
administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Dooly County.
(Ord. of 9-20-2001, § VIII)
Sec. 22-38. - Liability.
Liability of persons responsible for damage shall be as follows:
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this
article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise
imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the Issuing Authority or District for damage to any person or
property.
The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of
another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for
in this article or the terms of the permit.
(Ord. of 9-20-2001, § IX(C))
Secs. 22-39—22-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED VEHICLES
Sec. 22-51. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Inoperative means not capable of being moved under its own power without additional work or repairs being completed to the
motor vehicle, or without any additional components being added to or placed upon a said motor vehicle.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
30/137
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
a.
b.
c.
d.
Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined in this article, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an
unexpired license plate and current license decal, or the condition of such motor vehicles is wrecked, dismantled, partially
dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded.
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is or is intended to be self-propelled and designed to travel on the ground and shall
include, but shall not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractor, go-carts, golf
carts, camper and trailers, as well as any part or parts thereof.
Private property means any real property within the County which is privately owned and which is not public property as
defined in this section.
Public property shall mean any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines or every
publicly maintained way and dedicated to the purposes of vehicular traffic, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property
or facility.
(Ord. of 7-1-2004, § I)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.
Sec. 22-52. - Prohibited; declared nuisance.
No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked motor vehicle of any kind upon any
private property within the unincorporated areas of the County for a period of time in excess of 30 days. The presence of a junked
motor vehicle, or parts thereof on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accord
with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. of 7-1-2004, § II)
Sec. 22-53. - Exemptions.
Those vehicles which are exempted from the provisions of this article are as follows:
Any motor vehicles or parts thereof which are located on the premises of licensed automobile dealers;
Any motor vehicles or parts thereof which are located on the premises of any licensed junkyard operated in
compliance with state and local laws relating to licensing, regulating and zoning of such junkyards;
Any motor vehicle enclosed within a building on private property which is not a hazard to public health and
which is not an attractive nuisance to children;
Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or
raceways;
Any motor vehicles in the process of being restored to an operable condition, provided they are:
Limited to no more than two in number;
Located in the rear yard and behind the house of the owner of such vehicles;
Not visible from any road; and
Are enclosed or covered in such a way so as not to be an attractive nuisance to children.
(Ord. of 7-1-2004, § III)
Sec. 22-54. - Notice of violations.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
31/137
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Whenever it comes to the attention of the Code Enforcement Officer that any nuisance as defined in this article exists in the
County, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the real property where the nuisance exists, upon the owner of the
property, and upon the owner of the junked motor vehicle or other property which constitutes such nuisance, notifying them of
the existence of the nuisance and directing its removal within 30 days. In the event that such owners cannot be located, or in the
event that the address of such owners is unknown, then notice shall be made to the last known address of such owners, or in the
event that the identity of such owners cannot be ascertained after due investigation, such notice shall be posted in the prominent
location on the premises where the nuisance exists, and upon the junked motor vehicle itself.
(Ord. of 7-1-2004, § IV)
Sec. 22-55. - Responsibility for removal.
Upon such notice, the owner of the junked motor vehicle, and the owner or occupant of the private property upon which the
same is located, either, or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event that such owners fail to remove such
vehicle and thereby abate such nuisance within the 30-day time period provided in the notice, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
be authorized to institute proceedings against such owner or owners in the Magistrate Court of the County pursuant to the
ordinances and rules of the said Court, and such persons shall be notified of the date and time of the hearing scheduled no later
than five days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall be served upon such owner or owners in the same manner as
provided for service of notice of ordinance violations.
(Ord. of 7-1-2004, § V)
Sec. 22-56. - Hearing.
At the hearing, the Court shall determine the owner of the vehicle and whether or not a nuisance exists and, if so,
the Court shall order abatement of such nuisance and shall impose such penalties as may be authorized for failure
to abate such nuisance.
In the event that the Court determines that a nuisance exists and abatement thereof is ordered, the Court shall be
authorized to grant the owner a period of time, not to exceed 15 days, to abate such nuisance. The Court shall
further include in its order provisions authorizing the County to abate such nuisance if such nuisance is not abated
by the owner within the time period for such abatement as ordered by the Court. Such order shall also include
authority for the County to enter upon the premises upon which the nuisance exists and abate the same, and shall
further provide that the cost of abatement or the nuisance incurred by the County shall be assessed against the
owner of the premises upon which the nuisance existed.
(Ord. of 7-1-2004, § VI)
Sec. 22-57. - Abatement by County.
In the event that the nuisance is abated by the County pursuant to the authority of the order of the Court authorized by this
division, the County shall abate the nuisance in the following manner:
The County shall hire a wrecker service, or such other service as may be required, to remove the nuisance, and
direct that the nuisance be removed to a local licensed junkyard or other similar facility.
The wrecker service hired to remove the nuisance shall notify the owner of the property and the owner of the
motor vehicle within ten days of removal of the property of the location of the junked motor vehicle and of the
cost incurred by the owner in connection with the abatement service. Such cost may include the actual cost of
removal of the motor vehicle and storage charges, if applicable, up to and including the date of payment by the
owner.
In the event that the owner does not pay the charges or otherwise recover the motor vehicle within such time
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
32/137
as may be established by the wrecker service or by state law, the wrecker service may be authorized to recover
its cost and expenses and dispose of the property in accord with general provisions of state law.
(Ord. of 7-1-2004, § VII)
Sec. 22-58. - Abatement by County.
Each day which the Court finds the nuisance has existed shall constitute a separate offense, and each such offense shall
subject the violator, upon conviction therefor, to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment in the common jail of the
County for a period not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each such offense.
(Ord. of 7-1-2004, § VIII)
Chapter 26 - FLOODS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 26-31. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition
is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall
or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered "New Construction."
Appeal means a request for a review of the Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a
variance.
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base
flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or
equipment.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
33/137
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
b.
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of
fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers or shear walls.
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before first day of October, 1995.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before first day of October,
1995.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration,
where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration,
delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and
containing flood profiles and water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding.
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the
proposed foundation of a building.
Historic structure means any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of
Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved programs.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
34/137
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a
building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this
Code.
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers,
travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be
improved property.
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various
elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD).
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.
New construction means ANY structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after the first day of
October, 1995 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the first
day of October, 1995.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent
construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure.
NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any article requirements. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage
tank.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
35/137
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking
place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
prior to the improvement. The market value of the building should be:
the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or
in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair
work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a
building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to
ensure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the Code Enforcement Official, and not solely
triggered by an improvement or repair project.
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the
repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this article.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. VI, 4-4-1995)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.
Sec. 26-32. - Statutory authorization, ndings of fact and objectives.
State authorization. The Legislature of the State of Georgia has delegated the responsibility to local governmental
units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. The
Board of Commissioners of Dooly County, Georgia, establishes this article.
Findings of fact.
The flood hazard areas of the County are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are
inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative
effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and
to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards,
or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion;
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are
involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
36/137
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
increase flood hazards to other lands.
Objectives. The objectives of this division are:
To protect human life and health;
To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in
such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas;
To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the
expense of the general public;
To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and
To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 1, § A, B, C, D, 4-4-1995)
Sec. 26-33. - Lands to which this article applies.
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the County.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 2, § A, 4-4-1995)
Sec. 26-34. - Basis for area of special ood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS),
dated June 4, 1996, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and
declared a part of this division. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and
data for the unincorporated County are hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 2, § B, 4-4-1995; Res. of 4-4-1996)
Sec. 26-35. - Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any
development (see definition) activities.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 2, § C, 4-4-1995)
Sec. 26-36. - Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
article and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 2, § D, 4-4-1995)
Sec. 26-37. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 2, § E, 4-4-1995)
Sec. 26-38. - Interpretation.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
37/137
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be:
considered as minimum requirements;
liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 2, § F, 4-4-1995)
Sec. 26-39. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the County or by any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 2, § G, 4-4-1995)
Sec. 26-40. - Penalties for violation.
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 2, § G, 4-4-1995)
Secs. 26-41—26-60. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 26-61. - Designation of the Dooly County Emergency Management Agency as Administrator.
The Director of the Dooly County Emergency Management Agency is hereby appointed Administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 3, § A, 4-4-1995)
Sec. 26-62. - Permit procedures.
Application for a development permit shall be made to the Administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
elevations of the area in question, and the nature, location, dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of
materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required:
Application stage:
Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement,
of all proposed structures;
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood proofed;
Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that any non-residential flood-proofed
structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria in Section 26-66 (2);
Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
38/137
(2)
a.
b.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
development.
Construction stage:
For all new construction and substantial improvements, permittee shall provide regulatory floor elevation
or flood-proofing certification after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. Upon placement of
the lowest floor or after flood-proofing for non-residential structures, it shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Administrator an as built certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation in relation to mean sea level or highest adjacent grade, whichever is applicable. Lowest
floor certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for a non-residential
structure, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer
or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall
be at the permit holder's risk.
The Administrator shall review the above referenced elevation certification data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further
progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the
corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 3, § B, 4-4-1995)
Sec. 26-63. - Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator.
Duties of the Administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to:
Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied.
When Base Flood Elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 26-34,
then the Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Division 3.
Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest
floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with Section 26-62 (2).
Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with Section 26-62 (2).
When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the Administrator shall obtain design certification from a
registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with Section 26-62 (2) and Section 26-92 (2).
Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to ensure accuracy of community flood maps. Ensure flood carrying capacity
of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained.
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of Special Flood Hazard (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the
Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 26-64 hereof.
Advise permittee that additional Federal or State permits may be required, and if specific Federal or State
permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file.
All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the Administrator and
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
39/137
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
(2)
(3)
(4)
(i)
shall be open for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 3, § C, 4-4-1995)
Sec. 26-64. - Variances.
The Appeals Board as established by Dooly County Board of Commissioners shall hear and decide appeals or
requests for variances from the requirements of this article.
The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
is made by the Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Dooly
County.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure"
and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the
criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
In reviewing such requests, the Appeals Board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all
standards specified in this and other sections of this article.
Conditions for variances:
A variance shall be issued ONLY when there is:
A finding of good and sufficient cause;
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of
the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction, therefore any deviation from the
standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of an historic
structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic
character and design of the building;
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between
the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation;
The Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the Appeals Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 5, 4-4-1995)
Secs. 26-65—26-90. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
40/137
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(1)
(2)
Sec. 26-91. - General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required:
New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other
service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding;
Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces;
New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system;
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding, and
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions
of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 4, § A, 4-4-1995)
Sec. 26-92. - Specic standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in Section 26-34, Section
26-63 (2), or Section 26-93, the following provisions are required:
Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure or
manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above
the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with
standards of Section 26-92 (4).
Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or
non-residential structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no
lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Structures located in AE or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure below the base flood elevation, plus one
foot, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, are designed to be water tight, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
41/137
(3)
a.
b.
c.
(4)
a.
1.
2.
3.
b.
c.
(5)
a.
b.
or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set
forth above and in Section 26-63 (4), (5).
Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways. Located within
the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 26-34, where streams exist but no base flood data have
been provided (A-zones), OR where base flood data have been provided without floodways, the following
provisions apply:
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 26-
34, then the Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of Division 3. If data are not available from these sources, then the following subsections b.
and c. shall apply.
No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width
of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless
certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment
shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial
improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The
Administrator shall record the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part
of the permit file.
Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully
enclosed area located below the base flood elevation formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be
designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or
architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they
permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction.
So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall
only be use for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with
the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and
The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on individual lots or parcels, in new or
substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in expansions to existing
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must
have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
42/137
1.
2.
c.
d.
1.
2.
(6)
a.
b.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
subdivision may be elevated so that either:
The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of
the base flood elevation, or
The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation
elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade.
All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or
The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction," including the
anchoring and elevation requirements of Section 26-92 (5) a. and c.
Floodways. Located within areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 26-34, are areas designated as
floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion
potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the
base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or
other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it
is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway
widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer shall provide supporting
technical data and certification thereof.
Only if Section 26-66 (6) a. is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvements shall
comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 26-64
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 3, § B, 4-4-1995)
Sec. 26-93. - Standards for subdivision proposals.
All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development,
including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less.
(Ord. No. 95-04, art. 3, § C, 4-4-1995)
Chapter 30 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances for the purpose of preserving public health, safety and welfare, O.C.G.A. §
36-1-20.
Sec. 30-1. - Public nudity.
(13)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
43/137
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(c)
(1)
(2)
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this su
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Entity means any proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, business trust, joint venture, joint-stock company or
other for profit and/or not for profit organization.
Nude means any person insufficiently clothed in any manner so that any of the following body parts are not entirely covered
with a fully opaque covering:
The male or female genitals;
The male or female pubic area;
The female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
The buttocks, which is defined as the one-third of the gluteus maximus that is centered over the cleavage of
the gluteus maximus for the length of the cleavage. Attire which is insufficient to comply with this requirement
includes, but is not limited to, G-strings, T-backs, dental floss and thongs.
Body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex, whether wet or dried, and similar substances, shall not be
considered opaque covering.
Person means any live human being ten years of age or older.
Places provided or set apart for nudity include, but are not limited to, enclosed single sex public restrooms, enclosed single sex
functional showers, lockers and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping
accommodations, doctor's offices, portions of hospitals and other places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily or customarily
expected outside of the home and its sphere of privacy constitutionally protected therein. This term shall not be deemed to
include places where a person's conduct of being nude is used for his profit or where being nude is used for the purpose of
entertaining others.
Public place means any location where the public is generally and openly invited or may by legal right be present, and where a
person may reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not limited to,
publicly-owned or publicly-maintained streets, sidewalks and parks, and all commercial establishments. Premises or portions
thereof, such as hotel rooms, used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed
to be a public place.
It is the intent of this section to protect and preserve the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of the
county by prohibiting a person from intentionally or recklessly appearing or being nude, or causing another person
to appear to be nude, in a public place and in other places which may reasonably be expected to be observed by the
public within the unincorporated areas of the county, except when such person appears nude in a place provided or
set apart for nudity provided such person:
Is nude for the sole purpose of performing the legal function that is customarily intended to be performed
within such place provided or set apart for nudity; and
Is not nude for the purpose of obtaining money or other financial gain for such person or for another person
or entity.
The prohibitions of Subsection (d) of this section shall not apply when a person appears nude in a place provided or
set apart for nudity provided such person:
Is nude for the sole purpose of performing the legal function that is customarily intended to be performed
within such place provided or set apart for nudity; and
Is not nude for the purpose of obtaining money or other financial gain for such person or for another person
or entity.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
44/137
(d)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(c)
(d)
(e)
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, intentionally or recklessly appear, or cause another person to appear,
public place or in any other place which is readily visible to the public. It shall also be unlawful for any person or entity
maintaining, owning or operating any public place establishment to encourage, suffer or allow any person to appear nu
public place.
(Ord. of 1-19-1994, §§ 1, 2)
State law reference— Obscenity, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 et seq.
Chapter 34 - ROADS AND BRIDGES
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control
the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶III(a)(4); County road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.
Sec. 34-1. - Obstruction of roads by railroads.
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Train includes a railroad engine or propelling unit with or without cars attached, and shall include two or more railroad cars
when attached together, whether or not there shall be an engine or propelling unit attached thereto.
Vehicular traffic means all motorized traffic upon the public roadways of the County, not including trains or railroad cars.
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.
Blocking public roadways - combined time of moving and while stopped.
It shall be a violation of this section for the directing officer or the operator of any train to direct the operation
of or to operate the same so that it shall stop in an intersection with a public roadway within the
unincorporated areas of the County longer than 15 minutes including the time such train is in motion and the
time such train is stopped.
If a public roadway intersection is blocked for 15 minutes, then the directing officer or operator of the train
shall remove the same from the intersection for a 15-minute period before the intersection may be
permissibly blocked again for a period of 15 minutes.
Blocking roadways - leaving crossing gates down. It shall be a violation of this section for any railroad company or
corporation to allow crossing gates maintained or operated by such company or corporation at any intersection of
its tracks with any public roadway in the unincorporated areas of the County to remain down so as to control traffic
upon any such public roadway for an uninterrupted period of time longer than 15 minutes, regardless of whether or
not a train or trains, or railroad car or cars are, or have been, within the area of such intersection within such period
of time.
Blocking public roadways - leaving warning devices activated. It shall be a violation of this section for any railroad
company or corporation to allow any warning device maintained or operated by such company or corporation and
installed to control vehicular traffic at any intersection of its tracks with any public roadway of the County to remain
active so as to control vehicular traffic upon any such public roadway for an uninterrupted period of time longer
than 15 minutes, regardless of whether or not a train or trains, or railroad car or cars are, or have been, within the
area of such intersection within such period of time.
Blocking public roadways - switching or other intra-county transit. It shall be a violation of this section for the
directing officer or the operator of any train to direct the operation of or to operate the same while engaged in local
(14)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
45/137
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
switching or any other intra-county transit in such a manner as to prevent the use of any public roadway within the
unincorporated areas of the County for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than 15 minutes.
Blocking public roadways - clearing in case of fire, medical or law enforcement emergency. In case of fire, medical,
law enforcement or other emergency service vehicle alarm, railroad crossings shall be immediately cleared.
Violation - placing responsibility on employer. The spirit and intent of this section is in keeping with O.C.G.A. § 46-8-
197 and where there is a violation of this section by a member of the train crew, yard crew, or engine crew of a
railroad, which is a common carrier, and such members shall offer reasonable proof that such violation was
necessary to comply with the orders or instructions either written or oral of his employer or its officers or
supervisory officials, the responsibility for such violation shall be upon such employer, officer, supervisory official, or
railroad.
Violation - excused acts. No act which is caused by breakdown of equipment or other mishap, nor any act done to
prevent personal injuries or property damage, shall be a violation of this section.
Violation - prescribed punishment. Dooly County Sheriff or his lawfully appointed deputies shall be authorized to
issue citations against any person, persons, or other entity violating any of the provisions of this section and the
citation shall confirm to the requirements of O.C.G.A. title 15, ch. 10, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et. Seq.).
(Ord. of 6-14-1998, §§ 1—9)
Sec. 34-2. - Use of roads by timber or pulpwood harvesters.
Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this section to ensure that operators engaging in transporting timber or
pulpwood harvested in the County be responsible for any damage beyond normal wear and tear inflicted on the
County Road System or rights-of-way as a result of their operations.
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Applicant means any operator who files an application to use County roads as an incident to timber or pulpwood harvesting.
County road means any and all roads which are a part of the Dooly County Road System, delineated in accordance with
O.C.G.A., title 32, ch. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.), and intended or used for the passage of motor vehicles by the public.
Damage means any and all injury to the road surface or rights-of-way of a road which is part of the Dooly County Road System,
including but not limited to the following:
Diversion of or the filling in of any drainage ditch, culvert or pipe parallel to or underneath a County road, so as
to restrain or redirect the flow of water;
The operation of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment which will gouge, rip, break, depress or otherwise
deface a public road;
The continued ingress or egress, to and from a County road at a particular location which results in a build-up
of rock, gravel, mud, dirt, chemicals, or other materials, which present potential hazard to other persons using
the County road;
The creation or erection of any dam, berm, ditch or wall which restrains the natural flow of waters and results
in the redirecting of the waters onto the road surface or right-of-way of any County road.
Enforcement officers means the Dooly County Sheriff, the Dooly County Road Superintendent, or their deputies, marshals,
constables or designees.
Operator means any person, entity, individual, partnership, corporation, association or other organization including the
officers, agents and employees thereof carrying out the activities contemplated by this section.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
46/137
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
b.
(5)
(f)
(1)
(2)
(g)
Repair means the repair of a County road to its condition prior to the occurrence of damage caused by cutting or harvesting of
timber or pulpwood.
Rights-of-way means the shoulder, front slope, ditch, drain, and back slope of a County road whether owned by title or
otherwise.
Damage to public roads. It shall be unlawful for any operator engaged in transporting timber or pulpwood over
County roads to damage County roads or County rights-of-way.
Notice required. On and after July 1, 1997, no operator shall engage in the process of transporting timber or
pulpwood from a harvesting site in Dooly County without first giving notice as required by O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24 and
meeting such other requirements specified in this section.
Operational requirements.
Roads. The use of County roads of the County by operator transporting timber or pulpwood must not
endanger the traveling public; where damage does occur, the roads so damaged shall be restored to their
previous condition, including but not limited to removal of debris and mud and replacement of gravel. Trucks
or other equipment used in the harvesting operation shall not be allowed to park on the public right-of-way.
Signs. An operator transporting timber or pulpwood over County roads shall post at least one sign in each
direction from the entrance onto the road used by the operator to alert motorists. The signs shall be placed in
locations designated by the Dooly County Road Superintendent. If no locations are designated by the Road
Superintendent, the signs should be placed in locations visible to oncoming traffic between 500 and 1000 feet
on either side of the road entrance. Each sign should be orange with dimensions of 36"×36" and should read
"Caution Trucks Entering Highway" or contain an equivalent message. An operator may furnish his own signs.
Termination. At the termination of harvesting activities at each permitted site, an operator shall immediately
notify the Road Superintendent, who shall make an inspection of the site and the County Road System affected
by the proposed activities. This inspection shall take place within three business days of receipt of the notice.
Results of inspection/appeal/release.
If the inspection required by Subsection (3) of this section results in a finding that no damage occurred,
the Superintendent shall immediately so notify the operator conducting the operations.
In event damage has occurred, the operator having caused the damage shall immediately undertake the
repairs necessary to return the County road or right-of-way to its original condition. If there is
disagreement with the Road Superintendent's assessment that damage has occurred, the operator may
appeal the decision of the Road Superintendent to the Dooly County Board of Commissioners.
Repairs by County. In the event no appeal is filed, or appeals have expired, and the operator responsible has
not effectuated the repairs, the Road Superintendent shall be authorized to use County labor, equipment and
materials to effect the necessary repairs to the County Road System in which event the County shall be
authorized to file a claim against the operator in the Magistrate Court of Dooly County or the Superior Court in
Dooly County in the amount necessary to reimburse the County for expenses incurred.
Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the County through a duly appointed enforcement officer. Each day
that an operator continues timber or pulpwood harvesting operations without a permit constitutes a separate
violation.
Any operator violating this section shall be tried before the Magistrate Court of Dooly County. Upon conviction,
a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00, except
that violation of the notice requirements of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00.
The director of the Georgia Forestry Commission shall be notified as to any violations of this section.
Mediation. Any dispute arising out of the operation of this section may be referred to mediation for resolution at
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
47/137
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
the written request of either party. The mediator shall be jointly selected from a list of mediators maintained by the
State Department of Community Affairs or as otherwise agreed to by the County and the operator. The cost of such
mediation shall be evenly divided between the parties and mediation shall be completed within 30 calendar days
after the request for mediation is made.
(Ord. of 6-5-1997, §§ I—VI, VIII—XI; Ord. of 5-20-1999)
State law reference— Local regulation of timber harvesting operations, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24.
Chapter 38 - SIGNS
Sec. 38-1. - Signs near interstate highways.
This section shall apply to all outdoor advertising signs visible and intended to be read from the main traveled way
of Interstate 75 in the County.
No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this section.
Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not permitted to become
dilapidated.
All signs located on sites abutting or visible from the Interstate 75 right-of-way shall conform with O.C.G.A. title 32,
ch. 6, art. 3, pt. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq.) and shall meet all Federal and State requirements necessary to obtain a
permit under said statute. In instances where the sign controls of this section are more strict, these regulations shall
apply:
No new, off-premises, outdoor advertising signs shall be erected in the County on Interstate 75 unless they are
located within 600 feet of an on-going commercial or industrial activity as specified in State law and are
restricted to an area 1,200 feet long, beginning 500 feet from the point where the pavement widens on the
main traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp.
On premises signs located within 100 feet of a regularly used part of the activity being advertised and located
on the same property and for sale or for lease signs located on the property being advertised would not be
prohibited.
Any legally erected sign which would become non-conforming as a result of this section would be allowed to
remain until purchased by the Department of Transportation or the County, provided that the sign owner
meets the requirements of State laws and rules and regulations governing such signs.
(Ord. of 5-22-1986, § 1)
State law reference— Signs along interstate highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq.
Chapter 42 - SOLID WASTE
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)
(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act,
O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved.
(15)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
48/137
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Sec. 42-31. - Amount and collection of tax.
Each residential and commercial unit located within the unincorporated area of the County and within the corporate
limits of the municipalities of Byromville, Dooling, Lilly, Unadilla, Pinehurst, and Vienna shall be charged a fee as
provided in the Fee Schedule established by the Board of Commissioners annually at the first regular meeting of
each fiscal year.
The occupant and/or the owner of the residential or commercial unit according to the Tax Digest for Dooly County
shall be billed for the fee collected under this article. The occupant and/or the owner shall be billed monthly by the
County showing the amount due and payable. "Residence" shall be defined as all single-family dwelling units,
including mobile homes and modular homes, and each individual unit of any multi-family structure, such as
duplexes and apartment buildings. "Commercial" shall be defined as any hotel, motel, restaurant, business, public
or semi-public establishment of any kind.
The fee shall be due and payable by the tenth day of each following month. A late payment penalty and an
assessment of interest shall be imposed on each account for which payment is not made within the prescribed time
limit. The occupant and/or the owner of each residential or commercial unit may pay the entire amount due for the
calendar year in advance if so desired.
The collection of residential or commercial solid waste levied pursuant to the terms of this article and all late
charges accruing thereto are hereby deemed and constituted a tax and are hereby levied severally against the
owner and occupant of each residential unit, including all residential units located in mobile home courts and/or
trailer courts. The fees, late charges, and interest billed in this section shall be treated in all respects as provided by
law with respect to ad valorem and State taxes, and uncollected fees, late charges, and interest shall constitute a
continuing lien against the real property upon which residential unit is located; on personal property composing a
residential unit, and upon personal property of the occupant of each residential unit, until paid. Writs of fieri facias
may be issued by the County for fees which are past due and collection may be effected as provided by law for ad
valorem or other State taxes as provided by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.3 or other applicable law. The County Clerk is
authorized to enforce the provision for collection as provided herein and is authorized to execute writs of fieri facias
and all documents necessary for collection.
Any individual, business, corporation, partnership, or any other entity of any type that occupies any residence or
undertakes any commercial activity as defined in this article shall notify the Dooly County Solid Waste Department
within ten days of occupying a residence or commercial building. Any new resident or commercial enterprise shall
be considered a customer of the Dooly County Solid Waste Department, and all taxes and fees imposed by this
article shall be levied and assessed from the date of beginning of service or ten days from the date of occupancy of
the residence or commercial unit as determined by the Director of the Dooly County Solid Waste Department.
(Ord. No. 99-01, 5-6-1999; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1, 2-7-2002)
State law reference— Fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.3.
Sec. 42-32. - Use of taxes and fees.
All taxes and fees imposed by this article shall be used and appropriated to pay for the collection and disposal of all solid
waste within the County. The taxes and fees shall be deposited in a special account set up by the County specifically for this
purpose.
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 2, 5-6-1999)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
49/137
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Sec. 42-33. - Solid waste storage and collection.
For purposes of this article, solid waste shall mean putrescible animal or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, serving, or consumption of food, including food containers, and nonputrescible solid
waste consisting of combustible and noncombustible materials, including waste paper, metals, cans, glass, plastics,
and/or other similar materials.
All solid waste shall be free from excessive liquid and placed in plastic bags or vinyl containers supplied by the
County or its designated collector.
Containers must be placed at the curbside of the nearest public road by 7:00 a.m. on regular collection days or on
the next collection day if the regular collection day falls on a holiday. Containers from residential units must be
moved from curbside to a place on the side or rear within 24 hours of the collection.
The County shall have the exclusive right to collect and dispose of all solid waste (including recyclables) within the
County either through employers of the County or by contract issued to a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or
entity engaged in the business of solid waste collection and disposal. No person, firm, corporation, partnership, or
entity shall collect, remove, transport, or dispose of any solid waste (including recyclables) within the district except
as provided for herein, except with the express permission of the County.
Solid waste shall be collected once a week from residential units on a day to be established by the Dooly County
Board of Commissioners. The frequency of collection for commercial units shall be at least once per week. More
frequent collections from commercial units may be required if sanitary conditions in and around the container
dictate.
The County or the designated contract collector may decline to collect any solid waste containing excess liquid, that
is not properly contained, or is contained in unauthorized containers.
The County or the designated collector shall not be responsible for collection of discarded building materials, dirt,
rock, appliances, or furniture.
The County or the designated collector may elect to collect yard waste, including grass clippings, trees, and tree
branches (cut to a length of no more than four feet), and/or other vegetation, each week on a day to be established
by the Dooly County Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 3, 5-6-1999)
Secs. 42-34—42-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - WASTE MANAGEMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-1 et seq.
Sec. 42-61. - Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
Regulate the transportation, for disposal purposes, of solid, biomedical and hazardous waste within the
County in a manner so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to preserve the environmental
resources of the County and to conserve the County landfill capabilities.
Regulate the location, operation and management of treatment facilities dealing with the storage, transfer,
treatment or disposal of solid, biomedical and hazardous waste.
Regulate the disposal of solid, biomedical and hazardous waste that require special handling, in order to
(16)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
50/137
(4)
protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the County.
Stipulate permits that are required and how to apply for such permits.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § II)
Sec. 42-62. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Autoclave means a controlled process by which solid, liquid and gaseous wastes are sterilized, leaving a residue that is
considered sterile.
Autoclaving facility means all devices combined at one single location under one ownership, intended or used for the
autoclaving and sterilization of solid, liquid or gaseous wastes.
Biomedical waste means and includes any pathological waste, biological waste cultures and stocks of infectious agents and
associated biologicals, contaminated animal carcasses (body parts, their bedding and other wastes from such animals), sharps,
chemotherapy waste, discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have not
been decontaminated, as further defined in Rule 391-3-4-.15 of the Board of Natural Resources of the State of Georgia, and other
such waste materials.
Decontamination means the removal of contamination from biomedical waste during the microwaving process.
Environmental Quality Board (EQB) means a board of five citizens appointed by the County Commission to assist in the
administration of this article.
Hazardous waste means and includes any waste containing any substance listed as a hazardous constituent in regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Federal act by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency which are in
force and effect on February 1, 1992, codified as Appendix VIII to 40 C.F.R., Pr 261 — Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste.
Hazardous waste treatment facility means any property or facility that is intended for, or used for, storage, treatment, or
disposal of hazardous waste.
Incineration means a controlled process by which solid, liquid and gaseous combustible wastes are burned and changed into
gases and a residue produced which is relatively free of combustible materials.
Incineration facility means the combined incinerators under one ownership at a single location.
Incinerator means all devices intended or used for the reduction or destruction of solid, liquid or gaseous waste by burning.
Incinerator ash means the residue remaining after the incineration of solid waste.
Microwave facility means all devices combined at a single location under one ownership, intended or used for the reduction or
decontamination of solid, liquid or gaseous wastes by microwaving.
Microwaving means a process using microwave technology by means of which solid, liquid and gaseous waste are microwaved
and disinfected.
Operator means the person having direct supervision of daily field operations of a private landfill, or a private solid waste or a
biomedical or hazardous waste treatment facility to ensure that the site operates in compliance with the permit.
Principal use autoclaving facility means a medical autoclaving facility used to treat biomedical wastes prior to disposal in a
landfill.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
51/137
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
Principal use incinerator facility means an incinerator or incinerators at a single location where the incineration process is the
primary business and where the facility has the total capacity of burning greater than 250 pounds per hour.
Principal use microwave facility means a microwave facility used to treat biomedical or other waste prior to disposal in a
landfill.
Solid waste means and includes any garbage or refuse; sludge from a waste water treatment plant, water supply treatment
plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material
resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, or agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered
materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial
discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC §1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-products material as
defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). Specifically, Solid Waste shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
Commercial solid waste means and includes all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants,
warehouses, and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial waste.
Industrial waste means and includes any solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or
operations that is not a hazardous waste regulated under Article III of the Georgia Hazardous Waste
Management Act. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing
processes: electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food and related products and byproducts; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and
foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic
products; stone, glass, clay and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment.
This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste.
Municipal waste means and includes any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and
sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single family and multi-family residences, hotels and
motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use recreation areas. The term includes yard
trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or
silviculture operations or industrial processes or operations.
Sterilization means the destruction of living germs, especially bacilli and/or bacteria and/or microbes, from biomedical waste
during the autoclaving process.
Treatment means any method, technique, or process, including neutralization and incineration, designed to change the
physical, chemical, or biological character or composition of any solid, hazardous or biomedical waste so as to neutralize such
waste or so as to render such waste nonhazardous, safe for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for storage, or reduced in
volume. Such term includes any activity or processing designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of hazardous
waste so as to render it nonhazardous. This includes blending of hazardous waste and the on-site or off-site impoundment or
containment of all kinds of hazardous waste including blended hazardous waste and the use of any sold or hazardous waste as a
fuel source or alternate fuel.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § III)
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.
Sec. 42-63. - Permits required.
Owners and operators of solid, biomedical and/or hazardous waste treatment and disposal facilities shall be
permitted as required by the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. Any violation of
the conditions of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Permit shall also be a violation of the conditions of
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
52/137
(b)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
any Dooly County Permit.
No person shall construct or operate solid, biomedical and/or hazardous waste treatment and disposal facilities
without having a valid permit issued by the County Commission pursuant to these regulations.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § IV)
Sec. 42-64. - Application.
A permit applicant shall prepare and file a permit application with the County Commission. The permit application
shall include all related documents submitted to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, Army Corps of
Engineers and the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division.
The County Commission shall have, and may exercise, the authority to refuse to grant such permit if it finds by clear
and convincing evidence that the applicant for a permit or, in the case of a corporation, partnership, or association:
Has intentionally misrepresented or concealed any material fact in the application submitted to the County
Commission;
Has obtained, or attempted to obtain, the permit by misrepresentation or concealment;
Has been convicted by final judgment, and all appeals have been exhausted, in the State or any Federal court
of any felony involving moral turpitude within the three years immediately preceding the application for a
permit;
Has been convicted of any violations of any environmental laws punishable as a felony in any State or Federal
court within the last five years preceding the application for a permit;
Has knowingly, willfully, and consistently violated the prohibitions specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.7; or
Has been adjudicated in contempt of any court order enforcing any Federal environmental laws of the State
within the five years preceding the application for a permit.
An application shall contain the following information:
A description of the company, information on its financial capability, and a detailed history of all its past
activities in the field of waste treatment, including a synopsis of every other facility it has operated, and
including a detailed account of all past and pending litigation, favorable and unfavorable. Include the record of
any subsidiary or parent corporation having an interest greater than five percent of the outstanding shares of
the applicant corporation. Also include a list of all past and present litigation, favorable and unfavorable,
involving the subsidiary and/or parent corporation or any officers of the corporation when with this or any
other corporation operating in the waste treatment or disposal field. Also include a statement about any felony
committed at any time by any officer of the corporation.
Evidence of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for sudden and $10,000,000.00 for non-sudden
coverage. Evidence of $10,000,000.00 liability insurance to run for five years subsequent to closure to cover
post-closure costs. Also provide a history of any claims against the company at any site, including the record of
any subsidiary or parent corporation or officers as defined above.
Justification for and anticipated benefits from the project.
A description of the scope of the proposed project, including an estimated schedule of how much and what
kinds of waste the facility would accept, where the material would come from, what pretreatment will be
required of wastes unacceptable to the facility without such pretreatment and at what location this will occur,
and how long the facility is expected to operate.
Yearly site operation expenses and an estimate of the costs for the lifetime of the project.
The proposed method of financing the project, including development, operation and closure stages. Include a
list of the financial institution name(s) that will be responsible for funding the construction.
Provide resumes of management personnel and the proposed number of employees and types of positions,
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
53/137
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(d)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
including information on their background, the training and experience required for each position, and safety
precautions undertaken for the protection of personnel.
The anticipated date to begin construction.
The anticipated date to begin operation.
A detailed estimate of the types and amount of local government services required by the operator in each
year.
A description of emergency procedures and safety and security precautions that will be in use at the facility.
This information should include details on emergency assistance and emergency medical treatment that will
be required from the area's medical facilities, Dooly County Emergency Medical Service and local fire
departments.
A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken by the applicant to prevent contamination
in and around the facility site and the description of planned monitoring systems, with an estimated annual
budget for each of these items.
A description of the environmental protection measures to be used during transportation of materials to and
from the facility, with an estimated annual budget for these arrangements and an estimate of the volume of
material to be transported during each year of operation.
A description of the site closure plan for the facility and the anticipated date of closure.
A description of anticipated need for post-closure care.
A map or other written material attached to the application shall include but not be limited to the following
information:
Ownership.
Name, address and telephone number of legal owner(s) (and/or agent) of the subject property.
Name, address and telephone number of professional persons responsible for plat of survey.
Description of any existing rights-of-way or easements affecting the property.
Reference to any existing restrictive covenants on the property.
Description. Location of property tax map and parcel number. This description should include a reference to
the deed book and page or other evidence of title the current property owner(s) may have.
Features. Each map shall contain the following information:
Drawn to scale of not less than 200 feet to the inch.
Location sketch map showing relationship of the project to the surrounding area.
Graphic scale, date, North arrow, and legend.
Location of property with respect to surrounding property and roads, and the names and addresses of
adjacent property owners according to County tax records.
The location of all boundary lines of the property.
The total acreage of land in the project.
The location of existing and/or platted streets, easements, buildings, railroads, cemeteries, bridges,
sewers, water mains, culverts, wells and gas and electric transmission lines.
The location of water bodies, water courses, ground water aquifers, springs and other pertinent features
within a five mile radius of such site.
The location, dimensions and acreage of all property proposed to be set aside for various uses on the
applicant's property.
The location of all existing and proposed test wells and/or borings.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
54/137
k.
(4)
(5)
(6)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(f)
(a)
The location of historic properties and gravesites including any plans of relocation of graves and properties
significance.
Geological map. A map showing location of faults, dikes, sills and other pertinent geologic features including
bedrock type and strike and dip of any mapable bedding; the depth and degree of weathering (saprolite);
identification and location of clay as to thickness, type and permeability; and location of the water table as to
approximate depth, gradient and surface configuration.
Topographic map. A topographic map with contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet drawn at
the same scale as the project site map shall also be included. Date, method of preparation and preparer of the
survey shall be stated.
Transportation route map. A map showing proposed transportation routes to and from the facility site,
including location of towns and emergency and safety facilities. Include an estimate of the volume of material
to travel on each route.
The applicant shall address the following facts with regard to, but not limited to, on-site storage and/or disposal:
Contaminant flow to water table including leachate monitoring, collecting and withdrawal systems; clay and
synthetic liners (extra thickness, multiple liners); spill prevention and containment measures.
Contaminant movement with ground water, including ground water monitoring systems at the site and in
potentially affected areas; subsurface "slurry wall" barriers' control and other ground water withdrawals in the
area.
Predictability of contaminant movement, based on preconstructed borings and ground water modeling.
Potential effect on surface waters; planned collection systems for surface water run-off; planned exclusion
systems for surface water run-on.
Potential effect on aquifers; planned provisions for alternate water supply systems and facilities for immediate
pumping and treatment of contaminated water.
Potential effect on public water supply; planned run-off collection and treatment and provisions for alternate
supply systems and water recycling.
Possibility of site flooding.
Potential human exposure to incinerator ash and treated waste water, including planned safety procedures,
clothing, instruction, and practice for employees, planned oversized or redundant treatment capacity, effluent
monitoring and automatic shutdown systems.
With respect to incineration, autoclaving and/or microwaving, the nature and predictability of pollution
movement, including planned stack height for any incinerators or microwave facilities with continuous stock
monitoring and recording, until emission levels are predictable.
In addition to the above, application for principal use biomedical and hazardous waste treatment facilities shall
show the ability to comply with each provision of Sections 42-68 and 42-69 herein.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § V)
Sec. 42-65. - Application and processing fee.
The County Commission shall require a permit application fee in the amount of $50,000.00 to reimburse the County
for the costs of any needed professional assistance that may be required to evaluate the permit application and
amendments, verify its contents and evaluate the impact of such a permit on the community, public health and
environment. This assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, the assistance of lawyers, biologists,
geologists, engineers, chemists, hydrologists, emergency response, transportation and public health experts, land
appraisers and professional testing laboratories. Funds not so expended in the legitimate review of the permit
application shall be returned to the applicant.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
55/137
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
Failure to provide these funds within 30 days of demand thereof shall result in termination of the permit process or ca
of the permit. The County Commission may take legal action against the applicant for any costs incurred to the County
point of termination.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § VI)
Sec. 42-66. - Application procedure.
The permit applicant shall submit to the County Commission 12 copies of all information required by Federal and
State agencies for the facility for which it requests a County permit at the time such information is submitted to the
State and Federal government. The review procedure shall not begin nor shall the application be designated as
complete until such time as all required data are submitted and the appropriate fees are paid, or suitable
arrangements for payment have been approved by the County Commission.
A designee of the County Commission shall compile copies of all reports, applications, minutes of the EQB meetings,
reports by consultants and similar materials. These shall be placed in one location with free access by the public and
availability of copying any portion or all of any document at cost.
Within 45 days of the submission of the application, the County Commission shall set a time for a public hearing so
that the applicant can present its plans to the EQB and answer questions regarding the same.
After the hearing, the County Commission, after consultation with the EQB, shall have 60 days in which to determine
if the application is complete and shall mail notice of its determination to the applicant. If it is not complete, the
applicant will have six months to complete the application. However, the applicant may at the end of six months
make a showing of cause to the County Commission, and if the County Commission finds that the delay is justified
and in good faith, they can grant the applicant a maximum three-month extension.
Each application shall require an analysis conducted by the County staff and a consultant or consultants selected by
the County Commission upon the recommendation of the EQB. The analysis shall be completed within 90 days from
the day the application is determined to be complete. In certain instances where the complexity of the application
requires more than the usual 90 days, the County staff and/or consultant may request an additional 60 days from
the County Commission and the proponent has the option of requesting the County Commission to extend the
analysis period to allow time for responding to the staff and/or consultant request for additional information on a
completed application.
The County staff and each consultant shall make reports on the application to the EQB at their meetings.
The EQB shall call a second public meeting for public comment on the completed application along with the analysis
of County staff and consultants. The purpose of this meeting shall be for public review of the application. The staff
shall give notice by regular mail of the time and place of the public meeting to the owner and adjacent property
owners as specified on the map. The notice shall be mailed not less than 14 days prior to the date specified thereon.
Notice of a public meeting shall be posted by the applicant on the proposed facility property and on each and every
street of access not less than 14 days prior to the date specified thereon. The posted notice shall be at intervals of
not greater than 1,500 feet. Notice shall also be placed by the applicant in the legal organ of the County at least
once per week for two consecutive weeks immediately preceding the dates specified thereon.
Within 45 days after receipt of the final analysis of the complete application and public comment, the EQB shall
make a recommendation to the County Commission at a third public meeting whether to accept the application,
deny it, or accept it with modifications. Before making a recommendation to the County Commissioners to accept
the proposal or accept it with modifications, the EQB shall make the following determinations:
That there is a bona fide need for the facility and there is no reasonable alternative facility which will pose a
lesser threat to the environment.
That the construction and operation of the facility will not pose an unreasonable health or environmental risk
to the surrounding locality.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
56/137
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(i)
(j)
(1)
(2)
(3)
That the applicant (or facility operator) has the capability, and financial resources, to construct, operate and main
That the applicant or operator has taken or consented in writing to take any and all reasonable measures to
comply with the applicable Federal, State and local regulations and ordinances.
That the applicant's plan represents the best available technology for handling the waste and the applicant has
demonstrated that it will employ the best management practices in handling the waste at the proposed facility.
That the waste treatment facility is compatible with the County solid waste management plan, taking into
account alternative methods of management and recycling.
That the applicant has a valid contract with the operator of a State licensed landfill for the disposal of the
projected ash production of the incineration facility or residues from other methods of biomedical and
hazardous waste treatment for a three-year period.
At its next scheduled meeting, the County Commission shall make its decision to grant the permit, deny it, or grant it
with specified conditions. The County Commission may deny the permit if it finds that one or more of the criteria
enumerated in Subsection (h) above have not been met.
A permit shall be valid for no more than 24 months from the date it is granted by the County Commission unless the
applicant begins construction of the facility prior to the expiration of the permit and continues to operate the facility
according to specified conditions, without assigning its granted permit to any other party.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § VII)
Sec. 42-67. - Control of emissions.
Emissions from all principal use incinerator facilities and all biomedical waste incinerator and microwave facilities shall not
cause ambient pollution concentrations to exceed levels defined in "Guidelines for Ambient Impact Assessment of Toxic Air
Pollutants Emissions," issued by Georgia Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § VIII)
Sec. 42-68. - Certication of operator.
No person shall operate a principal use incinerator, microwave or autoclave facility unless such individual who operates or
maintains the facility obtains a certificate of training in biomedical waste treatment or other applicable certificate issued by the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers within nine months of the commencement of the training program. Copies of the
training certificates for the operators and maintenance engineers shall be submitted to the EQB and shall be available for
inspection at the facility along with the permit to operate.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § IX)
Sec. 42-69. - Special procedures for transportation and handling of biomedical waste.
No biomedical waste shall, for purposes of treatment and disposal in the County, be transported into the County or from place
to place within the County except under the following conditions:
All transports shall be refrigerated trucks maintaining a temperature of not more than 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
All trucks transporting medical wastes shall be used exclusively for the transport of medical waste and each
truck shall have placed upon it at a prominent location a sign reading as follows: "Medical Waste Only - Not For
Transportation of Other Materials." Such sign shall be in bright yellow letters readily discerned from a distance
of 100 feet.
All biomedical waste shall be transported in leak-proof, puncture-proof boxes of the following specifications:
Die cut body with lid attached. Black sheet size 62 7/8 × 74 1/8 finished product size - inside dimensions
18×18×23. Board - 400 double wall B/C flute, board combination 69/40/69/40/69 wet strength medium or
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
57/137
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
stronger, water proof adhesive. Board to be curtain coated with wax on both sides. All mediums to be wax
impregnated. Box must have leakproof corners. Box will be self-locking, outer liner of box to be oyster white
linerboard. Box to be printed four panels, one color. Print to include appropriate information on the contents
and handling of the material contained in carton. Liner for above carton. Blank size - 39 13/16 × 74 5/8. No
joint scored sheet to fit above carton to further insure that it is leakproof. Board - 400 double wall B/C flute,
board combination 69/40/69/40/69 wet strength medium or stronger, water proof adhesive. Board to be
curtain coated with wax on both sides. All mediums to be wax impregnated.
No biomedical waste shall be transported for purposes of disposal into or within the County in plastic bags
having colorants which contain cadmium, arsenic, mercury, antimony, lead or selenium. The EQB may require
random samplings of plastic bag material from any principal use biomedical treatment facility to assure
compliance with this section. The EQB may also require any owner or operator of a principal use biomedical
waste treatment facility to demonstrate that it has taken proper precautions and made proper arrangements
with biomedical waste generators and handlers to insure compliance with this section.
No principal use biomedical waste treatment facility may be operated in the County unless provisions have
been made for storage of the waste in refrigerated facilities in accordance with State regulations. Such
refrigerated storage facilities shall be served with a backup system of power generation preventing
interruption by reason of electrical failure. The applicant shall show by calculation that adequate refrigerated
space is provided for at least five days volume of medical waste at the average rate of delivery.
No principal use biomedical waste incinerator facility shall be operated in the County unless the facility shall
have in operation a screening device which automatically removes unburned particles or globules of a size of
two centimeters or more and returns them to the incineration process.
Each owner or operator of a principal use biomedical treatment facility in the County shall, at such time as may
be determined by the EQB, at least two times per year, obtain from a EQB approved engineering firm, a
putrescible matter determination test of the incinerator ash or autoclave or microwave residues, in accordance
with Method A prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Performance Test Codes,
Paragraph 7.3. The results of such testing shall be provided to EQB and should any test show that putrescible
material is not being properly treated, the license for the facility shall be suspended until such time as the
owner or operator thereof shall demonstrate to the EQB that appropriate corrective measures have been
taken.
No principal use biomedical waste incinerator facility shall be operated in the County unless the incinerator
ash produced by the facility contains no more than six percent by dry weight of combustible material as
demonstrated at regular quarterly intervals. The incinerator ash shall be sampled and tested according to
standard methods published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (PTC33) and American Society
of Testing Materials.
No biomedical waste incinerator facility operated in the County shall be allowed to operate unless such facility
is presently equipped, or installs the necessary equipment before acceptance of such waste, to perform 24-
hour monitoring of opacity and temperature. Opacity shall not exceed 20 percent on a continuous basis, but
may be allowed five minutes per hour at 40 percent. Temperature in the secondary combustion chamber shall
be maintained at a minimum of 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit and a minimum residence time of two seconds. The
recording of opacity and temperature as monitored on a 24-hour basis shall be made available to the County
Clerk upon request. Any biomedical waste incinerator facility that fails to maintain the required opacity and
temperature shall not be allowed to continue to operate until such time as the owner or operator thereof shall
demonstrate to the County Commission or its designated agent that appropriate measures have been taken.
The transportation of biomedical waste between medical facilities under one ownership for disposal purposes
shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section 42-69 provided that the total biomedical waste disposal by
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
58/137
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
the owner of the facilities does not exceed 125 tons per year.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § X)
Sec. 42-70. - Special procedures for transportation and handling of hazardous waste.
No hazardous waste shall, for purposes of disposal in the County, be transported into the County or from place to place within
the County except under the following conditions:
All trucks transporting hazardous waste shall be used exclusively for the transport of hazardous waste and
each truck shall have placed upon it, at a prominent location, a sign reading as follows:
"Hazardous Waste Only - Not For Transportation of Other Material."
Such sign shall be in bright letters readily discerned from a distance of 100 feet.
All hazardous waste shall be transported in leak-proof vehicles.
No principal use hazardous waste incinerator facility shall be operated in the County unless the facility shall
have in operation a screening device which automatically removes unburned particles or globules of a size of
two centimeters or more and returns them to the incineration process.
No principal use hazardous waste incinerator facility shall be operated in the County unless the incinerator ash
produced by the facility contains no more than six percent by dry weight of combustible material as
demonstrated at regular quarterly intervals. The incinerator ash shall be sampled and tested according to
standard methods published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (PTC33) and American Society
of Testing Materials.
No hazardous waste treatment facility may be operated in the County unless provisions have been made for
safe storage of the waste during natural disasters. Such storage facilities shall be served with a backup system
of power generation preventing interruption by reason of electrical failure and suitably constructed facilities to
prevent spillage, rupture or contamination of surroundings.
Each owner or operator of a principal use hazardous waste treatment facility in the County shall, at such time
as may be determined by the EQB, at least quarterly, obtain from an EQB approved engineering firm, a toxic
matter determination test of the treatment residue, in accordance with prescribed methods. Should any test
show that toxic material is being released into the surroundings at prohibited levels, the license for the facility
shall be suspended until such time as the owner or operator shall demonstrate to the EQB that appropriate
corrective measures have been taken.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § XI)
Sec. 42-71. - On-site monitoring.
The County shall monitor the site continuously at the permittee's expense and a designated representative of the County
Commission shall be permitted to inspect any operation or facility at any time.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § XII)
Sec. 42-72. - Permits and fees.
In addition to the permit application fee required under Section 42-65 (a), the following fees shall be levied annually:
Landll User Permit (Solid Waste) $ 
5,000.00
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
59/137
(b)
(a)
(b)
Principal Use Incinerator Facility Permit 20,000.00
Biomedical Waste Incinerator or Microwave Facility Permit 15,000.00
Hazardous Waste Incinerator or Microwave Facility Permit 15,000.00
Each of the above permits are valid only for the calendar year in which issued and are renewable annually upon
proof that all conditions and qualifications of the permit have been and are being complied with and upon payment
in full of the annual permit fee.
The above fees are levied in order to assist the County in deferring the additional costs accruing to the County as a
result of increased road maintenance, additional training for emergency personnel, enforcement of this article, and
the impact of any post-closure cleanup or monitoring.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § XIII)
Sec. 42-73. - Waivers.
There shall be no waiver of any of the requirements of this article.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § XIV)
Sec. 42-74. - Enforcement and penalties.
No permit shall be issued for construction of a solid, commercial, industrial, municipal, biomedical or hazardous
waste treatment facility or private landfill unless the property owner shall have fully complied with the terms of this
article. A landowner shall comply with the terms hereof in order to obtain a permissive use permit in the County.
Any person, firm or corporation seeking permission to transport waste into the County shall be required to produce
documentary evidence that all waste to be treated will be disposed of at a facility meeting the terms of this article.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. In addition, any facility operated in violation
hereof shall subject its owner to a fine of $1,000.00 per day for each day of illegal operation, or imprisonment not
exceeding 12 months, or both. Each day a violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate the provisions of this article shall on conviction be fined not
exceeding $1000.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 12 months, or both, at the discretion of the court, for each and
every violation. In addition thereto, the County Commission shall be authorized to seek injunctive relief to restrain
further transportation of imported waste into the County by any person, firm or corporation that shall violate the
provisions of this article. Provided further that any owner or operator of a solid waste landfill, or a putrescible waste
landfill, or an incinerator or microwave facility who shall knowingly accept imported waste from any person, firm or
corporation not properly permitted under the requirements of this article shall be subject to punishment under this
section, including, but not limited to, the revocation of the violations permit and/or license.
(Ord. of 9-2-1993, § XV)
Appendix A - LOCAL ACTS
FOOTNOTE(S):
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
60/137
(a)
(b)
Editor's note— In this appendix, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20, the title of the governing body has been redesignated as the
Board of Commissioners and members of the Board of Commissioners have been redesignated as Commissioners. Such state
code section removed "of Roads and Revenues" from the title. Pursuant to Ga. Const. (1976) art. VI, § VI, ¶ IV, terms such as
ordinary or court of ordinary are changed to judge of the probate court and probate court, respectively.
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS CREATED
An Act to create a Board of Commissioners for the County of Dooly; to provide for the appointment of members thereof by the
Judge of Superior Court of said County upon recommendation of Grand Jury of said County, to define their duties and powers and
prescribe their qualifications, and for other purposes pertaining to County and County matters for the County of Dooly.
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1913 Ga. Laws (Act No. 216), page 373. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical
history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from
the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been
made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of
capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20, the term "Board of
Commissioners of Roads and Revenues" has been changed to "Board of Commissioners."
Sec. 1. - Dooly County Board of Commissioners.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by the authority of the same, That a
Board of Commissioners for the County of Dooly is hereby created. Said Commissioners shall be qualified voters of said County,
and shall reside in the Road Districts from which they are appointed, which districts are to be defined later on in this Act.
(1947 Ga. Laws (Act No. 30), page 143 § 1; 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 267), page 3703, § 2)
Sec. 2. - Composition of the Board.
The Board of Commissioners of Dooly County shall be composed of five members. For purposes of electing
members of the Board of Commissioners, Dooly County is divided into five commissioner districts. One
member of the Board shall be elected from each such district. The five commissioner districts shall be and
correspond to those five numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and
further identified as Plan Name: doolywkl Plan Type: Local User: Gina Administrator; Dooly.
When used in such attachment, the terms 'Tract' and 'BG' (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same
geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial
census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are
underneath a 'BG' heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the
report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any
part of Dooly County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included
within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States
decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Dooly County which is described in that
attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is
not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district
contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of
2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any commissioner district,
whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of
that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia.
(17)
(18)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
61/137
(c) Each candidate for election as Commissioner must be a resident of the district he or she seeks to represent at
the time he or she qualifies as a candidate. The election of each Commissioner shall be by the voters of the
district represented only.
(1919 Ga. Laws (Act No. 263), page 639; 1929 Ga. Laws (Act No. 207), page 594; 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 267), page 3703; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 938), page
6083; 1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 382), page 5153; 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 492), page 4108)
Editor's note—
The plan referred to in the above section is as follows:
Plan Name: doolywkl Plan Type: Local User: Gina Administrator: Dooly
Redistricting Plan Components Report
District 001
Dooly County
Tract: 9701
BG: 1
1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1016 1032 1033
1034 1035 1037 1038 1039 1040 1041 1042 1043 1044 1045 1046
1047 1048 1049 1050 1051 1052 1053 1054 1055 1056 1057 1058
1059 1060 1061 1062 1063 1064 1065 1066 1067 1068 1069 1070
1071 1072 1073 1074 1075 1076 1077 1078 1079 1080 1081 1082
1083 1084 1085 1086 1087 1088 1089 1090 1091 1092 1093 1096
1097 1098 1103 1104 1105 1106 1107 1108 1109 1110 1111 1112
1113 1114 1115 1116 1999
BG: 2
2000 2022 2025 2026 2027 2028 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035
2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 2041 2042 2043 2044 2045 2046 2047
2048 2049 2050 2051 2052 2053 2054 2055 2056 2057 2058 2059
2060 2061 2062 2063 2064 2065 2066 2067 2068 2069 2070 2071
2072 2073 2074 2075 2076 2077 2078 2079 2080 2081 2084 2085
2086 2087 2088 2093 2106 2107 2108 2109 2110 2111 2112
BG: 3
3006 3007 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 3018 3019
3020 3023 3061
District 002
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
62/137
Dooly County
Tract: 9701
BG: 1
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022
1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1036 1094 1095
1099 1100 1101 1102 1117 1118 1119 1120 1121 1122 1123 1124
1125 1126 1127 1128 1129 1130 1131 1132 1133 1134 1135 1136
1137
BG: 2
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2018 2019 2020 2021 2023 2024 2029
2082 2083 2089 2090 2091 2092 2094 2095 2096 2097 2098 2099
2100 2101
BG: 3
3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3008 3009 3021 3022 3024 3025
3026 3027 3028 3033 3034 3035 3036 3037 3041 3042 3043 3044
3045 3046 3047 3048 3049 3050 3051 3052 3053 3054 3055 3056
3057 3058 3059 3060 3062 3063 3064 3065 3066 3067 3068 3069
3070 3071 3072 3073 3074 3075 3076 3077 3078 3079 3080 3081
3082 3083 3084 3085 3086 3087 3088 3089 3090 3091 3092 3093
3094 3095 3096 3097 3098 3099 3100 3101
Tract: 9703
BG: 1
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011
1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023
1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035
1036 1037 1038 1039 1040 1041 1042 1043 1044 1045 1046 1047
1048 1049 1050 1051 1052 1053 1054 1055 1056 1057 1058 1059
1060 1064 1065 1066 1067 1068 1069 1070 1071 1072 1073 1074
1075 1076 1077 1078 1079 1080 1081 1082 1083 1128 1129 1130
1131 1132 1133 1134 1135 1136 1137 1138 1139 1140 1141 1142
1143 1144 1145 1158
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
63/137
BG: 2
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
2012 2015 2016 2017
BG: 3
3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017
3999
District 003
Dooly County
Tract: 9702
BG: 1
1056 1057 1065 1066 1067
Tract: 9703
BG: 1
1061 1062 1063 1084 1085 1086 1087 1088 1089 1090 1091 1092
1093 1094 1095 1109 1110 1111 1112 1113 1117 1118 1119 1120
1121 1122 1123 1124 1125 1126 1127 1146 1147 1148 1149 1150
1151 1152 1153 1154 1155 1156 1157 1159 1160 1161
BG: 2
2013 2014 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2027 2028
BG: 3
3009 3011 3018 3019 3020 3021 3022 3023 3024 3025 3026 3027
3028 3029 3030 3031 3032 3033 3034 3035 3036 3037 3038 3039
3040 3041 3042 3043 3044 3045 3046 3047 3048 3049 3050 3051
3052 3054 3055 3056 3057 3058 3060 3062 3066 3067 3068 3069
3070 3071 3072 3073 3074 3075 3076 3077 3080 3081 3082 3083
3084 3085 3086 3087 3088 3089 3090 3091 3092 3093 3094 3095
3096 3097 3098 3997
BG: 4
4014 4049 4054 4055 4056 4057 4058 4059 4060
District 004
Dooly County
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
64/137
Tract: 9703
BG: 1
1096 1097 1098 1099 1100 1101 1102 1103 1104 1105 1106 1107
1108 1114 1115 1116 1162
BG: 2
2025 2026 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038
2039 2040 2041 2042 2043 2044 2045 2046 2047 2048 2049 2050
2051 2052
BG: 4
4000 4001 4002 4003 4004 4005 4006 4007 4008 4009 4010 4011
4012 4013 4015 4016 4017 4018 4019 4020 4021 4022 4023 4024
4025 4026 4027 4028 4029 4030 4031 4032 4033 4034 4035 4036
4037 4038 4039 4040 4041 4042 4043 4044 4045 4046 4047 4048
4050 4051 4052 4053
District 005
Dooly County
Tract: 9701
BG: 2
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
2102 2103 2104 2105
BG: 3
3029 3030 3031 3032 3038 3039 3040
Tract: 9702
BG: 1
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011
1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023
1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035
1036 1037 1038 1039 1040 1041 1042 1043 1044 1045 1046 1047
1048 1049 1050 1051 1052 1053 1054 1055 1058 1059 1060 1061
1062 1063 1064 1068 1069
BG: 2
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
65/137
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035
2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 2041 2042 2043 2044 2045 2046 2047
2048 2049 2050 2051 2052 2053 2054 2055 2056 2057 2058 2059
2060 2061 2062 2063 2064 2065 2066 2067 2068 2069 2070 2071
2072 2073 2074 2075 2076 2077 2078 2079 2080 2081 2082 2083
2084 2085 2086 2087 2088 2089 2090 2091 2092 2093 2094 2095
2096 2097 2098 2099 2100 2101 2102 2103 2104 2105 2106 2107
2108 2109 2110 2111 2112 2113 2114 2115 2116 2117 2118 2119
2120 2121 2122 2123 2124 2125 2126 2127 2128 2129 2130 2131
2132 2133 2134 2135 2137 2138 2139 2140 2141 2142 2143 2997
2998 2999
Tract: 9703
BG: 3
3006 3007 3008 3010 3053 3059 3061 3063 3064 3065 3078 3079
3998
Sec. 2A. - County Administrator.
The office of County Administrator of Dooly County is created.
The County Administrator shall be appointed by majority vote of the Board of Commissioners to serve at the
pleasure of said Board for an indefinite term.
The County Administrator shall be chosen by the Board solely upon the basis of executive and administrative
qualifications, with specific reference to actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practices with respect to
the duties of the office as set forth in this section.
The County Administrator may be removed by a majority vote of the total membership of the Board of
Commissioners. The reasons for the removal shall be set forth in writing and provided to the County Administrator
within 48 hours of the vote. The County Administrator shall be entitled to severance pay as outlined in an
employment agreement executed by the County Administrator and the County. In the event no such agreement
exits, the County Administrator shall receive severance pay equal to 90 days of base salary. No severance pay shall
be provided to the County Administrator if the termination is for reason of conviction of a felony. Nothing in this
section shall prevent or interfere with the rights of the Board of Commissioners to terminate the services of the
County Administrator at any time, subject only to the provisions of this subsection.
The County Administrator shall be paid an annual salary to be fixed by the Board of Commissioners, which shall be
subject to adjustment annually based on an annual performance evaluation by the full Board. The County
Administrator shall receive all across-the-Board cost-of-living allowances and across-the-board wage and salary
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
66/137
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
increases awarded to County employees, and shall receive, at a minimum, all employee benefits provided to County
employees generally.
By letter filed with the County Clerk, the County Administrator shall designate a County officer or employee as acting
County Administrator to exercise the powers and perform the duties of County Administrator during the County
Administrator's temporary absence or disability. The Board of Commissioners may revoke such designation at any
time and appoint another officer of the County to serve as acting County Administrator during the County
Administrator's temporary absence or disability. In the event the position of County Administrator becomes vacant,
the Board of Commissioners may appoint an Acting County Administrator to temporarily exercise the powers and
perform the duties of County Administrator pending appointment of a new County Administrator.
The County Administrator and any acting County Administrator shall be required to execute and deliver a good and
sufficient bond payable to the Board of Commissioners of Dooly County in the amount of $25,000.00, and the
premium therefore shall be paid by Dooly County.
The County Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the County. He or she shall be responsible to
the Board of Commissioners for the proper administration of the affairs of the County. It shall be the duty of the
County Administrator to:
See that all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the Board and all laws of the state subject to
enforcement by County officers or department heads are faithfully executed;
Attend all meetings of the Board, with the right to take part in the discussions in accordance with any rules
adopted by the Board of Commissioners, but having no vote. The County Administrator shall be entitled to
notice of all special meetings;
Prepare and submit to the Board a proposed annual budget and a proposed capital program and to execute
the budget and capital program adopted by the Board, approving all disbursements and expenditures as
budgeted or authorized by the Board;
Examine regularly at periods fixed by the Board of Commissioners, the accounts, records, and operations of
every County board, commission, department, office, and agency which receives appropriations from the said
Board; to make monthly reports to the Board on County, fiscal, and other affairs; to keep the Board fully
advised on the financial conditions and future needs of the County; and to make such recommendations on
County affairs as he or she deems necessary for the efficient operations of the County;
Submit to the Board at the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative
activities of the County for the preceding year;
Confer with and advise all other elected or appointed officials of the County who are not under the immediate
control of the Board, but who receive financial support from the Board;
Supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person for work done for the County and supervise
and regulate all purchases of materials and supplies for the County within such limitations and under such
rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Board;
Exercise control over all departments or divisions of the County for which the Board has responsibility, and to
direct and supervise the administration of all County offices and the construction, maintenance, and operation
of all County roads, bridges, drains, buildings, and other public works and the care and maintenance of all real
and personal property owned by the County;
Appoint, and when in his or her discretion the welfare of the County requires it, suspend, discharge, transfer,
or remove all employees for whom the Board is responsible, except the County Attorney who shall be
appointed directly by the Board. The County Administrator may delegate to any department head such powers
with respect to subordinates within that department;
Fix the salaries of all officers and employees of the County, subject, however, to budget appropriations and
supervision and control by the Board;
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
67/137
(11)
(12)
(i)
(j)(1)
(2)
(3)
(A)
(B)
(k)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(l)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Supervise the programs of financial management, personnel administration, procurement, and risk
management; and
Perform such other duties as may be required by the Board.
The County Administrator shall perform his or her duties under the direction of the Board of Commissioners and
shall be responsible to the Board of Commissioners as a body. No member of the Board of Commissioners shall
individually direct the County Administrator or attempt to interfere in the performance of his or her duties, and the
Board of Commissioners shall, except for the purpose of formal inquires and investigations, deal with County
employees subject to the County Administrator's direction or supervision solely through the County Administrator.
The County Administrator shall, no later than the last day of the seventh month of each fiscal year, submit to the
Board of Commissioners a budget plan and calendar for developing a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year;
and the County shall formulate and submit to the Board of Commissioners, no later than the last day of the tenth
month of each fiscal year, a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message.
The County Administrator's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of work
programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the County for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the
important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current fiscal year in financial policies,
expenditures, and revenues, together with the reasons for such changes, summarize the County's debt
position, and include such other material as the County Administrator deems desirable.
The proposed budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all County funds and activities for the ensuing
fiscal year and, except as required by law, shall be in such form as the County Administrator deems desirable
or the Board of Commissioners may require. The proposed budget shall, at a minimum, include a clear general
summary of its contents, and show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy,
and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall indicate in separate
sections:
Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund by organization unit
when practical, and the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure; and
The anticipated income and expense and surplus or deficit for the ensuing year for each utility or other
enterprise fund operated by the County.
The County Administrator shall consult with the heads of County departments and constitutional officers and shall
prepare and submit to the Board of Commissioners a proposed five-year capital program each year. It shall be
submitted to the Board of Commissioners by the County Administrator simultaneously with submission of the
proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The capital program shall include:
A clear general summary of its contents;
A list of all capital improvements and other capital expenditures which are proposed to be undertaken during
the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for each;
Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each improvement or other capital expenditure;
Method of financing upon which each capital expenditure is to reliant; and
The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired.
The County Administrator, subject to supervision by the Board of Commissioners, shall:
Develop plans and programs to advance the health, safety, general welfare, and physical and economic
development of the County and shall pursue grants-in-aid that may be available from time to time to help
finance implementation of such programs;
Monitor the County's planning activities including those undertaken in response to the Georgia Planning Act
and the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act; and
Cooperate with and coordinate the community improvement activities of independent authorities and
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
68/137
(1)
(2)
agencies, County constitutional offices, the County planning commission, and County departments and other
organizational components of the County government as necessary.
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 6977), page 4027, § 1)
Sec. 3. - Repealed.
[Repealed by 1929 Ga. Laws (Act No. 207), page 594]
Sec. 4. - Initial and subsequent members of the Board.
The initial and subsequent members of said Board of Commissioners shall be as follows:
Effective January 1, 1993, the Commissioners representing Commissioner Districts 2 and 4 shall be the former
Commissioners representing Commissioner Districts 2 and 4, who were elected at the general election of 1990
pursuant to the order of the District Court for the Middle District of Georgia in Civil Action No. 86-95-ALBAMER, entered September 26, 1986. Said Commissioners shall complete the terms of office to which they were
elected, which shall expire on December 31, 1996. Effective January 1, 1993, the Commissioner representing
Commissioner District 5 shall be the former Commissioner representing Commissioner District 5, who was
elected at the general election in 1988 pursuant to the order of the District Court for the Middle District of
Georgia in Civil Action No. 86-95-ALB-AMER, entered September 26, 1986. Said Commissioner shall complete
the term of office to which he or she was elected, which will expire on December 31, 1994. Successors to such
members and future successors shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration
of the terms of office and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for
terms of six years and until their successors are elected and qualified.
Effective January 1, 1993, the Commissioners representing Commissioner Districts 1 and 3 shall be the
Commissioners representing Commissioner Districts 1 and 3 who were elected at the special nonpartisan
election held on Tuesday, December 15, 1992, pursuant to the order of the District Court for the Middle District
of Georgia in Civil Action No. 92-378-1-MAC(DF), entered October 28, 1992. Said Commissioners shall complete
the terms of office to which they were elected, which shall expire on December 31, 1998. Thereafter,
successors shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of terms and shall
take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of six years and until their
successors are elected and qualified.
(1929 Ga. Laws (Act No. 207), page 594; 1943 Ga. Laws (Act No. 195), page 951; 1967 Ga. Laws (Act No. 237), page 2586; 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 267), page
3703; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 938), page 6083; 1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 382), page 5153)
Sec. 5. - Convening of Board meetings.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That said Commissioners hereby named shall convene at the courthouse in
said County on the first Tuesday in October after this Act becomes a law, and, after taking an oath before the Judge of the Probate
Court of said County to faithfully discharge their duties as said Commissioners, shall organize by electing one of their members
Chairman, whose duty it shall be to preside at all of the meetings and sign all warrants on the treasurer and all orders of the
Commissioners. Said Chairman shall have the right at all the meetings to vote on all questions before the Board of Commissioners
and shall also have the right to make motions and perform all duties imposed under this Act upon said Commissioners. His term of
office as Chairman, shall terminate on first Tuesday in January following his election, but may be re-elected for another year, it
being the purpose of this Act to elect a Chairman on first Tuesday in January each year, whose term as such Chairman shall be one
year.
Sec. 5A. - Designation of Building Supervisor.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
69/137
Said Board of Commissioners shall designate one of their members as "Building Supervisor", at certain periods as the Board
may direct, whose duties it shall be to carry out various assigned policies of the Board. Said periods of appointment may be
terminated when the necessity for same has ceased. The remaining members of the Board shall set a reasonable compensation
for such "Building Supervisor" notwithstanding and in addition to the compensation he may receive under Section 7 of this Act.
(1929 Ga. Laws (Act No. 207), page 594; 1960 Ga. Laws (Act No. 784), page 2882)
Sec. 6. - Oath of oce; bonding fee.
Be it further enacted by authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners as herein provided, shall be commissioned by the
Governor of said State for the term of office for which they are appointed, and before entering upon the discharge of the duties of
said office said Commissioners shall each take an oath before the Judge of the Probate Court for the faithful performance of their
duties, and shall give a solvent Bond in a solvent surety or guaranty company, authorized to execute bonds under the laws of
Georgia, to be approved by the Judge of Superior Court, and payable to the Judge of the Probate Court of said County and his
successors in office, in the sum of $5,000.00 each, conditioned for the faithful performance of their duties as said Commissioners
and the bonding fee shall be a legal charge against the County.
Sec. 7. - Salary.
Each member of the Board of Commissioners of Dooly County shall receive an annual salary of not less than $300.00 nor more
than $10,000.00, the exact amount of such annual salary to be established by a resolution of said Board of Commissioners. The
Board by resolution may establish the annual salary of its members for calendar year 1995. Beginning on January 1, 1996, and
thereafter, the Board by resolution adopted at its first regular meeting of each calendar year shall establish the annual salary of its
members for such calendar year. If the Board fails to take any action to establish the annual salary at the initial regular meeting in
a calendar year, the members shall receive for such calendar year the same annual salary that the members received during the
preceding calendar year.
(1943 Ga. Laws (Act No. 195), page 951; 1953 Ga. Laws (Act No. 486), page 3291; 1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 360), page 4585; 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 93), page
3769)
Sec. 8. - Repealed.
[Repealed by 1929 Ga. Laws (Act No. 207), page 594]
Sec. 9. - Employment of Clerk; bond; duties.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That said Board of Commissioners shall employ a competent Clerk and may
require him full time and fix his salary, to be paid monthly from the County treasury as other bills are paid. He shall make solvent
guarantee bond in the sum of $2,500.00 for the faithful performance of his duties, said bond payable to the Commissioners; he
shall keep a complete record of the actings and doings of said Board, said records to be open to the inspection of any citizen or
citizens of said County at all times; provided the same does not interfere with the meetings of said Board. Said Clerk shall perform
such other duties as said Board may require of him, and shall be subject to removal by said Board for inefficiency or neglect of
duties.
(1919 Ga. Laws (Act No. 263), page 639; 1929 Ga. Laws (Act No. 207), page 594)
Sec. 10. - Superintendent of Roads and Bridges.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That J. C. Slade shall act as Superintendent of Roads and Bridges from the first
Tuesday in September, 1913, to the first Tuesday in January, 1914, or until his successor is elected. He shall receive as such
Superintendent the salary of $100.00 per month. He shall be furnished by the Board of Commissioners with a conveyance that he
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
70/137
may keep in constant touch with the roads and bridges in every section of the County. Before entering upon the discharge of his
duties he shall take an oath before the Judge of the Probate Court to faithfully discharge his duties as Superintendent to the best of
his ability and shall make a solvent guaranty bond in the sum of $1,000.00 payable to the Commissioners, conditioned for the
faithful discharge of his duties. He shall be subject to the orders of the Board in the working of roads and building of bridges, and
shall be subject to removal by said Commissioners for inefficiency or neglect of duties.
Sec. 11. - Election of Superintendent; salary; bond.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That on the first Tuesday in January in each year or as soon thereafter as
practicable the Board of Commissioners shall elect a Superintendent of Roads and Bridges at a salary not exceeding $1,500.00 per
annum on whom shall rest the burden of the Road and Bridge building of the County. He shall before entering upon the discharge
of his duties as such Superintendent of Roads and Bridges, take an oath and give a bond of $1,000.00 in some solvent bonding
company, conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties as such Superintendent. He shall be subject to removal at any time
by the Commissioners for inefficiency or neglect of duties.
Sec. 12. - Commissioners' jurisdiction and control.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid. That said Commissioners shall have exclusive jurisdiction and control over the
following matters to-wit: In directing and controlling all of the property of said County, as they may deem expedient according to
law; in levying taxes according to law; in establishing or abolishing roads and bridges according to law; in establishing, abolishing
or changing election precincts or militia districts; in supervising Tax Collector's and Tax Receiver's books; in allowing the insolvent
list of said County; in settling all claims and accounts of officers having the care, management or disbursement of funds belonging
to or appropriated for the use and benefit of said County, and in bringing them to settlement; in providing for the poor of the
County and for the promotion of health as granted by law, or not inconsistent with law; in examining the tax digests of said County
for the correction of errors; in regulating or fixing license fees as may be provided by law; in establishing and maintaining the
County chaingang; in working said chaingang on the public roads or public works of said County as provided by law; in electing or
appointing all minor officers and employees of said County whose election is not otherwise provided by law; such as
Superintendent, or warden and guards of convicts or chaingang, janitor of courthouse and jail, superintendent of pauper farm,
County physician, and health officer, and district road overseers; in making such rules and regulations as they may deem best for
the interests of the County governing all minor officers and employees appointed by them, and fixing such reasonable
compensation for them as said Board may deem best for the interest of the County; in providing for the collection of a
commutation road tax, fixing the amount to be paid or the number of days work on the roads of said County in lien thereof;
provided, said commutation tax shall not exceed $3.00 or six days work on the roads of said County in lien thereof payable in the
month of September of each year; in trying all road defaulters in accordance with law; and generally to have and to exercise all the
powers heretofore vested in the Board of Commissioners and in the Judge of the Probate Court of said County when sitting for
County purposes, and to exercise such other powers as are granted by law or as may be indispensable to their jurisdiction over
County matters or County finances. Any meeting of the Board had at any place other than the courthouse of Dooly County shall be
inoperative, and no Act done or authorized at any such meeting shall have any validity or obligatory effect whatever upon the
Board or the County of Dooly; the Board shall have no authority to appropriate or to expend any funds for the rent of office space
for its meetings; the Board shall sell the bonds now remaining undisposed of under any authorized issue, and any bonds that may
hereafter be authorized to be issued only after due advertisement of the time and place of the sale thereof at least twice in some
public gazette of this State and by posting written notice on the courthouse door of the County of Dooly at least 20 days prior to
such proposed sale; all contracts pertaining to the purchase of property or supplies involving an outlay of as much as $10,000.00
shall be based upon specifications to be prepared by the Board in writing, and advertisement for the proposed work or matter
embraced in such contract shall be made, inviting competitive bids therefor after advertisement at least twice in some public
gazette in this State and by posting written notice on the courthouse door of the County of Dooly at least 20 days prior to the
consideration of the bids, which time and place shall be expressly stated in the notice thereof, and unless immediate delivery or
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
71/137
performance is required by public exigency and the articles may be procured by open purchase or contract at the places and in the
manner in which such articles are usually bought and sold between individuals, no such contract shall be entered into by the
Board.
(1929 Ga. Laws (Act No. 207), page 594)
Sec. 13. - Commissioners; amenability.
Commissioners shall be amenable to the Judge of Superior Court of said County, who on recommendation of the Grand Jury
may remove or reprimand said Commissioner for malpractice in office, inefficiency or neglect of duty.
Sec. 14. - Duties of Commissioners.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That it shall be the duty of the Commissioners of the County of Dooly to work
all the public roads and thoroughfares leading to and through the municipalities of said County within the corporate limits of said
municipalities the same as the public roads and thoroughfares are now worked outside of the corporate limits of said
municipalities.
(1913 Ga. Laws (Act No. 216), page 373)
Sec. 15. - Examination of books and records.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Board of Commissioners of the County of Dooly shall upon
recommendation of the Grand Jury, cause all the books and records, the actings and doings, of all the officers of said County to be
examined and inquired into by a non-resident certified accountant; provided such examinations shall not be made oftener than
once a year.
Sec. 16. - Repealed by 1929 Ga. Laws (Act No. 207), page 594.
Sec. 17. - Appointment of Commissioners.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that at the November, 1913, term of Dooly Superior Court, the Judge of said
Court shall, upon recommendation of the Grand Jury of said County, appoint three Commissioners from each respective road
district, whose term of office shall begin on the first Tuesday in January following, and continue in office as follows: Commissioner
for Road District Number One shall be for one year, dating from the first Tuesday in January, 1914; Commissioner for Road District
Number Two shall be for two years dating from the first Tuesday in January, 1914, and Commissioner for Road District Number
Three shall be for three years dating from the first Tuesday in January, 1914. On the first Tuesday in November of each year the
Judge of the Probate Court of said County of Dooly shall order an election to be held in each and every precinct in said County of
Dooly to have elected a successor to each Commissioner for the County of Dooly as their term shall expire under this Act, and
whose terms of office shall be for three years, and all voters who are qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly in said
County shall be qualified to vote in said election, provided that no person shall be elected as Commissioner of said County of Dooly
who is not a freeholder and who resides outside of the road district for which he is elected. From and after October 1, 1929, the
Judge of the Probate Court of Dooly County shall order an election to be held in every precinct of the County on the first Tuesday in
November, to have elected a Commissioner for each district, the first election to be held in 1932, and biennially thereafter, and the
Commissioners shall be elected by the qualified voters of the road district of the respective district which such member represents
on the Board, and any vacancy by death, resignation, removal, or otherwise shall be filled by the designation of the remaining
membership of the Board, and such appointee shall upon qualification act for the unexpired term.
(1919 Ga. Laws (Act No. 263), page 639; 1929 Ga. Laws (Act No. 207), page 594)
Sec. 18. - Board meetings.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
72/137
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That said Commissioners shall hold regular meetings at the County
courthouse of said County on the first Tuesday in each month, and may adjourn from day to day, and may hold called sessions
whenever in their opinion public necessity requires it. A majority of said Board may constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business; provided, that one or more Commissioners may be empowered by majority of said Board, duly entered on its minutes to
hold court at any time or place in said County to try road defaulters in accordance with law.
Sec. 19. - Hiring or employing for work done; best bidder.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That said Board shall not hire or employ or contract with any member of said
Board, or with any one related to any member of said Board for work to be done or supplies to be furnished said County, except
such work to be done or supplies to be furnished shall be let to the best bidder.
Sec. 20. - Submission of information on County assets; funds on hand.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That said Commissioners shall before each term of Superior Court, prepare
and submit to the Grand Jury of said County a complete statement in writing of the County property, paupers' finances, buildings,
public roads and bridges, and the exact amount of County funds on hand and the amount disbursed, giving names of each person
in whose favor each warrant or order was drawn and the amount thereof; and for this purpose said Board shall have the authority
to require all persons handling County funds to make written statements to them.
Sec. 21. - Board members' exemptions while in oce.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the members of said Board shall be exempt from militia, road and jury
duty during their terms of office.
Sec. 22. - Board vacancy.
In the event of a vacancy on said Board of Commissioners of Dooly County, by death, resignation or otherwise, it shall be the
duty of the Judge of the Probate Court of Dooly County to call for, set the date for and hold an election in the district in which the
vacancy occurs, within 20 days after the occurrence thereof. Such person elected shall hold office for the unexpired term to which
elected.
(1919 Ga. Laws (Act No. 263), page 639; 1929 Ga. Laws (Act No. 207), page 594; 1960 Ga. Laws (Act No. 784), page 2882)
Sec. 23. - Employment of free labor.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid. That said Commissioners shall when expedient and for the best interests of
the County, employ free labor on the roads and bridges of the County, and to do such other things in the management of County
affairs as will, in their judgment, best subserve the interests of the people of the County.
Sec. 24. - Repealer.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all laws or parts of laws in conflict with this Act be, and the same are,
hereby repealed.
ARTICLE II. - OTHER COUNTY OFFICERS
DIVISION 1. - CLERK OF THE SUPERIOR COURT, SHERIFF AND JUDGE OF THE PROBATE COURT PLACED ON SALARY BASIS
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
73/137
An Act to abolish the present mode of compensating the Clerk of the Superior Court, the Sheriff and the Judge of the Probate
Court of Dooly County, known as the fee system; to provide in lieu thereof annual salaries for such officers; to provide that all fees,
costs or other employments of each of said officers shall become the property of the county; to provide for the collection of all
such fees, costs and emoluments; to provide for periodic statements; to provide for the payment of the operating expenses of said
offices; to provide for the employment of Deputies, Clerks, Assistants and all required personnel by such officers; to provide for the
compensation for such personnel; to provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia:
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed in this division is 1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 135), page 2441. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical
history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from
the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been
made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of
capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Sec. 1. - Clerk of the Superior Court, Sheri, and Judge of the Probate Court; abolishment of mode of compensation.
The present mode of compensating the Clerk of the Superior Court, the Sheriff and the Judge of the Probate Court of Dooly
County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, annual salaries for such officers are prescribed as
hereinafter provided.
Editor's note—
As to the Sheriff, the above section is superseded by O.C.G.A. § 15-16-19.
Sec. 2. - Clerk of the Superior Court; salary.
The Clerk of the Superior Court shall receive an annual salary of $5,500.00, payable in equal monthly installments from the
funds of Dooly County.
Editor's note—
The above section is superseded by O.C.G.A. § 15-6-88. See also O.C.G.A. § 15-6-92.
Sec. 3. - Sheri of Dooly County; salary.
The Sheriff of Dooly County shall receive an annual salary of not less than $8400.00, and not more than $10,000.00, payable in
equal monthly installments from the funds of Dooly County, the same to be fixed by the governing authority of Dooly County at the
first regular meeting of the said governing authority following the effective date of this Act and thereafter at the beginning of each
fiscal year of said County.
(1967 Ga. Laws (Act No. 140), page 2344)
Editor's note—
The above section is superseded by O.C.G.A. § 15-16-20.
Sec. 4. - Judge of the Probate Court; salary.
(19)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
74/137
The Judge of the Probate Court shall receive an annual salary of $7,200.00, payable in equal monthly installments from the
funds of Dooly County.
Editor's note—
The above section is superseded by O.C.G.A. § 15-16-63. See also O.C.G.A. § 15-9-67.
Sec. 5. - Collection of compensation for services.
After the effective date of this Act, said officers shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures,
commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, moneys and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed by law as
compensation for services in any capacity in their respective officers, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for Dooly County
as public funds and shall pay the same over to the fiscal authority of said County on or before the 15th day of each month next
following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment to the County fiscal
authority, each of said officers shall furnish the governing authority of the County a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all
such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid over to said fiscal authority. The statement shall show
the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof.
Sec. 6. - Uncollected compensation.
All fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, moneys and all other emoluments and perquisites
which have accrued to each of the within-mentioned officers at the time this Act becomes effective and to which said officer is
entitled and which remains uncollected at the time this Act becomes effective, shall when collected be paid to said officer. He shall,
however, report the collection of any such fees to the governing authority of the County.
Sec. 7. - Sheri; authorization to appoint Deputy.
The Sheriff is authorized to appoint one Deputy who shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the Sheriff, but which
shall not exceed the sum of $7,200.00 per annum, which compensation shall be paid in equal monthly installments from funds of
the County available for such purpose, and any additional Deputies appointed by the Sheriff as provided by law shall be
compensated by the Sheriff out of his own funds. Dooly County shall furnish two automobiles to the Sheriff for official business
only and the cost of operating and maintaining same shall be paid by the County. The Sheriff shall receive from Dooly County as
fixed from time to time by the governing authority of said County not less than $2.00 per day per prisoner and not more than
$3.00 per day per prisoner for the purpose of feeding prisoners confined in the County jail.
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 70), page 2162; 1970 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1176), page 3048; 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 354), page 3934)
Sec. 8. - Clerk of the Superior Court; authorization to appoint Deputy.
The Clerk of the Superior Court is authorized to appoint one Deputy whose compensation shall be fixed by the Clerk, but which
shall not exceed $250.00 per month, which compensation shall be paid from any funds of the County available for such purpose,
and any additional clerical assistance employed by the Clerk shall be compensated by the Clerk out of his own funds.
Sec. 9. - Judge of the Probate Court; additional salary.
The Judge of the Probate Court, in addition to the salary provided in Section 4, shall receive from Dooly County a sum not less
than $150.00 per month, and not more than $250.00 per month, as fixed and determined from time to time by the governing
authority of Dooly County, for furnishing all clerical assistance required for his office, which sum shall be paid to him whether or
not clerical employee or employees are employed by him and any additional clerical assistance used by the Judge of the Probate
Court shall be compensated by the Judge of the Probate Court out of his own funds.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
75/137
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 880), page 2725)
Sec. 10. - Ocers' power and authority.
It shall be within the sole power and authority of each of said officers, during his respective term of office, to designate and
name the person or persons who shall be employed as such Deputies, Clerks, Assistants or other employees, and to prescribe their
duties and assignments, and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within his sole discretion.
Sec. 11. - Payment of additional expenses.
The necessary operating expenses, supplies, material, postage, furnishings, furniture, utilities and equipment, and the repair,
replacement and maintenance thereof, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of each office and for
which provision is not elsewhere made in this Act, shall be furnished by the County and shall be paid from any funds of the County
available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements for each office shall be in the sole discretion of the governing
authority of Dooly County.
Sec. 12. - Bonding of ocers.
The official bonds of each of said officers, and the respective Deputies, Clerks, Assistants and other personnel, as may be
required by law, shall be procured by each elected officer, and the premiums and costs thereof shall be paid out of any County
funds available for that purpose.
DIVISION 2. - CORONER PLACED ON SALARY BASIS
An Act to provide a salary for the coroner of Dooly County in lieu of fees; to provide the procedure connected therewith; to
provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia:
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed in this division is 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 157), page 2478. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical
history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from
the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been
made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of
capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Sec. 1. - Coroner of Dooly County; salary.
The Coroner of Dooly County is hereby placed on a salary basis in lieu of a fee basis and shall be compensated in an amount
not less than $600.00 nor more than $1200.00 per annum to be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of said County.
The governing authority of said County shall fix the amount of such compensation. Said salary shall be in lieu of all fees, costs,
commissions, allowances, monies, and all other emoluments and perquisites of whatever kind heretofore or hereafter allowed
coroners, and all such fees, costs, commissions, allowances, monies, and all other emoluments and perquisites of whatever kind
shall become the property of Dooly County and shall be paid by the coroner to the fiscal officer of said County on or before the
15 day of each month for the preceding month. At the time of each such monthly payment, the Coroner shall furnish a detailed,
itemized statement under oath of all such funds, which statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the
source thereof.
Editor's note—
(20)
th
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
76/137
The specific salary in the above section is superseded by O.C.G.A. § 45-16-11.
DIVISION 3. - TAX COMMISSIONER
An Act to abolish the offices of Tax Collector and Tax Receiver in the County of Dooly; to consolidate the offices of Tax Receiver
and Tax Collector of Dooly County; to create the office of County Tax Commissioner of Dooly County; to fix his salary; to provide for
help and salary of help; to subscribe the rights, liabilities and duties of said officer; to provide that the laws now in force applicable
to tax receivers and tax collectors shall be of full force and effect as to the County Tax Commissioner, so far as the same are
applicable; to provide that taxes due and all fi. fas. shall have full force and effect and be collectible as such; to provide the
effective date of this Act; to provide for the election of the Tax Commissioner; to provide that all fees, costs and commissions now
accruing to the Tax Collector and Tax Receiver shall be collected by the Tax Commissioner and paid into the county treasury to
become county funds; to provide for filling vacancies; to provide for bond and the payment of premium thereon by the county; to
provide for the levying of a tax to pay salaries; and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same:
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1949 Ga. Laws (Act No. 364), page 1628. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical
history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from
the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been
made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of
capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Sec. 1. - Consolidation of Tax Receiver and Tax Collector.
That the offices of Tax Receiver and Tax Collector of Dooly County, Georgia, be and the same are hereby consolidated into one
office.
Sec. 2. - Creation of the oce of Tax Commissioner.
That the office of Tax Commissioner of Dooly County, Georgia, is hereby created in lieu of said offices so consolidated and so
abolished, and that the rights, duties, and liabilities of said office of Tax Commissioner of Dooly County, Georgia, shall be the same
as the rights, duties and liabilities of the Tax Receiver and Tax Collector of said County, and that all laws applicable to said offices
shall be applicable to the Tax Commissioner of said County, so far as the same can apply.
Sec. 3. - Tax Commissioner; salary.
The salary of the Tax Commissioner of Dooly County shall be an amount established by the Board of Commissioners of Dooly
County, but not less than the minimum salary established by general law for such office, and shall be paid in installments from the
funds of Dooly County. The Tax Commissioner shall be authorized to employ Assistants and clerical help and the salaries of those
Assistants and Clerks shall be fixed by the Board of Commissioners of Dooly County.
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 403), page 3317; 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 266), page 3700; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 66), page 3618)
Sec. 4. - Oce location of Tax Commissioner.
That said Tax Commissioner shall have his office in the courthouse of said County, and he shall not be required to make any
rounds to receive tax returns or tax payments. The County Commissioners shall furnish to said Tax Commissioner his office.
(21)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
77/137
Sec. 5. - Outstanding taxes due and payable.
That all taxes due and payable, and all tax fi. fas. issued by the Tax Collector of Dooly County, Georgia, outstanding at the time
this Act shall become effective as hereinafter provided, shall have full force and effect and shall be collectible as issued.
Sec. 6. - Collection of fees, costs, commissions and other compensation.
That all fees, costs, commissions and other compensation now or hereafter allowed by law to the Tax Receiver and Tax
Collector of Dooly County, for receiving and collecting tax for the State and political subdivisions thereof, shall be collected by the
said Tax Commissioner and all such funds so collected shall be paid into the treasury of the County of Dooly as County funds
subject to disbursement under orders of the Commissioners.
Sec. 7. - Vacancy of oce.
That in the event said office becomes vacant by death, resignation or otherwise the vacancy shall be filled in the same manner
as vacancies in the office of other County officers.
Sec. 8. - Oath of oce.
That before entering upon the duties of his office, said Tax Commissioner shall take the oath now prescribed by law for the Tax
Collector and Tax Receiver, and shall at the same time give bond and security as prescribed by statute. The bond premium shall be
paid by the Commissioners of Dooly County from County funds.
Sec. 9. - Term of oce; election.
The Tax Receiver and Tax Collector of Dooly County shall continue to perform their duties as such until the end of their terms
for which they were elected, which expire on December 31, 1952. This Act shall become effective January 1, 1953, and the Tax
Commissioner who shall be elected at the general election to be held in November, 1952 shall assume his office on January 1,
1953.
Sec. 10. - Levy and collection of property tax.
The Commissioners of Dooly County are hereby authorized and empowered to levy and collect tax on all taxable property in
Dooly County sufficient to pay the salary of said Tax Commissioner, his Assistants, his clerical force and expense of office as herein
provided.
DIVISION 4. - COUNTY TREASURER—OFFICE ABOLISHED
An Act to abolish the office of County Treasurer of Dooly County; to provide for the disposition of the books, papers, records
and other property and business of said office; to provide for the handling of the county funds by a county depository; to provide
that this Act shall not go into effect until January 1, 1953; and for other purposes.
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed in this division is 1949 Ga. Laws (Act No. 399), page 1730. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical
history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from
the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been
made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of
capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets.
(22)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
78/137
A.
B.
Sec. 1. - County Treasurer; abolishment of oce.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that the office
of County Treasurer of Dooly County, be and the same is hereby abolished.
Sec. 2. - Delivery of books, papers, records, and other property and business.
Be it further enacted, that all books, papers, records, and other property and business of said office of County Treasurer of
Dooly County shall be delivered to the County Commissioners of said Dooly County, as soon as this law becomes effective.
Sec. 3. - Selection of bank or trust company to act as County depository.
Be it further enacted, that the County Commissioners of Dooly County shall, on their first regular meeting in January of each
and every year after this Act goes into effect, select some chartered bank or trust company located in Dooly County to act as a
County depository for the purpose of handling and paying out all County funds under the direction of said County Commissioners,
and for the performance of the duties now performed by the County Treasurer of Dooly County, as shall be required of said bank
or trust company by said County Commissioners. Said bank or trust company shall be required to give bond in the sum of
$15,000.00 for the faithful performance of its duty, and where bond is given in some regular bonding company the premium
thereon shall be paid by said County Commissioners out of any County funds available therefor, but no other compensation shall
be allowed to said bank or trust company. Such County depository shall be chosen annually as herein provided or more often
upon a failure or refusal to perform the duties of said position by any one so chosen. All County warrants and disbursements shall
be drawn on and paid out by such County depository instead of the County Treasurer as is now done.
ARTICLE III. - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
Proposing an amendment to the Constitution so as to create the Dooly County Industrial Development Authority; to provide
for powers, authority, funds, purposes and procedure connected therewith; to provide for issuing revenue bonds and for the
validation of such bonds; to provide for the submission of this amendment for ratification or rejection; and for other purposes.
Be it resolved by the General Assembly of Georgia:
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 247), page 1768. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical
history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from
the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been
made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of
capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Sec. 1. - Creation of the Dooly County Industrial Development Authority.
Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph V of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof a new Paragraph which
shall read as follows:
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in Dooly County, Georgia, to be known as the Dooly
County Industrial Development Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a
public corporation and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the 'Authority'.
The Authority shall consist of six members to be elected by the Board of Commissioners for the County of
Dooly for initial terms of two, four and six years, and thereafter for staggered terms of six years. At the time of
(23)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
79/137
C.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
election of the first members, the aforesaid Board of Commissioners shall elect two members for a two-year
term, two members for a four-year term, and two members for a six-year term, and thereafter the terms of all
members shall be six years. In the event a vacancy occurs for any reason, the aforesaid Board of
Commissioners shall promptly elect a person to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. A majority of the
members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of routine business, but no official action may be taken
by the Authority without the affirmative vote of a majority of the membership of the Authority. The Authority
shall have power to elect their own Chairman, Assistant Chairman, Treasurer and Secretary from its
membership and such other officers as the Authority deems necessary or desirable. No member of the
aforesaid Board of Commissioners may be a member of said Authority and only residents of Dooly County,
Georgia shall be eligible members for said Authority.
The power of the Authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power:
To sue and be sued; to receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and administer trusts;
To borrow money, to issue notes and revenue bonds, to execute trust agreements or indentures, and to
sell, convey, lease, encumber, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property, and income as security
therefor;
To contract with any political subdivision of the State of Georgia, and with the State of Georgia, and with
the United States of America, or with any department or agency of any of them, and with private persons
and corporations.
To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to any public or private corporation
performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the State of
Georgia.
To encourage and promote the expansion and development of industrial and commercial facilities in
Dooly County, Georgia, so as to relieve insofar as possible unemployment within its boundaries, and to
that end to acquire by purchase or gift any building or structure within the limits of said County suitable
for and intended for use as a factory, mill, shop, processing plant, assembly plant, or fabricating plant
including all necessary and appurtenant lands and appurtenances thereto, and all necessary or useful
furnishings, machinery and equipment. Such acquisition/may be through the acquisition of land and the
construction thereon of a building, or buildings or other structures and facilities useful or desirable in
connection therewith, including the demolition of existing structures, or through the acquisition of an
existing building and remodeling, renovating, reconstructing, furnishing and equipping of such building.
No building acquired hereunder shall be operated by the Authority but shall be leased or sold to one or
more persons firms or corporations. If sold, the purchase price may be paid at one time or in installments
falling due in not more than 30 years from the date of transfer or possession. The lessee or purchaser
shall be required to pay all cost of operating and maintaining the building or buildings and to pay rentals
or installments sufficient, together with other revenues which may be pledged for the purpose, to retire
all bonds, both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which the Authority may have
incurred in connection with the undertaking;
To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public
funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political sub visions may be invested;
To designate officers to sign and act for the Authority generally or in any specific manner;
To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the
Authority as herein stated;
To appoint and select officers, agents and employees including engineers, architects, builders and
attorneys, and to fix their compensation;
To adopt, alter or repeal its own bylaws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
80/137
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
may be transacted and in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the Authority may deem
necessary or expedient in facilitating its business.
The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the Authority shall have the same immunity
from taxation as the property, obligations and interest on the obligations of Dooly County, Georgia. The
exemptions from taxation herein provided shall not include exemptions from sale and use taxes on property
purchased by the Authority or for use by the Authority.
In order to finance any undertaking within the scope of its power or to refund any bonds then outstanding, the
Authority is hereby authorized to issue bonds, debentures and revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or
any part of the cost of any project of the Authority. Such revenue bonds may be issued bearing rate or rates of
interest and maturing at the year and amounts determined by the Authority, and when so authorized, the
procedure for validation, issuance and delivery shall be in all respects in accordance with the Revenue Bond
Law (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761), as amended, as if said obligation had been originally authorized to be licensed
thereunder. The judgment of validation shall be final, conclusive and forever incontestable as to the validity of
the bonds and the security for the payment thereof, as well as all other matters, both substantive and
procedural, relative to their issuance, and any property real or personal, of the Authority may be pledged,
mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered, including the creation of any security
interest in any equipment or other property of the Authority, as security for any lawful debt of the Authority.
The Authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create any debt, liability or obligation
against the State of Georgia, or County of Dooly.
Should said Authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and
personal, held by the Authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Dooly County, Georgia, subject to
any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that
time.
This amendment, being for the purpose of developing and promoting the public good and the welfare of Dooly
County, Georgia, and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof.
The provisions of this amendment are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by
any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions.
Any project of the Authority shall be restricted to or within the limits of Dooly County, Georgia.
This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expending for the public good and welfare
industry and trade within the County of Dooly and reducing unemployment to the greatest extent possible,
and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the Authority shall be liberally construed for the
accomplishment of these purposes.
This amendment shall be effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the Governor and the
first members of the Authority shall take office within 30 days after such proclamation.
The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the Authority and the
exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management
and conduct of the Authority."
(1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 11), page 3514)
Editor's note—
The above local constitutional amendment was continued by 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 11), page 3514.
Sec. 2. - Publishing and submission of amendment.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
81/137
When the above proposed amendment to the Constitution shall have been agreed to by two-thirds of the members elected to
each of the two branches of the General Assembly, and the same has been entered on their journals with the "Ayes" and "Nays"
taken thereon, such proposed amendment shall be published and submitted as provided in Article XIII, Section I, Paragraph I of the
Constitution of Georgia of 1945, as amended.
(1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 11), page 3514)
ARTICLE IV. - COURTS
DIVISION 1. - MAGISTRATE COURT - MANNER OF SELECTING CHIEF MAGISTRATE
To change the provisions relating to the Magistrate Court of Dooly County, so as to change the manner of selecting the Chief
Magistrate thereof and to provide for terms of and vacancies in such officer; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia:
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed in this division is 1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 660), page 3864. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical
history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from
the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been
made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of
capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. By Ga. Const. (1983), art. VI, § 10, ¶ I(6), small
claims courts became magistrate courts. The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq. govern such courts. The small claims courts
was created by 1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 787), page 2429.
Sec. 1. - Chief Magistrate of the Magistrate Court; term; vacancy.
The person serving as Chief Magistrate of the Magistrate Court of Dooly County immediately prior to the effective date of this
Act shall continue to serve out that person's term of office, but all successors to that office shall be appointed by the governing
authority of Dooly County to take office the first day of January following the expiration of the immediately preceding term of that
office and shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. A vacancy in the
office of Chief Magistrate shall be filled for the remaining unexpired term by appointment by the governing authority of Dooly
County.
ARTICLE V. - TAXATION
DIVISION 1. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR COUNTY TAXES
To provide a homestead exemption from certain Dooly County ad valorem taxes for County purposes in the amount
of $4,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for certain residents of that County who are 62 years of age or
over; to provide for definitions; to specify the terms and conditions of the exemption and the procedures relating
thereto; to provide for applicability; to provide for a referendum, effective dates, and automatic repeal; to repeal
conflicting laws; and for other purposes.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA:
FOOTNOTE(S):
(24)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
82/137
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
Editor's note— Printed in this division is 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 234), page 4063. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical
history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from
the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been
made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of
capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Sec. 1. - Denitions.
For purposes of this Act, the term:
Ad valorem taxes for County purposes means all ad valorem taxes for County purposes levied by Dooly
County, including, but not limited to, taxes to pay interest on and retire bonded indebtedness.
Homestead means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A.
Sec. 2. - Purpose.
Each resident of Dooly County who is 62 years of age or over is granted an exemption on that person's homestead
from all Dooly County ad valorem taxes for County purposes in the amount of $4,000.00 of the assessed value of
that homestead. The value of the homestead in excess of the exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation.
A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (a) of this section unless the person or
the person's agent files an affidavit with the Tax Commissioner of Dooly County giving the person's age and such
additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the Tax Commissioner to make a
determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. The Tax Commissioner shall provide
affidavit forms for this purpose.
Sec. 3. - Application forms, information.
The Tax Commissioner of Dooly County or the designee thereof shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by
this Act and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the owner for
the exemption.
Sec. 4. - Claims, returns, renewals.
The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1] The
exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a
person has filed the proper affidavit as provided in Subsection (b) of Section 2 of this Act, it shall not be necessary to make
application and file such affidavit thereafter for any year, and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be
the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act to notify the Tax Commissioner of Dooly County or the
designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption.
Sec. 5. - Taxes aected.
The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any State taxes, municipal taxes, or County taxes for County
school district purposes. The homestead exemption granted by this Act shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other
homestead exemption applicable to Dooly County ad valorem taxes for County purposes.
Sec. 6. - Eective date.
The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1999.
(25)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
83/137
Sec. 7. - Election for approval or rejection.
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the Election Superintendent of Dooly County shall call
and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of Dooly County for
approval or rejection. The Election Superintendent shall conduct that election on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November,
1998, and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The Superintendent shall cause the date and
purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of
Dooly County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words:
( )
YES
( )
NO
Shall the Act be approved which provides a homestead exemption from Dooly County ad valorem taxes for
County purposes in the amount of $4,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for residents of the
County who are 62 years of age or over?
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act
shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, then Sections 1 through 6 shall
become of full force and effect immediately and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1999. If
Sections 1 through 6 of this Act are not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, Sections 1
through 6 of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately
following that election date.
The expense of such election shall be borne by Dooly County. It shall be the Superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof
to the Secretary of State.
Appendix B - ZONING
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Published in this appendix is the Dooly County Zoning Ordinance, being Ord. No. 98-01, adopted May 21, 1998.
Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates
that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without
notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citations
to State statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions for clarity are
indicated by brackets.
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. §
36-67A-1 et seq.
DOOLY COUNTY ZONING ORDINANCE
Sec. 1. - Title and Objectives.
This ordinance shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of Dooly County, Georgia," for the purpose of setting forth standards
and permissible uses of land designed to conserve and protect the natural, economic and scenic resources of Dooly County; to
secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health, aesthetics, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general
welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to promote desirable living conditions and stability
(26)
(26)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
84/137
in neighborhoods; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public
requirements by dividing Dooly County into districts of such size and shapes as may be best suited to carry out the purposes of the
legislative act and of this resolution.
Sec. 2. - Legislative Authority.
Counties of the State of Georgia are authorized by the 1983 Georgia State Constitution, Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 4, and
Chapter 66 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.), to exercise the powers of planning and
zoning; and it is hereby determined by the Board of Commissioners of Dooly County, Georgia, that it is necessary and desirable to
adopt these zoning regulations under the authority of the above cited Constitutional and statutory provisions.
Sec. 3. - Method of Regulation.
Now therefore be it resolved that the Board of Commissioners of Dooly County, Georgia, as authorized by the Constitution of
the State of Georgia, having previously created a Planning Commission known as the Dooly County Planning Commission does
hereby adopt these zoning regulations for the following purposes: (1) to define certain words used herein; (2) to create zone
boundaries; (3) to regulate the location of trades, professions, businesses, and industries; (4) to regulate the density in distribution
of population; (5) to provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures; (6) to provide for
the method of administration, amendment and enforcement; (7) to provide for imposition of penalties for violations; (8) to repeal
conflicting ordinances and resolutions; (9) and for other purposes.
Sec. 4. - Jurisdiction.
This zoning ordinance shall govern the use of all land and development within the unincorporated limits of Dooly County,
Georgia, and within the limits of any inactive municipality in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-70-5.
Sec. 5. - Denitions.
For the purpose of this resolution, words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular number unless the obvious construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
The word "shall" is mandatory. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to
the line relation to which the distance is specified. The word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "used" shall be deemed also to
include "designed," "intended," or "arranged to be used"; the term "erected" shall be deemed also to include "constructed,"
"reconstructed," "altered," "placed," or "moved". The terms "land use" and "use of land" shall be deemed also to include "building
use" and "use of building". The word "adjacent" means "nearby" and not necessarily "contiguous."
Accessory Building or Accessory Use: A subordinate building for or use such as a garage, workshop and the like customarily
incidental to and located on the same lot with the main building or use.
Agriculture or Agricultural: The bona fide use of a parcel of land of ten acres or more for the cultivation of land, raising of
poultry and/or livestock, or for similar agrarian activity for gain or profit, and the related buildings, structures, and appurtenances
associated with or necessary to carry out the aforementioned activities.
Airfield: Any area of land or water with airspace certified by the Federal Aviation Administration and utilized for the landing or
taking off of aircraft.
Airport: Any area of land or water with airspace certified by the Federal Aviation Administration and designed and set aside for
the landing and taking off of aircraft, and utilized, or to be utilized, in the public interest for such purposes. An airport shall include
all runways, terminal buildings, hangars, and related facilities located on the airport premises.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
85/137
Apartment Building: A single-structure located on a parcel of land under single or joint ownership, containing four or more
independent, residential units cooking facilities for the sole use of each residential unit.
Automobile Sales Lot: An open premises arranged, designed, or used for storage and display for sale of any motorized vehicle
and/or trailer which can be towed legally on Georgia roadways.
Base Flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Base flood is synonymous
with the term "regional" or "100-year" flood.
Biomedical Waste Facility: Any facility or location where the final disposition of any amount of biomedical waste (as that term is
defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, as amended) occurs, whether or not mixed with or including other waste allowed under Subtitle D of
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, and includes, but is not limited to, biomedical waste landfills
and biomedical waste thermal treatment technology facilities.
Boarding House: A dwelling in which lodging and meals are furnished for consideration. Maximum occupancy shall be
governed by life safety codes.
Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering and designed,
built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind including tents or awnings used for purposes
of a building.
Building Line: A line beyond which the foundation wall and any roofed porch, vestibule or other such portion of a building shall
not project.
Building, Principal: The building in which is conducted the principal and primary use of the lot on which the structure is
situated.
Care Home: A rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar use established and operated on a
profit or non-profit basis to provide lodging and meals and domiciliary care for the aged, infirm, chronically ill or convalescent
persons. The term "care home" shall include the term "extended care facility" as defined by Georgia Law. Such facility shall be
licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-7-12 as appropriate.
Caretaker or Employee Residence: An accessory residence (including mobile and manufactured homes) placed on an
otherwise occupied tract for use by a bona fide caretaker, employee or the owner himself.
Church, Club or Lodge: Building in which organized religious, fraternal, recreational, social or educational meetings are
conducted on a regular non-profit basis. Fraternal organizations must show that they have received recognition and sanction from
a parent group or organization. A private club must show that its membership is limited by either: (a) the use and operation of an
amateur athletic facility including but not limited to golf courses, tennis courts, shooting ranges or swimming pools; or (b)
residency in a particular subdivision, condominium, apartment project or other residential development.
Conditional Use: A use which is not permitted inherently in a specific zoning district, but which may be permitted under
specific conditions subject to approval by the Board of Commissioners.
Condominium: A building or building on a single parcel comprised of multiple dwelling units in which each tenant holds full
title to his dwelling unit and joint ownership in the common grounds.
Cul-de-sac: A street which has one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
Day Care Center: An establishment operating for profit which provides care and education for six or more children opened for
the major portion of the day or night and in which meals are served.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
86/137
Designated Official: The official or other designated authority charged by the Dooly County Board of Commissioners with the
administration and enforcement of this resolution or his duly appointed representative.
Drive-In: Any retail or service enterprise wherein a good or service is provided to the consumer on the inside of the principal
building and to the consumer while in his motor vehicle through an exterior wall of the principle building. The term "drive-in"
includes but is not limited to drive-in restaurants and dairy bars, theaters, banks, laundries, food stores and car washes.
Dwelling Unit: A building or portion thereof arranged or designed for occupancy by not more than one family for living
purposes and having cooking facilities.
Easement: A grant to a person or to the public by a property owner of a strip of his land for road right-of-way or other
specified purposes.
Equestrian Center: A tract of land of five acres or more on which more than four adult horses are kept for the purpose of
training boarding, sale or breeding, or where instruction pertaining to the same is given for a fee. For the purposes of this zoning
ordinance this term includes facilities for riding trails and rings, shows, competitive equestrian events and riding lessons.
Family: One or more persons permanently occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by
blood, marriage, or adoption, including foster children, as that term is defined under Georgia Law, no single dwelling unit shall
contain over five persons.
Farm: A parcel of land consisting of a minimum of ten acres on which bona fide agricultural and related uses are conducted as
specified in "agriculture".
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1)
the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Zone: Zones as they appear on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) in which the risk premium insurance rates have
been established by a Flood Insurance Study.
Floodplain: The low-lying and relatively flat areas adjoining inland waters, and including, at a minimum, that area subject to a
one percent or greater change of flooding in any given year.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Frontage: That dimension of a lot measured along the front right-of-way line thereof or if said front right-of-way line is curved
along the chord of the arc.
Garage, Repair: Building(s) and premises designed or used for the purpose of service or commercial repair of motor vehicles,
provided (1) that all body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings, (2) that the storage of junk, wrecked
vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies shall be solely for the purpose repairing motor vehicles and not as a salvage or junkyard
business, and (3) that the storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies not be visible beyond the premises.
Group Home: A residence under the ownership and supervision of a public educational or governmental institution occupied
or intended for occupancy by several unrelated persons or families, and in which cooking facilities are shared among all resident
persons or families.
Hazardous Waste: Any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the
administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act which are in force and effect on
February 1, 1991, codified as 40 CFR Section 261.3 and any designated hazardous waste, and as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. §
12-8-62, as amended.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
87/137
Hazardous Waste Facility: Any property or facility that is intended or used for storage, treatment, or disposal of hazardous
waste and which has been legally certified, licensed, approved and otherwise sanctioned by the appropriate state and federal
agencies.
Home Occupation: An occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling and which is carried on by a resident
thereof and no more than two nonresidents, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes. A Home Occupation does not allow access by the public. A Home Occupation is designed to be less restrictive than a
Home Office but more restrictive than a Residential Business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees
and types of business.
Home Office: An office use conducted entirely within a dwelling which is carried on by a occupant thereof and no other
individual, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. The office may be for
the purpose of service or tradeworkers who customarily work at various locations, such as electricians, plumbers, appraisers, real
estate salespersons, or individuals who work at home, such as writers or computer programmers. There will be no changes which
would alter the character of the dwelling or reveal from the exterior that the dwelling is being used in part for other than
residential purposes. The office shall be limited to one room of the dwelling and not exceed more than 300 square feet in area.
Home Office shall not include any business which involves the sale, manufacture or repair of merchandise on the premises. Home
Offices shall also not include any business requiring access by the public, including, but not limited to, customers, clients or
vendors. No outside storage or display, including signs, is permitted and no one other than family members who reside on the
premises may be employed in the office.
Hospital: Any institution receiving patients and rendering medical care including those wherein mentally retarded, mentally
disturbed, epileptic, alcoholic or drug addicted, chronically ill and physically disabled patients are treated or cared for. Such facility
shall be legally and properly certified, licensed, approved and otherwise sanctioned by the appropriate state or federal agency.
Industrial Park: A tract of land subdivided and developed according to a comprehensive development plan in a manner which
provides a park setting for industrial establishments.
Kennel, Commercial: Any place in or at which more than four adult dogs, cats, rabbits or other domesticated animals are kept
for the purpose of sale, boarding, care, breeding or training, and for which any fee is charged for such services. This term does not
apply to similar facilities operated for agrarian or agricultural purposes.
Laboratory: An establishment or premises where scientific services are provided including testing or analysis of medical,
chemical, physical, mechanical, electric or electronic nature, or the calibration of instruments.
Landfill: An area of land on which or an excavation in which solid waste is placed for permanent disposal and which is not a
land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, or compost pile, and as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, as
amended.
Lodging Home: See "boarding house".
Lot: A parcel of land which satisfies the area requirements for the district within which it is located, or on which exists a legal
nonconforming use, and has frontage along or legal access to a public right-of-way, and is intended as a unit for transfer of
ownership or for building development. A lot shall have a separate tax parcel reference number designated in the office of the
County Tax Commissioner and/or the County Tax Appraiser.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Line, Front: The front property line coincident with the street right-of-way line. The front lot line of a corner lot shall be the
lot line facing the principal building entrance.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
88/137
Lot Line, Rear: The rear lot line is generally opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length or if the
lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet
long, and lying wholly within the lot and farthest from the front lot line.
Lot, Substandard: A lot which does not meet the minimum lot size requirements for the district in which it is located.
Lot Width: The distance between the side lot lines measured at the front building line.
Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed
to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing,
heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured Homes shall be constructed in accordance with
the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401, et seq.
Materials Recovery Facility: Means a solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of
recoverable materials, materials, suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials suitable for
use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials, and as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, as
amended.
Mobile Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight feet or more in width or
40 feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is designed to be used as a dwelling with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning,
and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976.
Modular Home: A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on
a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and bears a seal of compliance with
regulations of the Southern Building Code Congress International, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act, or the Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, as amended.
Motel: A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms and having separate outside entrances for each guest room. To
be used primarily for automobile transients and including such terms as "auto court" and "motor lodge," but not "boarding house"
as defined in this section.
Municipal Solid Waste Disposal Facility: Any disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste (as that term is
defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, as amended) occurs, whether or not mixed with or including other waste allowed under Subtitle D of
the federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, and includes, but is not limited to, municipal solid waste
landfills and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities (as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, as amended.)
Municipal Solid Waste Landfill: Any disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste (as that term is defined in
O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, as amended) occurs, whether or not mixed with or including other waste allowed under Subtitle D of the federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon.
Nonconforming Use: Any building or use which lawfully exists at the time of adoption of this resolution and which does not
conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Occupy: To use land or buildings for any length of time for a purpose for which the land or a building or part thereof is used or
is intended to be used. Any variation of the term "occupy" shall be encompassed by this definition.
Park, Community: A parcel of land owned by a unit of government or a private organization and used or intended to be used
for recreational or leisure time activities, and which is open to the public at no charge. Such parks may include food or recreational
sales as accessory uses.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
89/137
Plat: A sketch, map or survey of a lot, tract or parcel of land depicting the relative positions of lot lines, street rights-of-way and
easements with the dimensions of these features inscribed thereon.
Plat, Development: A preliminary design which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate its
workability and conformation to the design requirements of the subdivision regulations in all aspects, but not in final form for
recording and the details are not completely computed. The development plat shall be approved by the planning board prior to
any development.
Plat, Final: A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and
certification necessary for commission. Streets shown on the plat shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners prior to
recordation.
Private Industry Solid Waste Disposal Facility: Any disposal facility which is operated exclusively by and for a private solid waste
generator (as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, as amended) for the purpose of accepting solid waste generated
exclusively by said private solid waste generator on site.
Private Way: A private street, drive or road provided solely for those property owners whose property is contiguous to and
have a legal right to use.
Public Right-of-Way: A street or road which has been dedicated for public use by deed, plat and/or prescription.
Recreational Use of a Commercial Nature: A building or use which provides entertainment, education, recreation or
amusement for profit such as, but not limited to, a health spa, dance hall, bowling alley, skating rink, shooting range, fortune
telling, amusement park, private zoo, sports stadium or arena, art gallery, concert hall, swimming pool or drive-in theater.
Residence: A building containing only residential units and which meets all the applicable requirements of the Standard
Building Code for conventional construction. The term "residence" or any combination thereof shall not be deemed to include
hotel, boarding house, rooming house, motel or other accommodations used for transient occupancy, and shall not, for the
purpose of this regulation, include travel trailers, mobile homes or manufactured homes.
Residence, Multi-Family: A building comprised of three or more dwelling units.
Residence, Single-Family: A building other than a mobile home, manufactured home, or travel trailer designed for occupation
by one family.
Residential Business: An occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, and which is carried on by an occupant thereof
and no more than three nonresidents, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes. The business may allow access by the public. The Residential Business is designed to be less restrictive than a Home
Office or Home Occupation but more restrictive than a Rural Business in regard to access by the public, size visibility, number of
employees and types of business.
Restaurant: An establishment, however designated, at which food is sold for consumption on the premises. However, a snack
bar, concession stand or refreshment stand at a public or non-profit community swimming pool, playground, park or marina
operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility shall not be deemed a restaurant.
Right-of-way Line: The outside boundary of a right-of-way, whether such right-of-way be established by usage, recorded
easement, deed, dedication or by the official right-of-way map of Dooly County.
Rural Business: An occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, an accessory structure or outside the dwelling and
which is carried on by a resident of that property and no more than 15 nonresidents, and which is clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of the property for residential dwelling purposes. The business may allow access by the public. The Rural Business is
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
90/137
designed to be less restrictive than a Home Office, Home Occupation or Residential Business in regard to access by the public, size,
visibility, number of employees and types of business.
Salvage Yard: The use of any space, whether inside or outside a building, for the storage, keeping, salvage or sale of junk, scrap
metals or other scrap materials, including the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of one or more automobiles or other
vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, or the lot line of an adjacent lot, and the front, rear
or side lines of a building on the lot with setback restrictions. The term "required setback" means a line beyond which a building is
not permitted to extend under the provision of this zoning ordinance establishing minimum depth and widths of yards.
Shopping Center: A group of commercial establishments planned, developed and owned or managed as a unit with on-site
parking and of similar architectural characteristics.
Slow Rate Land Treatment System: A system for waste water treatment by spray irrigation (land application). The term refers
to the advanced treatment of waste water by irrigation on the land to support vegetative growth. For purposes for this zoning
ordinance, the use may include ponds (lagoons) for the temporary storage of the treated waste water before application to the
spray fields.
Solid Waste Handling Facility: A facility, the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment,
utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste (as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22 as
amended).
Special Flood Hazard Area: Floodprone land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In
absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, such areas shall be those designated by the Dooly
County Board of Commissioners.
Street: A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or semipermanent location on the ground, or
attached to something having permanent location on the ground.
Townhouse: A residential structure containing three or more attached single-family units designed as a single structure having
common or party walls. Each unit shall have its own front door which opens to the outdoors, and the units shall have two floors,
but without access between adjoining units.
Travel Trailer: A portable, vehicular structure not over eight feet wide by 35 feet long designed as a temporary dwelling for
travel, recreational and vacation uses, and which may or may not have kitchen equipment, toilet, lavatory and bathing facilities, but
if such facilities are included, a sewage holding tank for sanitary waste is required. Any vehicle designed or converted to a design
with plumbing connections for attachment to outside sewage systems shall not be included in this definition.
Travel Trailer Park: A parcel of land which has been planned and developed to accommodate two or more travel trailers, tents
or other camping units for temporary occupancy. Maximum length of occupancy of any tenant shall not exceed 60 consecutive
days.
Use, Permitted: Those uses specifically listed in this resolution as "uses permitted inherently" and conditional uses subject to
approval by the board of commissioners.
Use, Principal: The principal purpose for which a lot or building is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
Variance: A grant of relief or other modification of the requirements of this ordinance.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
91/137
Vehicle: Any device or contrivance for carrying or conveying persons or objects, said device being designed to be self-propelled
by its own motor or power.
Water System, Community: A potable water supply and treatment system other than an individual or public water system
serving more than one building, residence, manufactured or mobile home or other facility designed or used for human occupancy
or congregation. The system is one which is owned by a person or legal entity other than a unit of government.
Water System, Individual: A potable water system other than a community or public water system serving a single building,
residence, manufactured or mobile home, or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation.
Water System, Public: A potable water supply and treatment system, other than an individual or community water system,
owned by a unit of government.
ARTICLE I. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Sec. 1. - Statement of Purpose.
For purposes of this ordinance, the area of Dooly County outside the incorporated communities of Byromville, Dooling, Lilly,
Pinehurst, Unadilla and Vienna is divided into the land use districts or zones as set forth herein below, the boundaries of which are
shown on the official zoning map maintained by the Zoning Administrator.
Sec. 2. - Land Use Zones or Districts.
NAME SYMBOL
1. Agriculture AG
2. Community Commercial C-1
3. General Commercial C-2
4. Flood Hazard FH
5. Industrial I
6. Residential, Single Family R-1
7. Residential, Multi-Family R-2
8. Reserved R-3
9. Residential, Mobile Home Park R-4
10. Residential, Mobile Home Subdivision R-5
11. Wildlife Preservation WLD
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
92/137
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Sec. 2. - Interpretation of District Boundaries.
Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following street lines, land lot lines, militia district lines,
private lot lines or corporate limit lines, such lines existing at the time of passage of the zoning resolution shall
be construed to be such boundaries.
Where a district boundary divides a parcel, location of the district boundary shall be determined by use of the
map scale appearing on the official zoning map, unless clearly indicated otherwise by dimensions on the
zoning map.
Where a public right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the vacated property shall be considered as
being within the same zoning district as the adjoining property.
Where district boundaries are shown so as to indicate they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of
roads or highways, such boundaries shall be construed as being measured from or being parallel to the center
lines of such roads or highways. If no distance is provided, dimensions shall be determined by the use of the
map scale appearing on the official zoning map.
Where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, tract or parcel of land at the time such district boundary is
established, the use classification of the less-restrictive district may be extended to the property line of said lot,
tract or parcel, but shall not be extended a distance of more than 100 feet without the permission of the
Planning Commission.
Sec. 3. - Restrictions Upon Land, Building, and Structures.
Except as hereinafter provided:
Use - No building or land shall be used or occupied, and no structure, or part thereof, shall be moved or
altered, except in conformity with this resolution, as amended.
Percentage of lot occupancy - No structure shall be erected, moved or altered, nor shall any open space
surrounding any structure be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with
requirements established herein.
Density of dwelling units - No building or structure shall be erected or altered, nor shall any property be
occupied or used so as to exceed the density of dwelling units allowed under the requirements of this
resolution.
Yard use limitation - No yard or other space required herein for any building or structure shall be considered
for use in satisfying the yard or other space requirement for any other building or structure.
Screening - A solid, visual buffer, e.g., a wall or evergreen, extending six feet above ground may be required by
the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to lessen adverse and negative impacts of noise and/or
bright lights on surrounding properties, or to secure privacy when a commercial or industrial establishment is
located in proximity to existing residences. Such a buffer must extend eight feet high along the perimeter of a
salvage yard. The Planning Commission may impose this requirement, if it is determined conditions warrant,
after the commercial or industrial establishment begin operations.
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS
In addition to requirements stipulated elsewhere in this resolution, the use of land shall be subject to the following general
provisions.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
93/137
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Sec. 1. - Accessory Building.
An accessory building shall not be located less than ten feet from side or rear lot lines.
When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway, or similar
means, it shall be considered part of the principal building and shall comply with the yard/setback
requirements of the principal building.
No accessory building shall be constructed prior to construction of the principal use building, with the
exception of farm buildings in the agriculture district.
An accessory building shall not be closer to the right-of-way line of a side road than the required front yard
setback along said side road.
Sec. 2. - Automobile Service Station/Truck Terminals.
All fuel pumps and storage tanks shall be setback at least 25 feet from the nearest road right-of-way line.
Curb cuts (vehicular entrance or exit) for service stations shall not exceed 35 feet in width, and there shall not
be more than two curb cuts to a service station per road frontage. Two curb cuts on the same road frontage
shall be separated by a distance of not less than 25 feet. Curb cuts shall not be closer than 50 feet to the
nearest road intersection.
Where a service station abuts a residential district, the commercial land use must erect a solid evergreen
buffer, solid fence or wall at least six feet high along that portion of the boundary shared with the residential
district.
Sec. 3. - Corner Visibility.
No structure, plant(s) or other visual obstruction between the heights of two feet and 12 feet above grade elevation shall be
allowed or permitted within 25 feet of the intersection of two road rights-of-way, or the intersection of a road right-of-way and
railroad right-of-way.
Sec. 4. - Hardship Manufactured Homes/Travel Trailers.
The Planning Commission may recommend to the Board of Commissioners approval of a variance for residential use of one
hardship manufactured home or travel trailer on any residential site at any given time. The application for such a variance shall
follow the general procedures for a re-zoning, including advertisement and public hearing requirements. The placement of one
hardship manufactured home or travel trailer on an occupied residential lot may be allowed if it is determined that a genuine
hardship exists only by reason of medical disability and/or age-related infirmity, and the following variance criteria are met:
The subject occupant(s) of the manufactured home or travel trailer is a relative by blood or marriage of the
owner-occupant of the residential lot, and;
The applicant can provide the Planning Commission with a practicing physician's (MD) written certification of
medical disability or age-related infirmity of the subject occupant. This certification will be valid for a period of
one year from date of issuance. If an extension is needed a new application for hardship variance shall be
submitted, and;
Said manufactured home or travel trailer shall be removed from the premises within 60 days of the time the
specified disability ceases to exist;,and;
The manufactured home or travel trailer shall at no time be rented or otherwise occupied by anyone other
than the approved occupant(s), nor shall it be used for storage, or other similar uses, and;
The County Health Department inspects the subject site and approves the temporary placement of a second
dwelling on the proposed property, and;
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
94/137
6.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
The applicant and/or occupant(s) comply with other requirements which may be established by the Board of Com
the best interests of the public health, safety and general welfare.
Sec. 5. - Home Occupations.
The number of employees not living on-site shall be limited to two.
No internal or external physical alteration which would be inconsistent with residential use of the building shall
be permitted.
One sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, may be attached to the residence housing a home
occupation. No other display shall be used, and said sign shall not be illuminated.
No mechanical equipment shall be used for a home occupation except that which is normally used for
domestic or agricultural purposes.
Nursing or convalescent homes, child care centers, boarding houses, massage studios, restaurants or similar
establishments shall not be considered home occupations.
Sec. 6. - Limited Use Provision.
Upon receipt of a rezoning petition the Planning Commission may determine that development of a particular land use not
permitted or conditioned in the zoning classification in which the proposed site is located may have less impact than some of the
land uses permitted or conditioned in said zoning classification. In such an event, the Planning Commission may, in response to a
rezoning petition, recommend to the Board of Commissioners that the site in question be approved for development as a specific
limited use (e.g. beauty shop rather than for commercial development). Any such limited use must previously have been
specifically permitted or conditioned in at least one of the County's zoning classifications, however.
Sec. 7. - Lot Frontage.
Each lot containing a principal building shall have frontage of at least 100 feet on a publicly owned or maintained right-of-way,
except as may otherwise be stipulated herein. A variance may be permitted for lot frontage on a cul-de-sac, provided lot width at
the building line is not less than the frontage granted by variance.
Sec. 8. - One Principal Building Per Lot.
Only one principal structure or building and its customary accessory structures shall hereafter be placed or erected on any
residential lot. However, in the agriculture zone there shall be permitted as a matter of right, to any owner of property, as many as
four residential uses in addition to a principal residence on any parcel of land under single ownership where the following
conditions can be met:
Each such non-principal residential use shall occupy a land area of not less than one acre.
Each such land area shall be identified by permanent physical markers and assigned an address in accordance
with the County's system of addressing rural properties.
Each such land area shall receive approval from the County Health Department as to its suitability as a site for
an effective sanitary sewage disposal system designed to accommodate wastes generated by occupants of
said site.
A domestic water supply which satisfies the rules and regulations administered by the County Health
Department shall be available to each satellite user of this special provision.
No commercial use of this special provision shall be permitted.
Each such use shall have a minimum road frontage of 100 feet.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
95/137
7.
8.
9.
10.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
1.
Individual power supply sources shall be provided to each non-principal residential use under this special provisio
utility installation shall meet such standards as have been adopted by local authorities.
Facilities established under this special provision for residential use shall meet the requirements of local
construction and use codes established by the Dooly County Board of Commissioners.
Any change in use or occupancy must be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
Permits for construction will not be issued prior to approval of each of the aforementioned conditions.
Sec. 9. - Open Air Business.
Open air businesses shall blend with the rural environment in which they are permitted, and be compatible with surrounding
rural development. Open air business uses shall include the following:
Retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture,
playground equipment and other home garden supplies and equipment.
Retail sale of fruit and vegetables.
Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, miniature golf, golf driving range, children's
amusement park or similar recreation services.
Bicycle, trailer, motor vehicle, boat or home equipment sales, repair service or rental service.
Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools and similar uses.
Sec. 10. - Prohibited Uses in Residential Districts.
Parking or open storage of wrecked or junked vehicles, and/or power driven construction equipment is
prohibited in all residential zones. Storage of used lumber, metal or any other miscellaneous scrap or
salvageable material in quantities that exceed those needed for homeowner use is prohibited in all residential
zones.
Parking or storage of semi-tractor-trailer combinations, semi-tractors or semi-trailers, regardless of duration,
shall be prohibited in all residential zones.
Sec. 11. - Property Divided By a Zoning District Boundary Line.
Where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, tract or parcel of land at the time such district boundary is established, the use
classification of the less-restrictive district may be extended to the property line, but shall not be extended a distance of more than
100 feet without approval of the Planning Commission.
Sec. 12. - Protective Screening.
All plans for protective screening shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for prior approval of materials, their use and
the arrangement thereof. If, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, screening would serve no good purpose, the Commission
may waive protective screening requirements.
Residential Buffers - Where an industrial or commercial district abuts directly upon a residential district, a
landscaped greenbelt, not less than 20 feet wide, shall be established by and maintained by said industrial or
commercial developer along the industrial or commercial property's entire border with the residential zone.
Such greenbelt shall be planted with deciduous trees, evergreens, flowering trees and/or ornamental trees set
no closer than six feet to the fence or wall. The remainder of the landscaped area which is not planted with the
aforementioned stock shall be in well-kept lawn. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing
condition.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
96/137
2. Salvage Yard Buffers - A solid-faced fence eight feet high, and buffer strip eight feet wide, as defined herein, meet
standards designated by the Planning Commission, and providing an adequate visual shield, shall be erected alon
frontages and all sides visible from public roadways.
Sec. 13. - Agreement With Health Codes.
No requirement mandated herein shall be enforced where said requirement or provision is in conflict with public health, safety
and welfare codes enforced by the County Health Department.
ARTICLE III. - NONCONFORMING USES
Sec. 1. - Continued Use.
All legal land uses existing and active as of the effective date of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue in the same land
use, even if such land use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance. All such land uses shall be considered to be
nonconforming.
Sec. 2. - Extension and Alteration.
No permit shall be issued to physically extend or structurally alter a nonconforming land use except to make said use conform
to, or comply with, the provisions and requirements of this ordinance.
Sec. 3. - Abandonment.
A nonconforming use which has been discontinued for a continuous 12-month period shall not be reestablished. However, a
nonconforming, vacant, manufactured home slab foundation may be reestablished as a manufactured home site at any time
provided said use is reestablished in compliance with all applicable standards of the County Health Department. Any other use at
the site of a previously abandoned land use shall be in conformity with provisions of this ordinance.
Sec. 4. - Reestablishment/Restoration After Damage.
A nonconforming land use damaged by fire or by any other cause in an amount equal to 51 percent or more of the property
tax value on public record in the office of Dooly County Tax Assessor on the date such damage occurred shall not be allowed to
reestablish as the previous or any other nonconforming land use.
Sec. 5. - Restoration to a Safe Condition.
Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the restoration of any building to a safe and sanitary condition when required to do so
by the proper authorities of the County.
Sec. 6. - Change in Tenancy or Ownership.
Nonconforming land uses shall be allowed to continue under changes in tenancy, management and/or ownership.
Sec. 7. - Change in Use.
A nonconforming land use shall not be changed to another nonconforming land use.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
97/137
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Sec. 8. - Nonconforming Signs.
A nonconforming sign shall not be improved (other than for normal maintenance), altered or relocated except in conformance
with provisions of this ordinance.
Sec. 9. - Nonconforming Salvage Yards: Expansion and Screening.
All nonconforming salvage yard shall be made to conform with the general provisions of this ordinance within a two-year
period of ordinance adoption. Salvage yard expansion and screening requirements are as follows:
A screen eight feet high is required along the full perimeter of the salvage yard. If constructed, the screen must
be of wood, concrete or other materials approved by the Planning Commission. If planted, the vegetation
selected must be of a species and variety which, with the required proper maintenance will reach a minimum
height of eight feet within five years of planting. Both types of screen must be maintained so as to block the
view of the salvage yard, and help deflect, muffle or absorb noise generated by activities in the salvage yard.
Screening is intended to shield the view and reduce audible noise levels of salvage yards from surrounding
properties and roadways, and to protect surrounding properties from fire. Modification of these requirements
may be granted at the discretion of the Planning Commission when the requested modification does not
contravene the intent of these regulations. Requests for modification must be filed with the Zoning Officer and
require a public hearing.
No salvage yard existing at the time this ordinance is adopted shall be expanded unless it meets requirements
for screening.
ARTICLE IV. - AGRICULTURE ZONE AG
Sec. 1. - Statement of Purpose.
The Agriculture zone is established in recognition of the high incidence of prime farmland throughout the County, high rate of
farmer participation in the farmland preferential tax assessment program, the general population decline which has occurred in
the unincorporated area during the preceding 30-year period (1960-1990), projections which suggest little, if any, population
increase by the year 2010, and the relative absence of municipal utility services (water and sanitary sewer) in the unincorporated
area. There is no indication of appreciable change in land use, and the need is not so much to prevent development that might
conflict with future urban patterns as it is to protect the prevailing land use from conversion to land uses which would conflict with
and are detrimental to agriculture. The intent is to protect the right to farm while allowing non-agricultural land uses which are
compatible with agriculture, and which tend to support and serve the needs of residents and land use in the agriculture zone. Any
acreage proposed to be subdivided for residential or other use in this zone must be rezoned to the appropriate zoning
classification. Unless specifically zoned otherwise, all area beyond the incorporated limits of the towns and cities in Dooly County is
part of the agriculture zone.
Sec. 2. - Permitted Uses.
Agriculture (row crop), dairy farming, production of cattle, pork and/or poultry, horticulture, silviculture,
aquaculture, accessory uses and activities.
Commercial fishing pond.
Farm stand.
Horse stable.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
98/137
5.
6.
7.
A.
B.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
1.
Hunting club.
Open air business.
Residential and accessory uses, e.g., garage, detached home workshop, swimming pool, greenhouse.
Single-family.
Modular housing and mobile home for single-family.
Sec. 3. - Conditional Uses.
Applicant should document that less than half of the acreage proposed for conversion is prime farmland, or that the proposed
site is not suitable for agriculture due to adjoining land uses, etc.
Airfield.
Bed and Breakfast Inn.
Cemetery (church affiliated or commercial).
Church.
Day care, for adults or children.
Fraternal organization/private club.
Government owned building.
Group home.
Hospital, located on a state route.
Kennel.
Recreational and/or cultural uses of a commercial nature.
RV campground or camp site.
School, accredited nursery school and higher grades.
Tower, transmission or receiving, for radio, cellular telephone, etc.
Rural business.
Sec. 4. - Conicts.
By their very nature, some agricultural activities generate noises, odors and insect pests which are detrimental to nearby
occupants. To the extent they are a function of the size of the specific agricultural activity, the adverse or negative effects of some
of these noises, odors and insects can be mitigated somewhat by distance. For the purpose of mitigating said adverse and negative
impacts, minimum distances between agricultural activities and surrounding land uses are hereby (Sections 5 and 6) established
on the basis of low and high agricultural density levels.
Sec. 5. - Low Density Farm Animal Operations.
Farm animal operations of sizes smaller or equal to the following thresholds are classified as low density:
Farm Animal Threshold
dairy cows 100
ducks 100
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
99/137
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
horses 50
poultry 150
sheep 100
steers/heifers 100
swine 150
turkeys 150
All low density farm animal operations constructed or expanded adjacent to an existing, noncompatible land
use (e.g. residential) activity shall construct all buildings and fencing used for animal confinement (e.g., poultry
house, farrowing house) at least 150 feet from the center line of an adjoining public road, and 200 feet from
the property line of the adjoining, noncompatible land use. Confinement fencing is not to be confused with
boundary fencing, the latter of which may be constructed along the right-of-way and property line. The area
between confinement fencing and boundary fencing may be used for row crop, vegetable or orchard
production, or pasture. In the event said area is used for pasture it shall not be stocked at a rate higher than
recommended by generally accepted animal husbandry practices for open grazing of the specific animal
species. Where said area is grazed, fencing, as necessary, shall be erected around any surface feature, e.g.,
bog, to prevent livestock from congregating along boundary fencing adjacent to the property line of a
noncompatible land use. Livestock catch pens shall be allowed in this grazing area, provided the specific site
does not retain water.
The site(s) used to dispose or treat any waste or by-product of a low density farm animal operation shall be
located at least 150 feet from the center line of an adjoining public road, and at least 200 feet from the
property line of the adjoining, noncompatible land use.
Machinery and equipment used to ventilate animal confinement buildings must be installed in such a way that
air removed from said buildings is directed away from nearby development(s).
Any development proposed for a site adjacent to and not compatible with an existing low density farm animal
operation shall be constructed at least 150 feet from the centerline of the adjoining public road when said
development fronts the low density operation, and 200 feet from the adjoining property line, when said
development is adjacent to the low density operation.
Sec. 6. - High Density Farm Animal Operations.
Farm animal operations of sizes greater than the thresholds identified in Section 5 (Low Density Farm Animal
Operations) are classified as high density farm animal operations.
High density farm animal operations initiated, constructed or expanded adjacent to an existing, noncompatible
land use (e.g., residential) shall construct farm buildings and fencing used for animal confinement (e.g., poultry
house, farrowing house, feedlot) at least 1,500 feet from the center line of an adjoining public road, and 1,500
feet from the property line of the adjoining, noncompatible land use. Confinement fencing is not to be
confused with boundary fencing, the latter of which may be constructed along the right-of-way and property
line. The area between confinement fencing and boundary fencing may be used for row crop, vegetable or
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
100/137
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
A.
B.
C.
D.
5.
1.
2.
3.
orchard production, or pasture. In the event said area is used for pasture it shall not be stocked at a rate
higher than recommended by generally accepted animal husbandry practices for open grazing of the specific
animal species. Where said area is grazed, fencing, as necessary, shall be erected around any surface feature,
e.g., bog, to prevent livestock from congregating along boundary fencing adjacent to the property line of a
noncompatible land use. Livestock catch pens shall be allowed in this grazing area provided the specific site
does not retain water.
Any site(s) used for temporary storage, disposal or active or passive treatment of any waste or by-product of a
high density farm animal operation shall be located at least 1,500 feet from the center line of an adjoining
public road, and at least 1,500 feet from the property line of the adjoining, noncompatible land use.
Machinery and equipment used to ventilate animal confinement buildings must be installed in such a way that
air removed from said buildings is directed away from nearby development(s).
Any development proposed for a site adjacent to and noncompatible with an existing high density farm animal
operation shall be constructed at least 1,500 feet from the centerline of the adjoining road, when said
development fronts the high density operation, and 1,500 feet from the adjoining property line when said
development is adjacent to the high density operation.
Sec. 7. - Rural Business Uses Permitted, Prohibited and Development Standards.
A rural business shall be secondary or incidental to the primary use of property for agricultural or residential purposes. Such
business shall be primarily directed toward providing local or neighborhood services to rural-residential areas. Rural businesses
are intended to be of smaller size, intensity and scale than commercial uses that would be more commonly found in commercial
zoning districts. Rural businesses shall be similar to home occupations except that the activity can occur in an accessory structure
detached from the residence. In addition, an applicant for a rural business permit must be residing on the subject property prior to
any application being filed for consideration by the Planning Commission, and must maintain residency thereon.
Sec. 7-A. - Permitted Uses.
Offices.
Beauty and barber shops.
Retail sales or services of a specialty nature; antique shops, specialty foods, custom furniture, upholstery
shops, tailoring, taxidermist, custom made sporting goods, meat cutting as a retail service to the public;
however, no slaughtering or wholesale meat cutting or processing is permitted.
Small repair shops for appliances, machinery, farm equipment or automobiles with the following limitations:
Repair shops shall not create noise, noxious odors, bothersome illumination, traffic levels or any hazard
which would adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the adjoining property owners or the
neighborhood in general.
Outdoor storage of inoperable machinery, equipment or vehicles shall be prohibited.
No more than two vehicles shall actually be serviced, actively worked on or repaired at any one time.
All spare parts (new or used) shall be stored within an enclosed structure, and the storage space shall be
included in the total space allocated for the rural business.
Small businesses similar to the above, as approved by the Planning Commission.
Sec. 7-B. - Prohibited Uses.
Service stations, retail sale of gasoline, automated or do-it-yourself car washes.
Truck terminals, heavy equipment rental.
Industrial or manufacturing uses which require specialized equipment not ordinarily associated with
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
101/137
4.
5.
1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
agricultural and residential uses, e.g., forges, large milling machines, poultry or meat processing or packing
equipment (except as provided for above).
Drive-in theaters, restaurants, entertainment facilities, skating rinks or any use which as a result of its normal
operation would generate levels of vehicular traffic uncommon in the vicinity of the proposed development.
Any use which is clearly out of scale or character with an agricultural and sparsely developed residential area.
Sec. 7-C. - Development Standards.
The following standards shall apply to all rural businesses:
A permitted, rural business shall be valid only as long as the original petitioner owns and operates the
business and maintains a valid business license: the rural business use permit is not transferable. The rural
business use permit shall become void upon expiration of the business license. Any subsequent owner of
property previously permitted for a rural business use must apply to the Planning Commission for a rural
business use permit.
The property containing the site of the rural business must also be the bona fide residence of the
petitioner/business owner.
A rural business shall be located on property containing at least one acre of land, and the site upon which the
business is actually conducted shall not exceed one-half acre of land.
Only one non-illuminated sign, limited to a maximum of 16 square feet, shall be permitted. This sign may have
two faces of up to 16 square feet each, back to back, on one set of supports.
The following standards shall apply to all rural businesses unless the petitioner can demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Planning Commission that exemption from one or more of the standards will not result in adverse impacts on
surrounding property(ies). A modification of the following standards shall be permitted only if: (a) there are special
and unusual topographic conditions unique to the property or structure, or (b) the proposed use is clearly of such a
small scale, and will remain at such small scale that conducting or operating the business would not be obvious or
noticeable from the adjoining property or by the public in general, and (c) a modification of these development
standards may be approved only if the intent of the rural business is maintained.
The rural business must be located to the side or rear of the principal residence on the property.
Neither the structure in which the rural business is housed, nor the grounds on which rural business activity is
performed shall contain equipment which would not ordinarily be found in accessory structures in an
agricultural/residential district. The structure shall be readily and easily usable for customary agricultural and
residential uses. The architectural style shall be in keeping with surrounding agricultural and residential
development.
A rural business shall not exceed 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Off-road parking shall be provided as set out in Article XVI.
A rural business shall have no more than 15 employees who do not reside in the principal residence on-site.
ARTICLE V. - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL R-1
Sec. 1. - Statement of Purpose.
The Single-Family Residential zone is established to encourage development of single-family detached housing and to
discourage developments which would generate traffic levels and patterns on neighborhood roads in conflict with single-family
residential development.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
102/137
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
A.
B.
4.
5.
6.
7.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
8.
9.
1.
All structures used as dwellings constructed in an R-1 District shall have a minimum frontage, of not less than 30 feet and a
minimum depth of not less than 30 feet.
Sec. 2. - Permitted Uses.
Single-family residence constructed on-site.
Accessory buildings or uses (swimming pool, greenhouse, etc.) incidental to permitted use(s) when located on
the same lot and not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation.
Sec. 3. - Conditional Uses.
Bed and Breakfast Inn.
Churches, exclusive of cemeteries.
Clubs and fraternal organizations (non-profit) provided:
Buildings are constructed at least 50 feet from all property lines, and
A buffer strip at least ten feet wide is planted along side and rear lot lines.
Home occupations.
Hospitals, clinics, sanitariums, nursing homes, rest homes, residences for aged persons, orphanages, group
homes, half-way homes and personal care homes.
Public (governmental-owned) buildings and structures.
Recreational developments including, but not limited to lakes, swimming pools, golf courses, and golf driving
ranges, subject to Planning Commission approval of the developer's comprehensive site development plan
which must include:
Site map of not less than 1" = 400' scale.
The location and function of all buildings.
Proposed modifications of the natural landscape.
Location and surface treatment of all roadways.
Appropriate details of drinking water and sanitary facilities.
A timetable for build-out.
Schools (State certified/licensed) from nursery and day care through high school.
Towers for radio transmission and reception, not to exceed 180 feet high, and limited to the sole use of the
resident.
Sec. 4. - Minimum Lot Size
ARTICLE VI. - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-2
Sec. 1. - Statement of Purpose.
The Multi-Family Residential zone is established to provide for medium and higher density residential development than is
permitted in the Single Family Residential zone, housing choice and variety.
Sec. 2. - Permitted Uses.
Manufactured housing/mobile home.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
103/137
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
1.
A.
B.
a.
Modular housing.
Home occupation.
All uses permitted in the R-1 zone.
Duplex.
Sec. 3. - Conditional Uses.
Art, music, photographic, or dance studio.
Boarding home.
Cemetery (church affiliated).
Mobile home park.
Mobile home subdivision.
Mortuary.
Multi-family residential development - built on-site or modular (triplex, townhouse, apartment, etc.).
Professional office.
All uses conditioned in the R-1 zone.
ARTICLE VII. - MOBILE HOME PARK R-4
Sec. 1. - Statement of Purpose.
The Mobile Home Park zone is for planned development designed to accommodate mobile home parks for year round rental
housing. When such a development is proposed, the developer(s) must petition the Planning Commission to rezone the subject
parcel to R-4. If, after an appropriately advertised public hearing the subject parcel is rezoned to the R-4 designation, the developer
must submit to the Planning Commission a complete site plan for approval prior to any development taking place on the site.
Sec. 2. - Permitted Uses.
Manufactured housing/mobile home park.
Manufactured housing/mobile home.
Modular housing.
Sec. 3. - Conditional Uses.
Public facilities or structures.
Home occupations.
Sec. 4. - General requirements
All mobile home parks shall meet the following general requirements:
Establishment of Mobile Home Parks.
Mobile home parks shall consist of a minimum of 25 contiguous acres.
Developers proposing to develop a mobile home park shall file with the Planning Commission two copies
of a sketch plan drawn approximately to scale showing the following features in compliance with the
minimum requirements stated herein:
site location on a County map.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
104/137
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
C.
D.
2.
A.
B.
3.
A.
B.
1.
2.
3.
C.
parcel identification (owner(s), boundaries, and owners of adjoining properties).
identification of adjoining land uses.
setback from roadway centerlines.
type of fencing/buffer.
at least two entrances/exits.
interior street layout and street widths.
placement of accessory uses.
placement of mobile homes.
any additional information requested by the Zoning Administrator.
No construction or improvements shall commence on any land proposed for development as a mobile
home park prior to conditional approval of the required site plan.
Conditional approval of the site development plan is good for six months. If after six months significant
physical development has not been initiated on site, conditional approval shall be null and void. If the
mobile home park has not received a certificate of occupancy within 12 months of conditional approval,
conditional approval shall be null and void.
Previously Existing Mobile Home Parks.
Conformity - All manufactured home parks existing on the effective date of this ordinance are hereby
declared to be nonconforming, and shall be allowed to continue to exist and operate. However, such
manufactured home parks shall at all times conform to applicable minimum health and safety codes.
Expansion of Existing Manufactured Housing Park - A developer proposing to expand an existing
manufactured home park to include more home sites than are accommodated within such park at the
time this ordinance becomes effective, shall submit plans and specifications for such improvements to
the Planning Commission for conditional approval prior to initiating construction and improvements.
Expansion, improvements, reconstruction and/or redesign of existing parks shall conform to these
regulations.
Design Requirements - Mobile home parks shall conform to the following requirements:
Exterior Setbacks - Mobile home parks shall have privacy fencing erected around the perimeter. Said
fencing shall be at least six feet high and shall be erected 150 feet from, and parallel to, the centerline of
all public roads adjoining the mobile home park.
Interior Setbacks:
Mobile homes, mobile home accessory structures and mobile home park accessory structures shall
be a minimum distance of 15 feet from the park's perimeter fencing.
Mobile homes shall be located at least 20 feet from interior streets.
Mobile home stands shall be designed so as to provide a distance of at least 40 feet between mobile
homes.
Access - Mobile home parks shall have frontage of at least 100 feet on a public road, and at least two
access/exit points from adjoining public roads. If the mobile home park abuts two public roads, the
access/exit points shall be from/to the public road with the lower traffic volume. The distance between
these access/exit points as measured along the public roadway shall be in conformance with applicable
State or County requirements, as appropriate. Every mobile home site and assigned parking area shall
have direct access to the internal street system, but shall not have direct access to any public road. The
width and design of the access/exit drives shall be adequate to accommodate fire protection vehicles and
equipment.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
105/137
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Streets - Streets within a manufactured home park shall be privately owned, privately constructed, and priva
Interior streets shall be paved and drained to County specifications, with a minimum paved surface of ten fe
and 20 feet for two-way streets.
Parking - A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be assigned each mobile home stand. One
additional parking space must be provided for every five dwelling units to accommodate guests. Parking
on interior streets is prohibited. The required front yard area may be used to satisfy the minimum
parking requirement. Side and rear yards may not be utilized to satisfy minimum parking requirements.
Minimum Number of Spaces - A manufactured home park shall have a minimum of ten spaces prepared
with all required improvements in place before the park may be approved for occupancy.
Density - A maximum of six mobile homes, with required spacing as specified herein, may be placed on
any one acre in a mobile home park.
Length of Residential Occupancy - No mobile home nor mobile home stand located in a mobile home
park shall be rented for a period of less than 30 days.
Decals - No manufactured home in a manufactured home park shall be occupied until the proper decal
has been secured from and displayed in the manner prescribed by the Dooly County Tax Commissioner,
and the appropriate HUD (Department of Housing and Urban Development) sticker is attached to the
manufactured home.
Mobile Home Inspection - It shall be the responsibility of the mobile home park owner to schedule an
inspection of the mobile home and mobile home stand for compliance with all terms and provisions
herein prior to placement/set-up of any mobile home in said mobile home park.
Issuance of Permit - It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to inspect each mobile home
park and each mobile home therein once each year to determine that same are in compliance with
applicable codes. During the course of said inspection the Administrator shall issue a permit for each
mobile home unit found to be in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. Said permit shall be
valid for a period of one year from the date of issue. Mobile homes found to be in violation shall have 30
days to be brought into compliance with all applicable codes before occupants thereof will be forced to
vacate the premises and the substandard unit is removed from the park.
Sec. 5. - Improvements.
Mobile home parks constructed, and expansions/enlargements made to existing mobile home parks after the effective date of
this ordinance shall be provided the following minimum improvements:
Utilities - The mobile home park owner shall provide a method of sanitary sewerage collection and treatment,
and a potable water supply system approved by the County Health Department.
Utility Placement - All sanitary sewer, water, and where used, gas lines, shall be placed a minimum of 18 inches
below the site's finished grade level. Electrical service lines, likewise, shall be placed underground. The water
system shall be equipped with adequate valve systems to allow the cutoff of utility service to a mobile home
stand at the mobile home stand and at the entrance of the utility service from the stand to the trunk line of the
utility system.
Easements - Publicly dedicated easements of proper size for their respective, intended purposes shall be
provided within the park if individual mobile home stands and accessory park uses are to be serviced by a
public utility system.
Lighting - All recreation areas (required for developments of ten residential units or more), park
entrances/exists, interior streets, and walkways shall be illuminated to provide at least three-tenths foot
candles of lighting.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
106/137
5.
6.
A.
B.
C.
7.
A.
B.
C.
8.
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
Garbage and Refuse - Fenced and paved garbage and refuse service areas shall be reserved within the park, and s
conform to all applicable County solid waste ordinances.
Walkways -
General Requirements - All mobile home parks shall be provided with convenient, pedestrian walkways of
adequate width to provide for pedestrian safety. Walkways shall be durable and well maintained.
Common Walkway System - A common, paved, walkway system shall be provided and maintained
between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common walks shall have a minimum
width of three and one-half feet.
Individual Walkways - All mobile home stands shall be connected via individual walkways to common
walkways, or to interior streets, or to driveways or parking spaces reserved for the mobile home stand.
Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of two feet.
Manufactured Home Stands - Each mobile home stand shall be required to be provided with the following
minimum accommodations:
Interior Street Access: Each stand shall be provided with interior street frontage of at least 20 feet.
Electric Power Supply: Each stand shall be provided with a properly grounded, water-proofed, electrical
receptacle. A properly sized over-current device shall be installed as part of each power outlet. Said
fixtures shall meet the standards established by applicable County codes.
Stand Identification: A property and street number designation or other appropriate numbering device
properly identifying each mobile home stand shall be placed at the interior side lot line at a point ten to
15 feet from the interior road system to the park. Such device shall be clearly visible from the street and
shall be embossed with reflectorized glaze for the numbers. Such numbers shall be a minimum of six
inches in height.
Recreation - Mobile home parks of ten units or more must reserve an area for outdoor recreation use of park
residents of not less than 90 square feet per manufactured home stand.
Sec. 6. - Accessory Uses Permitted.
The following establishments of a commercial nature may be permitted as customary accessory uses in a manufactured home
park, provided such uses do not occupy more than ten percent of total park area, are located a minimum distance of 100 feet from
any adjoining property line or street right-of-way, and are primarily intended for the convenience of and service to occupants of
the manufactured home park:
Coin-operated laundry.
Coin-operated vending machines of types allowed under applicable County codes.
One or more signs which identify the name of the park and/or service(s) provided park residents, regulate
traffic or provide for the convenience and welfare of park residents.
Sec. 7. - Area, Height, Placement and Development Requirements (In accordance with Schedule of Regulations.
Sec. 8. - Other requirements.
Additions - Any addition to a mobile home or accessory building shall comply with applicable requirements of
the Building, Electrical, Plumbing and Gas Codes.
Foundations - All residential and accessory buildings shall be placed on properly engineered foundations which
meet applicable installation requirements and applicable state and local codes.
Siding material - All mobile homes shall have exterior siding materials consisting of either wood, masonry,
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
107/137
4.
5.
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
4.
concrete, stucco, hard-board siding, or metal lap. The exterior siding material shall extend to ground level,
except that when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation (under-pinning) is used, the siding
material need not extend below the top of the foundation.
Tie-down - All mobile homes shall be secured to their respective sites in accordance with applicable state
codes.
Certificate of Occupancy - Satisfactory compliance with all permitting and inspection requirements shall be
achieved before the Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
ARTICLE VIII. - MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION R-5
Sec. 1. - Statement of Purpose.
The Manufactured Home Subdivision Zone district is for planned development designed to accommodate mobile home
residency by homeowners.
When such a development is proposed, the developer(s) must petition the Planning Commission to rezone the subject parcel
to R-5. If, after an appropriately advertised public hearing the subject parcel is rezoned to the R-5 designation, the developer must
submit to the Planning Commission a complete site plan for approval prior to any development taking place on the site.
Sec. 2. - Permitted Uses.
Manufactured homes.
Any use permitted in the single-family residential (R-1) district.
Sec. 3. - Conditional Uses.
Any use conditioned in the single-family residential (R-1) district.
Sec. 4. - Minimum Lot Sizes.
Lot size shall be the same as in the single-family residential (R-1) district.
Sec. 5. - Minimum Yard Requirements.
Yard requirements shall be the same as in the single-family residential (R-1) district.
Sec. 6. - Minimum Improvements.
A manufactured home shall be placed on a concrete block foundation with poured concrete footing 16 inches
by 16 inches by four inches thick. Skirting or under-pinning of fiberglass, metal or masonry materials shall be
placed so as to completely enclose the understructure.
Wind-load anchors (tie-downs) capable of sustaining wind velocities of 70 miles per hour shall be installed.
All manufactured homes must have a HUD approved plate or sticker and comply with applicable codes of the
County and state. No manufactured home built or constructed before 1976 may be located in Dooly County.
The roadway system in manufactured home subdivisions shall have grading, drainage, road base and road
paving improvements all in conformance with County road development standards. All roadway improvements
will be checked and inspected during construction by the County Public Works Department.
ARTICLE IX. - COMMUNITY BUSINESS C-1
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
108/137
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Sec. 1. - Statement of Purpose.
The Community Business zone is established to encourage development of retail and service businesses which cater primarily
to the needs of the nearby resident population, but which do not create undue hazards, offensive and loud noise, vibration, smoke,
glare, heavy truck traffic, or late hours of operation. It is also intended that community or neighborhood businesses be
concentrated at sites which are mutually beneficial to both the business and customer, and which promote wise use of land
resources.
Sec. 2. - Permitted Uses.
Barber and beauty shop.
Custom dressmaking and tailoring.
Eating and/or drinking place in which there is no dancing, floor show or other live entertainment.
Laundry and/or dry cleaning, and coin-operated laundry.
Office for business, profession or government.
Repair shop for electrical or other household appliances; locks, radio, television, etc.
Retail business selling convenience goods and serving the apparel, prescription drug, food needs, etc., of the
immediately surrounding community.
Sec. 3. - Conditional Uses.
Churches.
Hospital, animal hospital, sanitarium for care of patients with mental disabilities, or alcohol or other drug
addictions.
Public (government-owned) buildings.
Schools.
Tower for transmission and/or reception of radio and telephone signals, radio studio.
Travel trailer park.
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL COMMERCIAL C-2
Sec. 1. - Statement of Purpose.
The General Commercial zone is established to provide for and encourage development of a wide variety of sales and services
in response to the broader commercial needs of the County.
Sec. 2. - Permitted Uses.
Amusement enterprises (indoor), theaters, bowling alleys, skating rinks, pool rooms.
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics.
Automobile and manufactured home sales.
Bottling and canning plant.
Car wash.
Catalog and mail order houses.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
109/137
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
A.
Communication related businesses (no tower).
Construction company with heavy equipment storage.
Construction and special trade contractor sales and services provided all outdoor storage is screened from
public right-of-way.
Credit institutions, depository or non-depository.
Electronic, HVAC, radio, television and appliance repair.
Fabrication and manufacturing businesses employing nor more than 25 workers in the office and
manufacturing operations, such as a small tool and die shop, dental surgical and optical goods manufacturing.
Flea market (indoor).
Gasoline service stations.
Manufactured home dealers, automobile sales lots.
Medical and dental laboratories.
Mini-warehouses.
Mortuary, funeral home, ambulance service.
Motel, hotel.
Museum.
Nursery, greenhouse (retail).
Physical fitness facility.
Professional offices and clinics: medical, dental, photographic, real estate, insurance, personnel, advertising,
surveying, accounting, engineering, architectural, securities and investment office, travel agency, social service
agency, data processing.
Public meeting hall, lodge hall.
Public utility structure.
Restaurant and other retail food establishment.
Retail store or service including the manufacture/fabrication on site of articles sold at retail, provided such
manufacture/fabrication is incidental to the retail activity.
Travel trailer park.
Wholesaling.
All uses Permitted in the C-1 zone.
Sec. 3. - Conditional Uses.
Boarding home.
Cemetery.
Church.
Communication related business with or without tower.
Correctional institution, jail, detention center.
Flea market (outdoor).
Hospital.
Manufactured home park.
Night club, lounge, club or fraternal organization not operating for profit provided:
buildings are at least 50 feet from property lines.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
110/137
B.
10.
11.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
12.
13.
14.
15.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
a buffer strip at least ten feet wide is planted along side and rear lot lines.
Petroleum (liquefied gas) dealers.
Recreational development including, but not limited to private or public lake, swimming pool, golf course, golf
driving range, or other recreational developments subject to Planning Commission approval of the developer's
comprehensive site development plan which must include:
site map of not less than 1" = 400'.
the location and function of all buildings
proposed modifications to the natural landscape.
location and surface treatment of all roadways.
appropriate details of drinking water and sanitary facilities.
timetable for build-out.
Schools.
Signs for general advertising which are located at least 30 feet from public right-of-way, and maintaining a
minimum clearance of eight feet between grade level and bottom of sign.
Warehousing and wholesalers.
All uses Conditioned in the C-1 zone.
ARTICLE XI. - INDUSTRIAL I
Sec. 1. - Statement of Purpose.
The Industrial zone is established to provide suitable area for industrial development and manufacturing.
Sec. 2. - Permitted Uses.
Agricultural services.
Heavy construction contractors.
Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, repair and servicing of products with the exception of the following:
Exceptions:
beef fertilizer lime
cement sh paper and pulp
chemicals glue plaster of paris
corrosive acid gelatin pork
explosives gypsum poultry
Motor freight transportation.
Public utility structure.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
111/137
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
1.
2.
3.
Retailing.
Services.
Warehousing and storage.
Wholesaling.
Any use Permitted in the C-1 or C-2 zones.
Sec. 3. - Conditional Uses.
Airports and landing fields.
Asphalt plant.
Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacturing.
Chemical plant.
Commercial incinerator.
Corrosive acid or alkali storage and manufacturing.
Explosives manufacturing or storage.
Fertilizer manufacturing other than blending.
Fish, poultry, beef and pork processing.
Hazardous waste facilities.
Salvage yards, automobile salvage yards or scrap metal processors.
Lumber yards, planing and sawmills.
Manufacture of glue or gelatin.
Manufacture and storage of gas including, but not limited to butane, propane, chlorine, or other toxic, noxious
or pyrophoric gases.
Paper and pulp manufacturing.
Petroleum bulk plants.
Processing of silica, clays and other soils.
Recycling centers.
Rendering plants.
Slaughter houses and stock yards.
Any use Conditioned in the C-1 or C-2 zones.
ARTICLE XII. - FLOOD HAZARD ZONE FH
Sec. 1. - Statement of Purpose.
The Food Hazard zone is established to promote public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
require that land uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against
flood damage at the time of initial construction;
restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards,
or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion;
control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
112/137
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which well unnaturally divert flood waters or which may inc
hazards to other lands; and
control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channel, and natural protective barriers which are involved
in the accommodation of flood waters.
More specifically, this zone is established to:
protect human life and health;
minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a
manner as to minimize flood blight areas;
to minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
to minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the
expense of the general public;
to minimize prolonged business interruptions;
to insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 2. - District Boundaries.
The Flood Hazard zone boundary of this ordinance shall be synonymous and coterminous with the areas of Special Flood
Hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the Flood Insurance Rate Map with an effective date of June
4, 1996, and any subsequent revisions thereto. The Planning Commission may also include those areas known to have flooded
historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but which have not been
incorporated in the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Sec. 3. - Permitted Uses.
The Flood Hazard zone is an overlay zone which applies to all other zones identified herein to the extent to which Special Flood
Hazard areas identified by FEMA in the FIRM map overlap with the other zones. The flood hazard zone does not consist of
permitted and conditional uses, but imposes conditions for development on all permitted uses, and additional conditions on
conditional uses enumerated in all other zones. In reviewing plans for development in the flood hazard zone the Planning
Commission shall be guided by the following standards:
Any structure or filling of land permitted shall be of a type not appreciably damaged by flood waters.
Any structure or filling of land permitted shall be designed, constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer
minimum obstruction to, and effect upon, the flow of water.
Any structure, equipment or material permitted shall be firmly anchored to prevent it from floating away, and
thus damaging other structures and threatening to obstruct bridge openings and other restricted sections of
the stream.
Where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, topographic data, engineering and other studies are
needed to determine the effects of flooding on a proposed structure or fill and/or the effect of the structure or
fill on the flow of water, the Planning Commission may require the applicant to submit such data or other
studies prepared by competent engineers or other technical people.
The granting of approval of any structure or land use in the floor hazard zone shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind or nature by Dooly County or by any officer or employee
thereof, of the practicality or safety of any structure or use proposed, and shall create no liability upon or
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
113/137
1.
2.
3.
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
3.
cause action against such public body, officer or employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
ARTICLE XIII. - WILDLIFE PRESERVATION WLD
Sec. 1. - Statement of Purpose.
The Wildlife Preservation zone is created in recognition of the natural wildlife resources, both plant and animal, which make
positive contributions to the local quality of life. These resources must be protected from the development they so often attract.
Sec. 2. - Permitted Uses.
Agricultural row-crop, timber production and harvesting, and other activities consistent therewith. None of the
acreage in forestland/woodland at the time-this ordinance becomes effective shall be converted to any use
other than forestland/woodland, except as provided hereinbelow.
Single-family residential.
Hunting and fishing lodges/camps.
Sec. 3. - Limitations on Development.
The following thresholds shall apply to development in the wildlife preservation zone.
On parcels of public record of three acres or less as of the effective date of this ordinance, a maximum of
one acre may be developed.
The maximum developable area on parcels of public record as of the effective date of this ordinance
which are greater than three acres and up to 50 acres is two and one-half percent.
The maximum developable area on parcels of public record as of the effective date of this ordinance
which are greater than 50 acres is two and one-half percent, not to exceed ten acres.
No improved roads shall be constructed. All existing, interior roads must maintain a dirt surface.
Harvest of hardwood trees shall be limited to trees with a diameter of 16 inches and larger at breast height.
ARTICLE XIV. - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
Zone Minimum
Lot Area
per dwelling
unit
MinimumLot
Width
Ft.
Front
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Rear
Yard
Setback
Maximum
Height
Ft.
AG 2.5 AC 150 150' 50' 50'
Low Density 2.5 AC - 150' 200' 200'
High Density - - 1,500' 1,500' 1,500'
C-1 1 AC - - - - 40'
C-2 1 AC - - - - 40'
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
114/137
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
FH - - - - - -
I - - - - - -
R-1 1 AC 150' 150' 25' 50' 40'
R-2 1/2 AC 125' 125' 20 30 40'
R-3
R-4 25 AC -
R-5 1 AC -
WLD 1 AC 40'
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Does not apply to R-4 district
ARTICLE XV. - SIGN REGULATIONS
Sec. 1. - Signs Shall Meet Requirements of This Section.
All signs within Dooly County shall be erected, constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards of this article and
applicable sections of the Dooly County Building Code, and only those signs that are permitted by these regulations shall be
erected within the County.
Sec. 2. - Signs Not Requiring a Permit.
The following signs shall not require a permit:
Signs to regulate traffic.
Signs required to be posted by law.
Warning signs and no trespassing signs.
Signs posted by governmental agencies.
Signs indicating bus stops, taxi stands and similar transportation facilities.
Signs not exceeding ten square feet in area giving information concerning the location of off-road parking
facilities or loading and unloading facilities.
Temporary real estate signs limited to a maximum of ten square feet on a residentially zoned piece of
property, and temporary real estate signs in any zone other than residential limited to a maximum of 32
square feet.
Temporary signs on private land related to campaigns of religious, charitable, civic, fraternal, political and
similar organizations.
(27)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
115/137
9.
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
3.
1.
A.
B.
2.
A.
B.
C.
a.
b.
D.
E.
F.
Construction signs and temporary subdivision signs limited to a maximum of 50 square feet.
Sec. 3. - No Signs Shall Hamper Trac Safety.
No sign shall be erected or continued that:
Obstructs sight distance along a public right-of-way.
Would tend by its location, color or nature to be confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals,
or to be confused with a flashing light of an emergency vehicle.
Would by its nature or moving parts tend to confuse traffic or create any potential hazard to traffic.
Uses admonitions such as "stop," "go," "slow," "danger" etc., which might be confused with traffic directional
signals.
Sec. 4. - Illumination Not To Be a Nuisance.
Illumination devices such as, but not limited to, flood or spot lights shall be so placed and so shielded as to prevent the rays or
illumination therefrom from being cast into neighboring structures and/or onto approaching or passing vehicles.
Sec. 5. - Standards for Permanent Signs On-Site.
Standards for point-of-business signs, incidental use signs, bulletin boards and identification signs:
Maximum area of sign shall be 150 square feet.
Maximum height, 40 feet.
Signs located at ground level shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from the road right-of-way line, or shall be
located on the right-of-way line with a minimum clearance under the sign of 10 feet.
Sec. 6. - Standards for O-Site Advertising Signs (Billboards).
Off-site advertising signs shall be allowed only in the following zones:
C-2 (general commercial).
I (industrial).
Off-site Advertising Sign Requirements:
Sign Surface Area:
Minimum - 72 square feet per face.
Maximum - 300 square feet per face.
Maximum number of signs: Only one sign per sign structure, although double-faced (back-to-back) signs
on the same support structure are permitted.
Height: Maximum —
Arterial Road Location - 35 feet to bottom of sign.
All other locations where allowed - 18 feet to bottom of sign.
Minimum clearance required under sign shall be ten feet.
Minimum Setback: 15 feet from the nearest road right-of-way line, and 35 feet from the intersection of
any two roadway/railroad rights-of-way.
Minimum Spacing: 750 feet between billboards on the same side of the road.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
116/137
G.
H.
3.
4.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1.
A.
B.
C.
a.
b.
c.
2.
There shall be no roof-mounted billboards.
No vehicle, motorized or nonmotorized, shall be driven or towed to a site for the purpose of being used
as stationary advertising.
Priority of Signs:
Where the location of two or more off-site advertising signs conflict under the requirements of this ordinance,
the sign meeting the requirements of this ordinance and having the earliest dated permit for its erection shall
have priority over other signs in conflict herewith.
Off-site advertising signs shall not be established within 100 feet of any church, school, cemetery, public park,
public playground, railroad intersection or residential district.
Sec. 7. - Standards for Portable Signs.
Permits for portable signs shall be valid for one year and may be renewed. A permit may be granted for the erection of one
portable sign on the premises of a business or institution provided the portable sign shall:
Not exceed 40 square feet in sign surface area.
Not utilize flashing illumination.
Not utilize colored lights (red, green, blue, yellow, etc.) which might be confused with traffic signals.
Be set back a minimum of 15 feet from road right-of-way.
Not be allowed in a parking space that is required to meet the minimum parking requirements established by
this ordinance.
Not be allowed in any residential district.
Be placed only in a commercial or industrial zone.
Not be placed or mounted on a roof; and
Nonconforming portable signs shall be removed or made to conform to this ordinance within six months from
the effective date of this ordinance.
Sec. 8. - Issuance of Permits, Administration and Filing Procedure.
Filing Procedure: Application for permits to erect, hang or place a sign shall be submitted on forms obtainable
from the Zoning Administrator. Each application shall be accompanied by:
Site plan showing proposed location of the sign.
Size, character and method of illumination, if any.
The exact location proposed for such sign, and in the case of a projecting sign:
proposed method of fastening sign to the building.
vertical distance between sign and finished grade, and
horizontal distance between sign and road right-of-way.
Additional Information - Each applicant shall submit any additional information deemed necessary by the
Zoning Administrator.
ARTICLE XVI. - PARKING
Sec. 1. - Parking Requirements.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
117/137
In all zones off-road parking spaces for the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants,
employees and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected or enlarged after the effective date of this ordinance shall be provided
as herein prescribed.
Required parking spaces shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon so long as said main building or structure
remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this ordinance. The owner or
owners of a building structure or other land use requiring off-street parking spaces must show, to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator, that he is the record title holder of the property devoted to said principal land use and of the property proposed for
off-street parking use, or that he is the lessee of such property.
Sec. 2. - Location of Parking Space for Other Land Uses.
The off-street parking facilities required for all other uses shall be located on the lot or within 1,000 feet of the permitted use
requiring such off-street parking, such distance to be measured along lines of public access to the property between the nearest
point of the parking facility to the building to be served.
For any proposed land use not included in the following section in this ordinance, the parking requirements shall be the same
as those which apply to the land use most similar to the proposed land use. The Zoning Administrator shall determine which of the
listed land uses is most similar to the proposed land use.
Sec. 3. - O-Road Parking Standards.
USE NUMBER OF
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
1. Apartment and Multi-family dwelling Two spaces for each dwelling unit plus 1 space for each
10 units for travel trailers, boats, and other vehicles.
2. Apartments for the Elderly One space for each dwelling unit.
3. Appliance Store One space for each 400 square feet of gross oor area.
4. Auditorium, stadium, assembly hall,
gymnasium, theater, community
(a) one space per three xed seats in largest assembly
or area, or (b) or one space for each 40 square feet of
oor area available for the recreation center
accommodation of movable seats in the largest
assembly room, or combination of xed and movable
seats; or (c) one space per each 150 square feet of
gross oor area; whichever is greatest.
5. Automobile Fueling Stations One space (in addition to service area) for each pump
and grease rack and one space for each two employees
during period of greatest employment but not less than
four spaces.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
118/137
6. Automobile Parts and Accessories One space for each 400 square feet of gross oor area.
7. Automobile sales and repair, service
stations and auto washeterias
Same as Use 5 above plus one space for each 500
square feet of gross oor area of the shop or
washerteria.
8. Automobile Service and
Appliance Centers
One space for each 400 square feet of retail area plus
two spaces for each service bay.
9. Bowling Alley Four spaces per alley plus requirements for any other
use associated with the establishment such as a
restaurant, etc.
10. Club or Lodge One space for each two employees plus one space for
each 200 square feet of gross oor area within the
main assembly area plus additional spaces for other
uses permitted within the premises.
11. Church One space per four seats in main place of assembly.
12. Combined Uses Parking spaces shall be the total of the spaces required
for each separate use established by this schedule.
13. Dance School One space for each employee plus one space per 150
square feet of gross oor area plus safe and convenient
loading and unloading of students.
14. Duplex Dwelling Unit One unpaved space per each unit. Residential
driveways will satisfy this need.
15. Financial Institution One space of each 250 square feet of gross oor area
and two waiting spaces for each drive-thru window.
16. Funeral Home Six spaces per viewing room or one space for each 50
square feet of chapel used for services.
17. Furniture Store One space for each 400 square feet of gross oor area.
18. Golf Course Two spaces for each hole and one space for each two
employees plus requirements for any other use
associated with the golf course.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
119/137
19. Grocery Store (including small
convenience type food store)
One space for every 250 square feet of gross oor area.
20. High Schools, Trade Schools,
Colleges and Universities
One space for each teacher, employee and
administrative personnel plus safe and convenient
loading of students plus ve spaces for each classroom.
21. Hospital One space for each bed plus one space for each
employee (nurse, attendant, etc.) Per shift plus one
space for each sta or visiting doctor.
22. Hotel/Motel One space for each guest room suite, or unit plus one
space for each two employees.
23. Indoor and outdoor recreational
areas (commercial)
(a) one space for each 150 square feet of gross oor,
building, ground area or combination devoted to such
use; or (b) one space per each four seats or facilities
available for patron use, whichever is greater.
24. Industrial or manufacturing
establishment or warehouse
Two spaces for each three employees on shift of
greatest employment, plus one space for each vehicle
used directly in the conduct of the business.
25. Kindergarten, nursery schools
and day care
One space for each employee plus safe and convenient
loading of children.
26. Nightclubs One space for each 100 square feet of gross oor area
plus one space for each employee.
27. Nursing Home One space for each two beds plus one space for each
employee on shift of greatest employment.
28. Oce, professional building
or similar use
One space for each 350 square feet of the gross oor
area or one space for each two employees, whichever is
greater.
29. Personal service establishment One space for every 350 square feet of the gross oor
area, or one space for each two employees, whichever
is greater.
30. Repair Shop One space for every 300 square feet of gross oor area
plus one space for each employee.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
120/137
31. Restaurant or place dispensing
food, drink, or refreshments to
be consumed on the premises
One space for each 100 square feet of gross oor area
with a minimum of ten parking spaces.
32. Restaurant or place dispensing
food, drink or refreshments for
carry out only
(and having outdoor seating area)
One space for each 100 square feet of gross oor area
(with a minimum of ten spaces for this); plus one
additional space for each three outdoor seats provided.
33. Restaurant or place dispensing
food, drink or refreshments for
carry out (no seating provided)
One space for each 150 square feet of gross oor area;
with a minimum of ten parking spaces.
34. Restaurant or place dispensing
food, drink or refreshments to
be consumed on the premises and
also having a drive-thru service
One space for each 100 square feet of gross oor area;
with a minimum of ten parking spaces and providing an
adequate lane for thru trac which will not obstruct
the required parking and driveway for the restaurant.
35. School, elementary One space for each teacher one space for each two
employees, and administrative personnel, and one for
each classroom, plus safe and convenient loading and
unloading of students.
36. Shopping Center (if over 35,000
square feet of gross oor area)
One space for every 300 square feet of gross oor area.
37. Shopping Center (if 35,000 square
feet or less of gross oor area)
One space for every 350 square feet of gross oor area.
38. Swimming Pool One space for each 200 square feet of water surface
area plus requirements for additional uses in
association with the establishment such as a
restaurant, etc.
39. Trailer Park One space for each trailer stall plus one space for each
two employees.
40. Retail stores of all types not
mentioned otherwise
One space for every 300 square feet of gross oor area.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
121/137
41. Wholesale Establishment One space for each employee plus sucient spaces to
accommodate vehicles used in the conduct of the
business.
Sec. 4. - Handicapped Parking Requirements.
In all zones where parking standards require the provision of six or more spaces, handicapped parking shall be provided in
accordance with the following scale. Handicapped parking spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width, located convenient to the
building entrances, and credited to the total parking requirements.
TOTAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS HANDICAPPED SPACES REQUIRED
1 - 25 1
26 - 50 2
51 - 75 3
76 - 100 4
101 - 150 5
151 - 200 6
201 - 300 7
301 - 400 8
401 - 500 9
500 + 2% of total
ARTICLE XVII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.
Sec. 1. - Statement of Purpose.
(28)
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
122/137
1.
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
There is hereby created, simultaneous with enactment of this ordinance, the Office of Zoning Administrator of Dooly County.
The individual occupying this office shall administer said ordinance in cooperation with the Dooly County Planning Commission
and the Dooly County Board of Commissioners.
Sec. 2. - Zoning Administrator
Appointment: The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the Dooly County Board of Commissioners.
Duties and authority: In administering the provisions of this ordinance the Zoning Administrator shall:
Serve as Administrative Secretary to the Planning Commission.
Establish a system with which to maintain public records concerning the administration of this ordinance,
including all maps, amendments, certificates of zoning compliance, conditional uses, variances, records of
public hearings, other records relevant hereto, and see that such records and documents are maintained
in current status.
Issue certificates of zoning compliance for all permitted uses, for conditional uses and variances
recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the Dooly County Board of Commissioners.
Collect data and keep informed on matters of zoning administration and practice in order to make sound
recommendations to the Planning Commission.
Undertake other duties as may from time to time be delegated or assigned by the Dooly County Board of
Commissioners.
Sec. 3. - Text or Map Amendments.
After due notice and public hearing the Dooly County Board of Commissioners may supplement, modify, vary or change the
boundaries of zoning districts or the requirements of the resolution by adopting amendments to the zoning map or text.
Initiation of Amendment: Amendments to the zoning map or text may be proposed by the Board of
Commissioners, the Planning Commission, or by any owner of property within the area proposed for change.
Procedure: An application for amendment shall be filed with the office of the Zoning Administrator at least 30
days prior to the date on which the request is to be considered by the Planning Commission.
Review by the Planning Commission: No amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been reviewed,
and a public hearing held, by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall have 30 days following
the public hearing within which to submit a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners. If the Planning
Commission fails to submit a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners within 30 days after the public
hearing, the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have approved the proposal.
Public hearing: The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on an application for amendment. Notice
of the time and place shall be publicized at least 15 days or not more than 45 days before the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in Dooly County.
Fee: Each application for rezoning by amendment shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount
established by the Dooly County Board of Commissioners to partially defray administrative costs. Refer to
Article XVII.
Minimize time between applications: A property owner shall not resubmit a proposal of zoning amendment
affecting the same property more than once in a six-month period, unless the applicant can show that the
conditions upon which the previous denial were based have substantially changed.
Sec. 4. - Zoning Policies and Procedures.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
123/137
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
5.
6.
1.
Policies and Procedures are herein established to provide guidelines for the following zoning activities.
The adoption of a new County Zoning Ordinance.
The adoption of an amendment which changes the text of the ordinance (Text Amendment).
The adoption of an amendment which rezones property from one zoning classification to another. (Map
Amendment).
The procedural requirements for amendments sponsored by the Dooly County Board of Commissioners.
The procedural requirements for amendments sponsored by a property owner or agent.
Sec. 5. - Policies and Procedures for County Initiated Zoning Changes.
In the case of amendments to the text or map of this ordinance, the Planning Commission and the Board of
Commissioners will, where appropriate, utilize any new or existing land use studies, land use plans or other
relevant documents as a resource. The Dooly County Board of Commissioners will hold at least one public
hearing on any proposed amendment to this ordinance.
Public hearing notices will be published within a newspaper of general circulation within Dooly at least one
time and at least 15 days prior to and not more than 45 days before the public hearing. The public notice will
state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing.
Public hearings will be convened at the advertised time and place and will be presided over by the appropriate
official.
The presiding officer of each respective public hearing will open the hearing by reviewing the following
operating procedures.
Those individuals wishing to address the Planning Commission and County Commission at their
respective hearings must first be recognized by the presiding officer for the purpose of speaking. Those
addressing the Commission must first identify themselves by first and last names, and give their home
road address, and where appropriate, business road address.
The presiding officer shall recognize one representative to speak on behalf of those supporting the
question before the Commission for a time not to exceed ten minutes.
The presiding officer shall recognize one representative to speak on behalf of those opposing the
question before the Commission for a time not to exceed ten minutes.
The presiding officer shall then grant a three-minute rebuttal to one spokesman supporting the question.
The presiding officer shall than grant a three-minute rebuttal to one spokesman opposing the question.
Appropriate notes or minutes will be recorded by the Planning Commission and the County Commission
at their respective public hearings.
The Planning Commission shall prepare and submit the necessary minutes, evaluations and/or
recommendations to the County Commission prior to the County Commission's Public Hearing.
The County Commission, at its public hearing, will review the evaluation and recommendations from the
Planning Commission and may choose to adopt, reject or modify the Planning Commission recommendations,
or the business may be tabled to the next regular County Commission meeting for additional study.
Sec. 6. - Procedures for Rezoning Property Requests by a Citizen or Property Owner.
An application for rezoning must be filed with the Zoning Administrator on a prescribed form, accompanied by
an application fee in the amount established by the Dooly County Board of Commissioners. The application
shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission at which the application is to be
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
124/137
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
presented.
The Zoning Administrator will inform the applicant of the public hearing date. The Planning Commission will
convene a public hearing on each application at the date, time and location advertised. The public notice will
appear at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation no less than 15 days nor more than 45 days
prior to the public hearing.
The public hearing notice will name the applicant, the location of property to be affected, the present zoning
class, the proposed zoning class and the date, time and place of both the Planning Commission hearing and
the public hearing held by the Dooly County Board Commissioners.
The Zoning Administrator shall have erected upon the property for which rezoning is to be considered a sign of
no less than 17" × 24" announcing the public hearings, stipulating the dates, times, and places for the two
hearings, the present zoning class and the proposed zoning class. The sign shall be clearly visible from a public
road and shall be erected not less than 15 days before the Planning Commission hearing date.
Public hearings held by the County Commission will follow essentially the same procedures as those of the
Planning Commission.
Any application for rezoning of a particular parcel of property which is denied by the Board of Commissioners
may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the
defeat of the rezoning request, unless the applicant can show that the conditions upon which the previous
denial were based have substantially changed.
Sec. 7. - Rezoning Criteria.
Decisions of whether to approve or deny a petition to rezone property shall based on the following criteria. These criteria are
established to assist the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners in balancing the interests of the public with the
interests of the private property owner:
Does the proposed zoning classification promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of Dooly
County?
The existing uses of the subject property and adjacent and near properties.
The current zoning of the subject property and adjacent or near properties.
The extent to which property values are diminished by the present zoning restriction.
The extent to which the restrictions diminishing the property's value promote the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the public.
The relative gain to the public compared to the extent of hardship imposed upon the individual property
owner (in retaining the current zoning designation).
The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes.
The history of the use of the subject property considered in the context of land developments in the
vicinity of the property.
Conformity with the Dooly County Future Land Use Plan.
Sec. 8. - Conditional Uses.
The Planning Commission may recommend to the Board of Commissioners approval of a petition to rezone provided the
applicant agrees to certain specified conditions related to the proposed rezoning. The Board of Commissioners will make the final
decision. The procedures and application process are the same as in Section 6 - Procedures for Rezoning Request by a Citizen or
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
125/137
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
3.
4.
Property Owner. The sign posted on site of the subject property shall include any conditions, requirements or limitations deemed
by the Planning Commission to be necessary for protection of adjacent properties and the community as a whole and to carry out
provisions of this ordinance.
Sec. 9. - Criteria for the Review of Conditional Uses.
An application to establish a conditional use shall be approved following a review by the Planning Commission and a
determination by the Dooly County Board of Commissioners that:
The proposed use will not be contrary to the purpose(s) of this ordinance.
The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general
neighborhood, nor affect adversely the health and safety of residents and workers.
The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend
or use such facility, vehicular movement, noises or fumes generation or type of physical activity.
The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses, and the proposed use will be placed on a
lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of said use.
Parking and all development standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may be granted
have been met., and
Provided, the Board of Commissioners may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as
may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community and to protect
the value and use of property in the general neighborhood, provided that, wherever the County Commission
shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, that any term,
conditions or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said Commission
shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full
opportunity for a public hearing.
Sec. 10. - Variances.
The Planning Commission may recommend to the Board of Commissioners approval of certain, specified variance from the
requirements of the ordinance. The Board of Commissioners shall have the power to authorize variance from the terms of this
ordinance where a literal enforcement of the zoning requirements would result in undue hardship, but where exercise of such
authority is not contrary to the public interest.
Procedure - Applications for variance shall be filed with the Office of the Zoning Administrator; such
application must be filed 30 days before the date of the following Planning Commission meeting in order that
the required public notice may be given before the next scheduled meeting. Each application shall be
accompanied by a simple sketch of the site, showing the following:
General location of existing structures and property lines.
Location of proposed buildings and land use.
Setbacks if applicable to the request.
Public hearing - A public hearing shall be held by the Board of Commissioners for the review of an application
for a variance. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least 15 days before the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Dooly County.
Fee - Each application for a variance shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount established by
the Dooly County Board of Commissioners to partially defray administrative costs.
Conditions and limitations - The Board of Commissioners shall include any condition, requirement, or
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
126/137
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
1.
2.
limitation which may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and to carry out the provisions of this
resolution.
Sec. 11. - Criteria for the Consideration of Variance Requests.
The following criteria shall be utilized when considering request for variance from the terms of the ordinance, when approval
of such will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the
ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, yet maintain the spirit of this ordinance and preserve and
secure the public safety and welfare. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding
of the Board of Commissioners that:
There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question
and because of its size, shape or topography; and
Strict application of this ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an undue hardship, and
Such conditions are particular to the particular piece of property involved and not the making of the applicant,
and
Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good, or impair the purposes and intent
of this ordinance, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure
that is prohibited by this ordinance.
The proposed use will be of such location, size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate
and orderly development of the surrounding neighborhood.
The proposed use will be of a nature that vehicular and pedestrian traffic will be no more hazardous than is
normal for the district involved.
The location, size, intensity, site layout and periods of operation of any such proposed use will be designed to
eliminate any possible nuisance (dust, noises, fumes, vibration, smoke or lights, etc.) emanating from the use
which might be noxious to the occupants of other nearby uses, and,
The location and height of buildings or structures and the location, nature and height of walls and fences will
be such that the proposed use will not interfere with or discourage appropriate development and the use of
adjacent land and buildings, or unreasonably affect their value.
Sec. 12. - Certicate of Zoning Compliance.
A certificate of zoning compliance, issued by the Zoning Administrator, and certifying that the proposed structure, land use, or
alteration complies with the provisions of the zoning resolution, is required.
Site plan - Each application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of
the site and indicating such information as may be needed to present a record of existing conditions and
proposed use including proposed off-road parking and/or loading areas.
Time limit - A certificate of zoning compliance shall become invalid after the use authorized is suspended or
abandoned for the period of one year.
Sec. 13. - Appeals.
An appeal by a person, firm, or corporation, or by any officer department, board or bureau may be taken to the Dooly County
Board of Commissioners where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Zoning Administrator or other administrative official in the enforcement and interpretation of this ordinance. Such appeals
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
127/137
1.
2.
3.
4.
shall be made within 30 days of the administrative action by filing with the Dooly County Clerk of Commissioners a Notice of
Appeal specifying the grounds thereof. If the Notice of Appeal is not filed within the 30 days, the only recourse shall be a court of
record.
The County Clerk shall then transmit to the Board of Commissioners all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal
was taken. The appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board
of Commissioners after the Notice of Appeals has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the Notice, a stay would, in the
Zoning Administrator's opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, other
than by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court of record.
The Board of Commissioners shall fix a reasonable amount of time for the hearing of an appeal and shall give due notice to
the parties concerned, including all landowners within 300 feet of the site in question. Such notice shall be delivered personally or
by mail, addressed to the respective owners at the address given on the last assessment roll. The Board of Commissioners shall
decide the appeal within a reasonable period of time with regard to the purposes of the ordinance. Upon the hearing, any party
may appear in person or through their agent.
In the event the petitioner for an appeal remains discontented with the Board of Commissioner's decision on an appeal
application, the petitioner shall have 30 days to appeal the action to Dooly County Superior Court.
Sec. 14. - Fees.
Fees for administration, inspection, application for rezoning, variance or conditional use applications and the issuance of
permits or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall be collected by the Zoning Administrator
in advance of the issuance of such permits.
The fee for rezoning, variance or conditional use application shall be $50.00, and is hereby established by the Board of
Commissioners to cover the cost of administration, inspection and supervision resulting from the enforcement of this ordinance.
Sec. 15. - Violations and Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction, shall be punished for each violation, according to the laws of the State of Georgia. Each
day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, placed,
displaced, replaced or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator, or any other appropriate County authority, Deputy Sheriff or any person who would be
damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the violation.
The punishment imposed for any ordinance violation shall not exceed a fine of $500.00 or 60 days
imprisonment or both, except as otherwise provided by general law, and shall not exceed the maximum
punishment specified by this ordinance. (Pursuant to Official Code of Georgia Annotated Sec. 15-10-60
[O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60]).
Prosecutions for violation of this ordinance, as with other County ordinances, shall be pursuant to article 4 of
the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. title 15, ch. 10, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.)] and shall be
heard and brought in the Magistrate Court of Dooly County pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-20-2(4).
Sec. 16. - Validity.
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
128/137
This ordinance and the various articles, sections, paragraphs and clauses thereof, are hereby declared to be severable. If any
article, section, paragraph or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of the
ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
Sec. 17. - Conicting Provisions Repealed.
All other ordinances of Dooly County and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance, to the extent of such conflict and
not further, are hereby repealed.
Sec. 18. - Eective Date.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety,
and welfare of the people of Dooly County, and are hereby ordered to be effective 15 days after the date of its passage.
Approved by the Dooly County Board of Commissioners in regular session this 21st day of May, 1998.
Chairman Attest:
_____________________ ________________________
Wayne J. West Clerk of Commissioners
First Reading: May 7, 1998
Second Reading: May 21, 1998
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - Local Acts
The following is a chronological listing of the Acts of Georgia used in the Code.
Ga. Laws
Year
Page Act No Section  Code
Section
1913 373 216 App. A, Art. I
App. A, Art. I, § 14
1919 639 263 App. A, Art. I, § 2
App. A, Art. I, § 9
App. A, Art. I, § 17
App. A, Art. I, § 22
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
129/137
1929 594 207 App. A, Art. I, § 2—
App. A, Art. I, § 4
App. A, Art. I, § 5A
App. A, Art. I, § 9
App. A, Art. I, § 12
App. A, Art. I, § 16,
App. A, Art. I, § 17
App. A, Art. I, § 22
1943 951 195 App. A, Art. I, § 4
App. A, Art. I, § 7
1947 143 30 1 App. A, Art. I, § 1
1949 1628 364 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 3
1730 399 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 4
1953 3291 486 App. A, Art. I, § 7
1960 2882 784 App. A, Art. I, § 5A
App. A, Art. I, § 22
1963 3317 403 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 3, § 3
1965 2441 135 App. A, Art. II
1966 2478 157 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 2
1967 2344 140 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 1, § 3
2586 237 App. A, Art. I, § 4
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
130/137
1968 1768 247 App. A, Art. III
2429 787 App. A, Art. IV,
Div. 1
2725 880 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 1, § 9
1969 2162 70 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 1, § 7
1970 3048 1176 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 1, § 7
1975 3934 354 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 1, § 7
1981 3700 266 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 3, § 3
3703 267 App. A, Art. I, § 2
App. A, Art. I, § 4
2 App. A, Art. I, § 1
1984 3864 660 App. A, Art. IV,
Div. 1
1985 4585 360 App. A, Art. I, § 7
1987 3514 11 App. A, Art. III, § 1,
App. A, Art. III, § 2
1992 6083 938 App. A, Art. I, § 2
App. A, Art. I, § 4
1993 5153 382 App. A, Art. I, § 2
App. A, Art. I, § 4
1995 3769 93 App. A, Art. I, § 7
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
131/137
1997 3618 66 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 3, § 3
4063 234 App. A, Art. V,
Div. 1
2002 4108 492 App. A, Art. I, § 2
2004 4027 6977 1 App. A, Art. I, § 2A
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of Dooly County, Georgia used in the Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the
time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table.
Ordinance
Number
Date Section  Code
Section
 5-15-1979(Ord.) I 6-31, 6-32
III—VII 6-33—6-37
 5-22-1986(Ord.) 1 38-1
89-2  9-21-1989 1—6 10-51—10-56
12-14-1989(Res.) 18-1
 8-30-1993(Ord.) 1 2-141
 9- 2-1993(Ord.) II—XV 42-61—42-74
 1-19-1994(Ord.) 1, 2 30-1
95-04  4- 4-1995 art. 1, §§ A—D 26-32
art. 2, § A— 26-33—26-39
art. 2, § G
art. 2, § G 26-40
art. 3, § A 26-61
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
132/137
art. 3, § B 26-62
26-92
art. 3, § C 26-63
26-93
art. 4, § A 26-91
art. 5 26-64
art. VI 26-31
 3- 7-1996(Ord.) 1 14-31
3 14-32
 4- 4-1996(Res.) 26-34
 6- 5-1997(Ord.) I—VI 34-2
VIII—XI 34-2
 6-14-1998(Ord.) 1—9 34-1
 6-18-1998(Ord.) 1—4 14-1
6 14-1
99-01  5- 6-1999 42-31
2, 3 42-32, 42-33
 5-20-1999(Ord.) 34-2
 9-20-2001(Ord.) II—VIII 22-31—22-37
IX(C) 22-38
02-01  2- 7-2002 1 42-31
 7- 1-2004(Ord.) I—VIII 22-51—22-58
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
133/137
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official
Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A).
O.C.G.A. § Code 
Section
1-3-1(3)—1-3-1(7) 1-2
1-3-1(a), (b) 1-2
1-3-3 22-32
1-3-3(5) 1-2
1-3-3(8) 1-2
1-3-3(10)—
1-3-3(12)
1-2
1-3-3(14)—
1-3-3(16)
1-2
1-3-3(19) 1-2
1-3-3(23),
1-3-3(24)
1-2
3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 6
3-1-2 6-1
3-3-2(a) 6-32
3-5-1 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II
3-5-41 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II
3-5-80, 3-5-81 6-34
4-1-1 et seq. Ch. 10
4-8-1 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
134/137
4-8-20 Ch. 10, Art. II,
Div. 2
4-8-21 10-51
4-8-22 Ch. 10, Art. II,
Div. 2
4-8-24 10-52
4-8-28 10-55
4-8-29 Ch. 10, Art. II,
Div. 2
tit. 8 14-31
8-2-1 et seq. Ch. 14
8-2-3 14-1
8-2-20 et seq. 14-31
9-2-20 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II
tit. 12, ch. 4,
art. 5, pt. 6
22-33
12-2-8 22-33
12-4-72 22-32
12-5-20 et seq. 22-31
22-33
12-5-30(f) 22-33
12-5-440 et seq. 22-33
12-6-24 34-2
12-7-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II
12-7-4 Ch. 22, Art. II
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
135/137
12-7-6 22-33
12-7-7 et seq. 22-34
12-7-12 22-36
12-7-15 22-36
12-7-17 22-32
12-8-1 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III
12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 42
12-8-22 App. B, § 5
12-8-30.7 42-64
12-8-39.3 42-31
12-8-50 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V,
Div. 2
2-141
12-8-52 2-141
12-8-60 et seq. Ch. 42
12-8-62 App. B, § 5
tit. 15, ch. 10
art. 4
34-1
App. B, Art. XVII, § 15
15-6-88 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 1, § 2
15-6-92 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 1, § 2
15-9-67 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 1, § 4
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
136/137
15-10-60 34-1
App. B, Art. XVII, § 15
15-10-60 et seq. App. B, Art. XVII, § 15
15-16-19, 15-16-20 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 1, § 1,
App. A, Art. II,
Div. 1, § 3
15-16-63 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 1, § 4
15-20-2(4) App. B, Art. XVII, § 15
15-21-93 18-1
15-21-95 18-1
16-6-24 34-2
16-7-40 et seq. Ch. 42
16-12-80 et seq. 30-1
31-7-12 App. B, § 5
tit. 32, ch. 4 34-2
tit. 32, ch. 6
art. 3, pt. 2
38-1
32-4-1 et seq. 34-2
32-4-40 et seq. Ch. 34
32-6-70 et seq. 38-1
36-1-1 et seq. Ch. 2
36-1-20 Ch. 30
36-1-20(b) 1-7
5/7/2019 Dooly County, GA Code of Ordinances
137/137
36-5-20 App. A
36-5-20 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II
36-66-1 et seq. App. B
App. B, § 2
App. B, Art. XVII
36-67A-1 et seq. App. B
36-70-5 App. B, § 4
36-80-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV
36-80-19 1-1
36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV
36-82-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV
45-16-11 App. A, Art. II,
Div. 2, § 1
46-8-197 34-1
47-11-51 18-1
47-17-60 18-1
48-5-40 App. A, Art. V,
Div. 1, § 1
48-5-50.1 App. A, Art. V,
Div. 1, § 4