THE CODE OF STEPHENS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2004 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted: April 6, 2004  Effective: April 6, 2004 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
COUNTY OF 
STEPHENS, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Linda Bell 
Chairman 
____________ 
Kenneth Rex Anderson 
Vice-Chairman 
____________ 
Steve Chitwood 
Commissioner 
____________ 
Darrell Hampton 
County Administrator 
____________ 
Russell Smith 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Nancy Downs 
Clerk of the Board of Commissioners 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the County of Stephens, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Senior Code Attorney, and Sherry A. Albritton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Russell Smith, County Attorney, and Nancy Downs, Clerk of the Board of Commissioners, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Stephens, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Stephens, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Stephens, Georgia. 2004. 
ORDINANCE NO. 04-02 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE COUNTY OF STEPHENS COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF STEPHENS COUNTY, GEORGIA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Stephens County, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 82, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 8, 2003, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or of any other ordinance of the county shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after July 8, 2003, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall before [become] effective April 6, 2004. 
Passed and adopted by the board of commissioners this 6th day of April, 2004. 
Stephens County Board of Commissioner 
By: 

By: 

By: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County boundaries, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances and other enactments embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Stephens County, Georgia," and may be so cited. It may also be referred to as "The Stephens County Code." 
Sec. 1-2. - General rules of construction; definitions. 
In the construction of this Code, the definitions and rules of construction in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners. 
General. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, which shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(b). 
Board, board of commissioners. The term "board" or "board of commissioners" shall mean the Board of Commissioners of Stephens County, Georgia. 
Code and this Code. Whenever the terms "Code" and "this Code" are referred to without further qualification, it shall mean The Code of Stephens County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the person having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday provided for in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the person having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3). 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean Stephens County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize him to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Fee, charge, rate, deposit. The term "fee," "charge," "rate" or "deposit" shall mean a fee, charge, rate or deposit set from time to time by the board of commissioners and kept on file in the office of the board. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(8). 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(4). 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(5). 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(11). 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(6). 
Oath. The term "oath" shall include affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(12). 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." shall mean the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officers, departments, etc. Whenever titles of various officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions or other agencies are used, they shall refer to such officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions or agencies of Stephens County, Georgia. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to organizations, associations, clubs, societies, companies, proprietorships, firms, partnerships, either general or limited, joint ventures, trusts, estates, bodies politic and/or corporate, and other entities as well as to individuals. 
State Law reference— "Person" defined, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(14). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" shall mean next before. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(15). 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(16). 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether it is privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Seal. The term "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
State Law reference— "May" defined, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(10). 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
State Law reference— "Sidewalk" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(57). 
Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(19). 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(63). 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(7). 
Week. The term "week" shall mean seven days. 
Writing. The term "writing" shall include printing and all numerals. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(23). 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(24). 
Sec. 1-3. - Statutory rules of construction. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the same rules shall be applied in construing provisions of this Code, and other ordinances of this county, as are applied in construing the statutes of this state, which rules are found in O.C.G.A. §§ 1-3-1—1-3-3, and the same meanings are to be given words found in the ordinances as are given similar words found in the statutes of this state. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines and other headings. 
The catchlines of the sections of this Code and the headings of articles and divisions thereof are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents and shall not be deemed to be titles, nor as any part of the section, article or division, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, articles or divisions, including the catchlines and headings, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid because of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading to any chapter, article or division. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of Code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. 
Sec. 1-6. - Editor's notes and references. 
The editor's notes, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing on the adoption date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code, and of codes or other provisions adopted by reference in this Code, are severable, and if any such phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be declared invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code and provisions adopted by reference, nor the application thereof to any persons or circumstances, since they would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation therein of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-9. - Penalties; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 et seq., 36-1-20; punishment for misdemeanors, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; nuisances, O.C.G.A. title 41. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(5)  Any ordinance relating to specific public improvements or assessments therefor. 
(6)  Any ordinance, consistent with this Code, providing for the levy or collection of taxes or for an annual budget or appropriations. 
(7)  Any ordinance pertaining to zoning. 
(8)  Any ordinance relating to the investment of county funds. 
(9)  Any ordinance, consistent with this Code, prescribing regulations, compensation, positions, classification, retirement and other matters pertaining to county officers or employees. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the county. 
(11)  Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, closing, prescribing grades, etc., of streets, roads, bridges and other public ways. 
(12)  Any ordinance, consistent with this Code, establishing fees, rates, deposits, service charges or other charges. 
(13)  Any ordinance creating, establishing, prescribing or abolishing urban renewal projects. 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing or providing traffic regulations at specific places, such as speed limits, through streets, stop intersections, yield intersections, one-way travel, no left turns, no right turns, traffic control by electrical devices, truck routes, loading zones, no parking zones and limited parking zones. 
(15)  Any ordinance continuing in force and effect local constitutional amendments. 
(16)  Any ordinance or resolution relating to civil defense or emergency management. 
All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Unlawful alteration of Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner (except by ordinance or other official act of the board of commissioners or the General Assembly) which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented. 
State Law reference— False writings and documents, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20. 
Sec. 1-12. - Amendments; new provisions. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected by the repeal. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make the same a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code. A reference to this Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of The Code of Stephens County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Stephens County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or division, article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which reads as follows:…." The new section (or division, article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of commissioners. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the board during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize ordinances and resolutions into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinances incorporated in the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance or resolution sections inserted in the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Effective date of ordinances and resolutions. 
Ordinances and resolutions which do not provide for their taking effect at a different time take effect immediately after their passage, or as otherwise provided by law. 
State Law reference— Effective date of legislative Acts, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-4. 
Sec. 1-15. - Effect of repeal of ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not revive any ordinance or resolution in force before or at the time the ordinance or resolution repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance or resolution repealed, nor any right acquired or liability incurred under any ordinance or resolution repealed. 
State Law reference— Operation of laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-5. 
Sec. 1-16. - Ordinances powers effective. 
(a)  To carry into effect the powers and authority conferred upon Stephens County by the provisions of this chapter, or any past or future act of the Legislature of the State of Georgia, the governing body has plenary power and authority to: 
(1)  Make and pass all needful ordinances, orders, bylaws, acts, resolutions, rules and regulations not contrary to the constitution and laws of State of Georgia; and 
(2)  Prescribe reasonable penalties for violation of its ordinances, orders, bylaws, acts, resolutions, rules and regulations, in the form of fines, forfeitures and confinement in the county jail, for a term not exceeding thirty days per offense. 
(b)  The fines, forfeitures and confinement shall be recovered, imposed or enforced under the judgment of the Magistrate Court of Stephens County unless required to be brought in the Superior Court of Stephens County pursuant to the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 1-17. - Ordinance procedures. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any chapter provision to the contrary, which chapter provision was in effect on the effective date of this section, it shall not be necessary, except where otherwise provided in this Code, for the governing body of Stephens County to publish in a newspaper any proposed ordinance prior to the adoption thereof or any enacted ordinance subsequent to the adoption thereof, and any and all ordinances of Stephens County shall be adopted in accordance with the following requirements, except where different or additional requirements are specified in other provisions of this Code, in which event such other different or additional requirements shall be applicable: 
(1)  A proposed ordinance shall be read by title at not less than two meetings of the governing body with at least one week intervening between each meeting, unless a member of the governing body demands that the ordinance be read in full at one or both meetings. If such demand is made, the ordinance shall be read in full as demanded. 
(2)  At least two weeks before the meeting at which a proposed ordinance is to be finally adopted, the governing body shall cause notice of the proposed adoption of said proposed ordinance, to be published as a legal advertisement, and the publication area for such publication shall be the legal section of the legal organ for Stephens County, Georgia. The notice shall state the subject matter in synopsis form and general title or titles of such proposed ordinance, the date, time and place of the proposed final vote on adoption, and the place or places within the county where the public may inspect such proposed ordinance. A reasonable number of copies of the proposed ordinance shall be kept at such place or places and be made available for public inspection. Said notice shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard with respect to the proposed ordinance. 
(3)  A proposed ordinance shall not be materially amended at the same meeting at which finally adopted. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any chapter provision to the contrary, which chapter provision was in effect on the effective date of this section, the governing body of Stephens County may adopt, by ordinance, building codes, housing codes, plumbing codes, sanitary codes, electrical codes, fire prevention codes, or any other technical codes dealing with general public health, safety or welfare, or a combination of the same, or a comprehensive code of ordinances, in the manner prescribed in this subsection (b). 
(c)  Before any such ordinance shall be adopted, the code shall be either printed or typewritten and shall be presented in pamphlet form to the governing body of the county two weeks before a regular meeting, and copies of such code shall be made available for public inspection at same time. The ordinance adopting such code shall not set out said code in full, but shall merely identify the same. The vote on adoption of said ordinance shall be the same as on any other ordinance. After adoption of the ordinance, such code or codes shall be certified by the board of commissioners and shall be filed as a permanent record in the office of the Stephens County Clerk, who shall be required to transcribe and record the same in the ordinance book as other ordinances are transcribed and recorded. 
(d)  Consistent with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, it shall not be necessary that any such ordinance, either as proposed or after adoption, be published in legal section of the newspaper, and it shall not be necessary that the code itself be so published, but before final adoption of any such proposed ordinance, notice of the proposed adoption of such ordinance and code shall be given by publication as herein provided for ordinances, the principal object of which notice shall also state where, within Stephens County, the code or codes will be available for public inspection. 
(e)  By a chapter framed and adopted, revision of a chapter as a whole, or a chapter amendment or amendments, as the case may be, subsequent to the effective date of this section, the county may require any or all ordinances to be published, two weeks in advance, in a legal section of the local newspaper prior to the adoption thereof, may expressly adopt the provisions of this section, may specify other additional requirements for the enactment of ordinances, or may prescribe a procedure for the enactment of ordinances in greater detail than prescribed in this section, but the county shall not, except in an emergency as specified in subsection (f) of this section, or except as otherwise provided in this code, have the power and authority to lessen or reduce the requirements of this section. 
(f)  The governing body of the county may enact an ordinance without complying with the rules prescribed in this section only: 
(1)  In the case of a pressing public emergency making procedure in accordance with the provisions of this section dangerous to the public health, safety or morals, and by affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members elected to the governing body; 
(2)  When otherwise provided in this Code. The nature of any such emergency shall be set out in full in the ordinance; or 
(3)  When deemed appropriate by affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members elected to the governing body and not otherwise required by Georgia law. 
(g)  Each ordinance when adopted shall be entered in the ordinance record book, and the original copy of the ordinance shall be kept in clerk records along with the minutes of the meeting in which the ordinance received its second reading and was enacted. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful to change or amend by addition or deletion any part of the ordinances or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Stephens County to be misrepresented. 
(Ord. of 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 1-18. - Resolutions records. 
(a)  Each resolution shall, before its introduction, be reduced to printed or typewritten form and shall be signed by the person who introduces it; and the clerk shall then number it, and, when adopted, shall spread it in full upon the minutes of board of commission. The clerk shall then place the original copy of such resolution in his/her office in a file to be known as the record of resolutions. 
(b)  Resolutions and portions of resolutions which are repealed or amended by subsequent resolutions or ordinances shall be noted and initialed in the margin thereof by the clerk, so as to show the date and number of the repealing or amendatory ordinance or resolution, but shall not be removed from the record of resolutions. 
(Ord. of 1-26-2010) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-10(3); any ordinance, consistent with this Code, establishing fees, rates, deposits, service charges or other charges saved from repeal, § 1-10(12); civil emergencies, ch. 26; courts, ch. 30; administration of flood damage prevention, § 38-61 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 42; personnel, ch. 54; planning, ch. 58; taxation, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Constitution reference— Counties and municipal corporations, Ga. Const. art. IX; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I. 
State Law reference— County government, O.C.G.A. title 36; emergency interim successors to officials, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Form of county government. 
The county shall be organized in accordance with a county administrator form of county government. 
Sec. 2-2. - Inspection of public records. 
All records maintained by the board of commissioners, as defined and set forth in O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., are declared to be available for inspection and for the purpose of making photographs or reproductions of same by any interested member of the public in accordance with the following rules and regulations and subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  The board determines it in the best interest of the county that an orderly procedure be developed for inspection of the public records of the board, that the board have and maintain a record of those persons inspecting the public records, and that the board maintain a record of the time and expense occasioned by the inspection of the public records, and to that end determines that a written record be maintained of those persons inspecting the public records of the board. 
(2)  Any member of the public desiring to inspect, photograph or reproduce any records maintained by the board shall complete an application for inspection. The application shall be on the form attached to the resolution from which this section is derived as exhibit "A" and incorporated in this section by reference. The clerk of the board of commissioners shall maintain an adequate supply of application forms and shall deliver, free of charge, reasonable quantities of such forms to members of the public making requests for inspection of such records. The clerk shall further mail to any person making a request by letter or by telephone an application for inspection. A written or verbal request containing substantial information requested on the application for inspection shall be deemed sufficient and the written request shall serve in lieu of the written application for inspection. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a completed application for inspection or a written request equivalent to an application, the clerk of the board of commissioners shall determine the time and expense that the inspection of the requested records shall entail, and whether or not the requested records fall within an exception to those records otherwise available for public inspection. The clerk of the board of commissioners shall produce for inspection all records responsive to a request within a reasonable amount of time not to exceed three business days of receipt of a request: provided, that nothing shall require agencies to produce records in response to a request if such records do not exist at the time of the request. In any instance where records are unavailable within three business days of receipt of the request, and responsive records exist, the clerk of the board of commissioners shall within such time period, provide the requestor with a description of such records and a timeline for when the records will be available. If the clerk determines that the requested records can be promptly made available to the inquiring person without considerable expense, time, or undue interruption of the normal business routine of the clerk's office, and that the requested information is not in that category of records not available for public inspection, the clerk shall immediately make available for inspection the records requested. The inspection shall be done under the supervision of the clerk , and the records may not be removed from the offices of the board while the inspection is in progress. The person desiring the inspection shall be allowed a comfortable table and chair at which the inspection shall be made. The clerk or any designated employee of the county shall have the right to remain present at all times to determine that no records are amended, altered, deleted, or removed as a result of the inspection. 
(4)  The person making the inspection shall have the right to make photographs or reproductions of the records with a camera or other copying device that the inspecting person may bring with him or her. 
(5)  Upon request, the board will, subject to time and work limitations, make photocopies of public records as may be requested by the person making application, using such photocopying machines or equipment that may be available from time to time for use by the board. 
(6)  If an extensive review or inspection of the public records is desired or immediate inspection would result in undue interruption, the clerk of the board of commissioners shall advise the person making application of the time and place at which the inspection shall be allowed. The inspection shall be allowed as soon as reasonably possible. 
(7)  If the clerk of the board of commissioners determines that the requested inspection involves records which are not open for public inspection, the clerk shall advise the person making application that the application will be referred to the board for determination as to whether or not the inspection will be allowed. 
(8)  For the work relating to the inspection and/or copying, the person desiring the inspection and/or copying and/or services of the clerk of the board of commissioners or any designated employee shall pay the following charges: 
a.  The sum of $0.10 per page for each page copied by the board at the request of the person making the application. 
b.  If, in supplying the information or furnishing the records for inspection or making copies thereof, the time expended by any employee of the board exceeds one-fourth hour, a charge for the search, retrieval, or redaction of records not to exceed the prorated hourly salary of the lowest paid full-time employee who, in the reasonable discretion of the custodian of the records, has the necessary skill and training to perform the request, the person making application shall, prior to being furnished the records requested, pay to the board as reimbursement to the county the maximum sum authorized in O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(d). 
(9)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the following records shall not be available for inspection: 
a.  Any records prohibited by law or the order of any court or any law of this state from being opened to inspection by the general public. 
b.  Any records specifically required by the federal government to be kept confidential. 
(10)  Any application may be denied because the requesting party desires to inspect a broad, and undifferentiated, mass of material. In case of the receipt of such an application, the board shall ask the requesting party to set forth identifiable, public records within the board's possession which the person desires to inspect. 
(11)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to make available for public inspection any records excluded by O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., and by the judicial interpretation of such statute. 
(12)  To the extent that any paragraph of this section conflicts with the Georgia Open Records Act, the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act shall control. 
(Res. of 2-20-1979; Ord. of 5-22-2012) 
Secs. 2-3—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 2-31. - Governing authority. 
The governing authority of the county shall be a board of five commissioners, who shall be elected as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 2-32. - Time of holding meetings. 
The time for regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be at 5:00 p.m. on the second Tuesday of each month; and 8:30 a.m. on the fourth Tuesday of each month. 
(Res. of 1-7-1975; Res. of 1-4-1977; Res. No. 2010-19, 7-13-2010; Ord. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 2-33. - Commissioner incentives. 
The board of commissioners must complete a mandatory 48 hours of certification to become a certified county commissioner. A certified commissioners advance program (CCAP) can be achieved through 48 hours of continuing education. Once a commissioner has completed this program and CCAP certification or the future equivalent of CCAP certification, he or she shall receive a supplemental pay incentive of $100.00 per month. The purpose of the incentive is to encourage county commissioners to achieve as much additional training and certification as possible with the understanding that better trained commissioners will be more effective county commissioners and more capable of serving the needs of the citizens of Stephens County. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2012) 
Secs. 2-34—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Board of adjustment for airport zoning, § 14-40; northeast Georgia regional solid waste management authority, § 62-31 et seq.; board of tax assessors, § 70-1. 

Secs. 2-61—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance, consistent with this Code, prescribing regulations, compensation, positions, classification, retirement and other matters pertaining to county officers or employees saved from repeal, § 1-10(9); appointment of animal control officer, § 10-36; office of director of emergency management director created, § 26-34; chief probation officer, § 42-38. 
State Law reference— Social security coverage for county employees, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-91. - County marshal/code enforcement officer. 
There shall be a county marshal/code enforcement officer, subject to the terms and conditions of the personnel policies and procedures manual. The county marshal/code enforcement officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of all county ordinances. The county marshal/code enforcement officer shall not exercise any arrest powers but shall be limited to issuing citations for violation of county ordinances and may take out arrest warrants for other law enforcement officers to execute. 
(Res. of 5-7-1991) 
Sec. 2-92. - Chief marshal. 
(a)  The office of the county marshal is hereby reactivate pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-100, with the chief marshal hereafter employed, to serve at the pleasure of the governing authority of the county to perform the duties of constables set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-102 and 15-10-103. 
(b)  The chief marshal shall be compensated solely on a salary basis and not in whole or part from fees and the salary shall be paid in equal bi-weekly installments from county funds in an amount to be set by the commission. 
(Res. No. 2005-04R, 5-3-2005; Ord. of 5-22-2012) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 22, 2012, changed the title of § 2-92 from "Chief marshal/deputy marshal" to "Chief marshal." 
Secs. 2-93—2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-10(2); taxation, ch. 70. 

Sec. 2-121. - Fiscal year. 
(a)  The fiscal year for the county shall commence on July 1 and end on June 30 of each year, and all county officials shall keep their official accounts in accordance therewith. 
(b)  All public officers of the county shall conform to the fiscal year as established in subsection (a) of this section in reporting and recording the financial operations of their respective offices and departments. 
(Res. of 6-18-1974) 
Sec. 2-122. - Signing of checks. 
(a)  The chairman of the board of commissioners and the clerk of the board of commissioners or the vice-chairman or finance director shall sign all checks by which county funds are expended. 
(b)  The vice-chairman of the board of commissioners is given full power and authority to sign all checks in the absence of the chairman. 
(c)  The finance director of the board of commissioners is given full power and authority to sign all checks in the absence of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 1-1-1974; Res. of 2-19-1974; Res. of 9-2-1975; Res. of 1-21-1975(1); Ord. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 2-123. - Management of budget. 
The following financial management policies establish the overall basic framework for the management of the county. These policies will provide assistance to the commissioners and county administrator by providing guidance in the decision-making process of the county. These policies will provide the guidelines for evaluating both current activities and proposals for future programs. These policies shall be reviewed annually by the board and changes made as the council deems appropriate. 
(1)  The operating budget authorizing the expenditure of county monies shall be adopted annually not later than the last meeting in the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year to which the budget applies. 
(2)  The operating budget shall be balanced in all funds. 
(3)  The county will attempt to maintain its present services level for all high priority and essential services. 
(4)  The county will continue to search for additional revenue. 
(5)  The county will take active measures to encourage economic development resulting in increased jobs and tax base. 
(6)  The county will aggressively seek federal and state funds. 
(7)  All investments of county funds shall be made through financial institutions located within the county, provided the rates are reasonably competitive. 
(8)  The county will have an independent audit of the county's financial records performed annually. The reports shall comply with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(9)  The county has written purchasing rules and regulations incorporated in the Stephens County Purchasing Manual as amended effective date of January 2009 and June 2011. 
a.  All purchases with an estimated total cost of a minimum of $1,000.00 to $5,000.00 shall submit three required competitive telephone quotations with purchase order unless adequate source is not available. Any budgeted purchases within this range require approval of the department head and county administrator. 
b.  Competitive written quotations shall be submitted with purchase orders from $5,000.01 to $15,000.00. A minimum of three quotations is required unless adequate source of supply is not available. Any budgeted purchase within this range requires authorization of county administrator and board of commissioners. 
c.  Competitive written quotations shall be submitted with purchase orders from $15,000.01. A minimum of three quotations is required unless adequate source supply is not available. All purchases above this range, budgeted or non-budgeted, require a sealed competitive bid, to be opened in public and approved by the board of commissioners. 
d.  The county administrator and any one commissioner; the finance director and any one commissioner shall be authorized to make emergency purchases when there is a threat to public health, welfare, safety, infrastructure, or county property, to either the county and/or its citizens. The emergency purchase order shall not exceed $20,000.00 without prior approval by the board of commissioners. The emergency purchase order shall be brought before the board of commissioners no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting. Staff should consider the dynamics of emergency to determine if a special called meeting of the board needs to be called and further emergency purchasing procedures need to be implemented. 
e.  To eliminate the staff spending unnecessary time in collecting bids, the board of commissioners authorizes county departments to utilize state and federal bids where applicable. 
(10)  The county has bid and contract procedures: Local bidder three percent preference: Facts: Bidder "A" an out-of-county bidder bids $10,000.00. Bidder "B" a county bidder bids $10,250.00 and bidder "C" a county bidder bids $10,400.00. Preference: Bidder "B" will be contacted and given 48 hours to meet the bid of bidder "A" since the local bidder's bid is within three percent of the out-of-town bidder $10,300.00. If bidder "B" agrees to meet the bid price of bidder "A" by written confirmation, the board of commissioners may award the contract to bidder "B". If bidder "B" declines to accept the award, bidder "A" would be awarded the bid since bidder "C's" (a second local bidder) bid is not within three percent of the low out-of-town bid. 
(Mo. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 2-124. - Investment of county funds. 
(a)  The investment authority of the board of commissioners as granted in O.C.G.A. § 36-80-3 shall be delegated by the board of commissioners pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-4, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The designee of the board of commissioners shall invest the funds under the control and jurisdiction of the board only in those investments which are authorized by the law of the state for such funds. 
(2)  The funds shall be invested only with financial institutions located in the county which have available lawfully authorized investments. 
(3)  The funds shall be invested at the highest rate of interest available from a financial institution in the county offering authorized investments for the time period for which the funds are sought to be invested. 
(4)  Funds shall be invested in such an amount as the finance director of the board of commissioners determines feasible, taking into account the cash needs of the board of commissioners so that the necessary funds to cover the expenses of the county are available as needed. 
(5)  The delegation of the investment authority granted in this section shall continue until revoked by general law of the state or by further action of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The designee of the board of commissioners is authorized to sign on behalf of the board such documents as may be necessary in order to exercise the investment authority delegated in this section, and a certified copy of this section shall be sufficient proof of the authority of the designee of the board to act as authorized in this section. 
(Res. of 1-8-1985; Ord. of 5-22-2012) 
Chapter 3 - UNIFORM POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR THE CALLING AND CONDUCTING OF PUBLIC HEARINGS RELATING TO VARIOUS COUNTY LAND USE ORDINANCES, ZONING AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES 

Sec. 3-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning and Land Use Public Hearing Policies and Procedures Ordinance of Stephens County, Georgia" (hereinafter referred to as the "chapter"). 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 3-2. - Intent. 
As the governing body of Stephens County, Georgia ("Stephens County"), it is the intention of the Stephens County Board of Commissioners ("governing body") to adopt a chapter enacting uniform practices and procedures to govern the calling and conducting of public hearings relating to Stephens County's various land use and zoning ordinances which now exist or which may be hereafter enacted, including without limitation, those hearings required by the Georgia Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5 et seq., as amended). 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 3-3. - Definitions. 
The following terms when used in this chapter with the first letter capitalized shall have the meanings given in this section: 
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, institution, public official or public body including any trustee, assignee or other representative and including, without limitation, the governing body and the planning committee. 
Property Owner. The person or persons who own property being considered under any zoning or land use ordinance. 
Zoning or Land Use Ordinance. Any zoning ordinance, the subdivision regulations or land use regulations, adopted as heretofore or hereafter amended and any other Stephens County land use ordinance which may by its terms provide that this chapter shall be applicable thereto. 
Zoning Ordinance. Any ordinance or resolution of Stephens County, whether now existing or hereafter enacted, which falls within the definition of "zoning ordinance" provided by the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. §36-66-3 (5)) or any successor provision thereto or any ordinance or resolution of Stephens County that requires compliance with the Zoning Procedures Law. 
Zoning Procedure Law. The State of Georgia Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. title 36, chapter 66, enacted by Georgia Laws 1985, page 1139, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 3-4. - Applicability. 
These policies and procedures shall apply to all hearings of the governing body relating to any of the following: 
(a)  The adoption of any Zoning or Land Use Ordinance; 
(b)  The adoption of any amendment to or restatement of any Zoning or Land Use Ordinance which changes the text of the ordinance; 
(c)  The adoption of any amendment to the official zoning map which rezones property from one zoning classification to another; 
(d)  The issuance of any conditional use permit under any Zoning or Land Use Ordinance; 
(e)  The grant of any variance under any Zoning or Land Use Ordinance; 
(f)  The adoption of any amendment to or restatement of this chapter; and 
(g)  Any other action requiring a public hearing pursuant to the Zoning Procedures Law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 3-5. - Procedures for adoption of amendment of text of Zoning or Land Use Ordinances and this chapter. 
(a)  Initiation of changes. The governing body may from time to time, on its own motion, or, in its discretion, upon recommendation of staff or any other Person, initiate a proposal to adopt, or to amend or restate the text of, any Zoning or Land Use Ordinance or to amend or restate this chapter. 
(b)  Submission of proposals. Any proposal to adopt, or to amend or restate the text of, any Zoning or Land Use Ordinance or to amend or restate this chapter which the governing body initiates shall be submitted by the governing body to staff for review and recommendation. 
(c)  Call of public hearings. Upon receipt of any such proposal the governing body shall set the dates, times, and places for holding a public hearing before the governing body to consider the proposed action. No final action may be taken by the governing body until after the public hearing of the governing body has been concluded. 
(d)  Notice of public hearings. After the date, time and place for a public hearing has been set, the governing body shall cause notice of the hearing to be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in Stephens County at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing. Such published notice shall include, as a minimum, the purpose, location, date and time of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 3-6. - Conduct of public hearings. 
All public hearings held by the governing body to which this ordinance applies shall be held in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The presiding officer shall open the public hearing by stating the matter being considered at the hearing. At this time the presiding officer may summarize the public hearing procedures. 
(2)  The applicant will present a description of the proposal, and any applicable background material. 
(3)  Persons who support the proposal will be asked to comment first. The Person initiating the proposal or his designated agent (the "proponent") may, upon recognition and upon statement of name, address and relationship to the matter, present and explain the proposal. The proponent shall be required to attend the public hearing unless written notice of hardship is received prior to the hearing. Failure of the proponent to attend the public hearing, except in cases of hardship, may be due cause for dismissal or denial of such application. After completion of the presentation of the proponent, other persons who support proposal will be asked to comment, and will be allowed to speak in support of the proposal upon recognition and upon identification of the Person's name, address, and relationship to the matter. 
(4)  Persons who oppose the proposal will next be asked to comment. All interested Persons, after being recognized and providing their names, addresses and relationship to the matter, shall be afforded an opportunity to address the proposal. 
(5)  The proponent shall have an opportunity for summary remarks rebuttal concerning the proposed application. 
(6)  The presiding officer, in his discretion, may impose time limitations on comments of each Person not less than ten minutes, and may require that each Person (other than any Stephens County official or his agent) who desires to speak sign in at the beginning of the meeting and indicate whether such Person will be speaking for or against the proposal 
(7)  All public comments having been heard, the members of the governing body considering the application may discuss the matter among themselves. During this discussion period, the members of the body may call on the proponent or other Persons to clarify points made previously, to answer questions or to provide additional information. Such Persons may respond upon recognition. 
(8)  Public hearings may be delayed, rescheduled or continued to another time and date, provided announcement is given at the time and place of the scheduled hearing, of the new time, place and date of the public hearing, which announcement shall constitute public notice for the hearing. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the presiding officer shall adjourn the hearing. 
(9)  The presiding officer or the applicant may require that any public hearing be transcribed by a court reporter provided that such Person has made arrangements with the court reporter to have the court reporter attend and transcribe the hearing. All costs of any court reporter shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 3-7. - Severability. 
Should any article, section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 3-8. - Public availability. 
Printed copies of this chapter shall be made available for distribution to the general public. 
Sec. 3-9. - Repealer. 
This chapter shall supersede all portions of any ordinances or resolutions which are in conflict herewith. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 1-26-2010) 
Sec. 3-10. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 1-26-2010) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 10-27-2009 amended ch. 6 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former ch. 6 derived from Ord. No. 93-2, §§ 1—24. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; use and possession of alcoholic beverages in parks, § 50-2. 
State Law reference— Local alcoholic beverage licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 et seq.; local regulation of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 34-40 et seq.; local regulation of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local regulation of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE 
PURPOSE 
Be it ordained by the Stephens County Board of Commissioners, for the purposes of: 
Promoting the health and general welfare of the community; 
Establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages; 
Protecting and preserving schools and churches' and 
Preventing undesirable persons from engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverages; it is hereby ordained as follows: 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Board means the Stephens County Board of Commissioners. 
Brown bagging means possession of an open glass bottle, can, or other container containing an alcoholic beverage or consumption of an alcoholic beverage on any premises for which a county business license has been issued, and occurs at a location different from where the alcoholic beverage was purchased. 
Clerk means the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Church means any permanent building which houses the main sanctuary in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is publicly designated as a church and which is either owned or held under a lease of at least five years by or on behalf of such persons, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes. The term "church" shall not include the temporary housing of a religious group in an otherwise commercial center. 
Code enforcement officer means the Stephens County Sheriff Department, Stephens County Marshal, or any individual so designated by the board. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Election day means that period of time beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. As used in this chapter, the term "election" is defined as any statewide primary election and the statewide general election and any runoff held for such primary or general election. Such term also includes local elections, 
Financial interest includes, but is not limited to, holding any indebtedness or security interest in a business. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued, or, in the case of a partnership, limited liability company or corporation, all partners, members, managers, officers, and directors of the partnership, limited liability company or corporation and in the case of any other business entity, any person filling an analogous role in such entity. 
Licensed premises means any premises in which alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises and shall include any premises which are required by law to be licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
Liter means metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six [bottles], 9.5 percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. Also included are beverages known as "nonalcoholic" beer." 
Minor is defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as enacted or amended. 
Nonprofit private club means any nonprofit association organization under the laws of the state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; Georgia code O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Owner means any person, corporation, or partnership or any other entity having a financial interest in the income of the business. Owner shall also include any person, corporation, or partnership operating a business under a management contract. 
Operator means and includes the owner, license holder, operator, manager, and person in charge of any licensed premises. 
Peace officer means any peace officer, county marshal, sheriff, or any other county designee. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. Person shall include all members of a retail dealer licensee's family. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased, or controlled by a licensee pursuant to this chapter and used by him for the purpose of operating under the license and there shall be a separate license for each premises outlet. In the case of a licensee where a golf course is located adjacent to and contiguous with a restaurant, the term "premises" shall include the playing area of the golf course. 
Resident means a person whose primary residence is within the territorial limits of the county. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and a seating capacity of at least 50 people, with at least two meals per day being served for not less than five days a week, for at least nine months each calendar year, and the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A minimum of 50 percent of its gross income deriving from the sale of such meals or appetizers, with each sale, which includes an alcoholic beverage including a reasonable order of a meal or appetizer. 
School means governmental or church school buildings and such buildings at such other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. The term "school building" includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. 
Stephens County is a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and, for the purposes of this chapter, the unincorporated portions thereof. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Retail package means sales of malt beverages or wine packaged to go and not for consumption on-the-premises sales. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail package dealer means any person who sells unbroken packages, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this chapter. 
Veterans' organization means a veterans group duly certified by their national organization and with a membership of not less than 25 persons. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, and combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1. 
Sec. 6-32. - Violations. 
Any firm, person or corporation who shall do anything prohibited by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended or who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be guilty of a violation of a county ordinance, amenable to the process of the magistrate court of the county and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by confinement in the county jail not to exceed 60 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, including the licensee, to engage in any activity on the premises for which the license is issued or within the place of business which is in violation of the laws or regulations of the state or federal government or any ordinance of Stephens County. 
(2)  Any person holding any license issued pursuant to this chapter or any employee or agent of such person who violates any provision of this chapter, or directs, consents to, permits, or acquiesces in such violation either directly or indirectly shall, by such conduct, subject the license to suspension, revocation or probation upon conditions. In addition, a maximum civil fine of $1,000.00 and/or up to 60 days in county jail, for each violation. In considering the amount of the civil fine, if any, the administrative hearing officer shall consider the following factor: 
a.  The gravity of the violation; 
b.  Any previous violations for which a fine was not assessed or for which the administrative hearing officer reduced and assessed fine; 
c.  The cost to Stephens County related to compliance or enforcement efforts undertaken by Stephens County in pursuing the case; and 
d.  The cost incurred by Stephens County in order to mitigate a condition remaining as the result of the violation. 
(3)  The imposition of a civil fine under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of the license or the taking of punitive or remedial action for any other violation of the ordinances of Stephens County or for subsequent violations of this section. No license shall be renewed if the licensee prior to renewal has not paid any civil fines imposed pursuant to this section. Any action taken by the administrative hearing officer to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, shall not preclude, and may be in addition to, any criminal prosecution by a proper authority as provided by the laws and ordinances of the county, the state, or the United States. Whenever any action is taken by the administrative hearing officer to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder, the administrative hearing officer shall provide written notice to the licensee of the action taken and state the reasons therefore. The licensee shall have 15 days following notification of such action to request a hearing before the governing authority. The licensee shall be entitled at such hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(4)  The Stephens County Sheriff, the Stephens County Marshal, or a code enforcement officer as designated by the board is authorized to conduct any enforcement actions necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(5)  It shall be a violation not to require and properly check the identification to ensure that an underage person is not sold, served, or does not have in his possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. Identification in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department or [of] public safety ID card. 
(6)  Except as otherwise specifically provided for by law, it is unlawful for any person to sell, possess, conceal, store, or convey any alcoholic beverage on which any tax or license fee imposed by this chapter has not been paid (O.C.G.A. § 3-2-33a). 
(7)  The license shall not permit the breaking of the package or packages on the premises where sold and shall not permit the drinking of the contents of the package or packages on the premises where sold (O.C.G.A. § 3-4-25). 
(8)  Malt beverages in quantities exceeding the amount specified in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-8, upon which the taxes imposed by or authorized pursuant to this chapter have not been paid in this state, are declared to be contraband; and any motor vehicle, watercraft, or aircraft used in transporting such beverages in excess of the amount specified in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-8 are also declared to be contraband and subject to seizure and disposition as provided by this chapter (O.C.G.A. § 3-5-3(b)). 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-33. - Remedies. 
If any provision of this chapter has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to protect or abate such violation. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-34. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The hours of sale of packaged malt beverages and wines shall be between 7:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Sundays. The hours of sale for consumption on the premises of malt beverages and wines shall be 11:00 a.m. to 12:45, Monday through Friday and 12:30 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on Sundays. Hours on Saturday and Christmas Eve shall be 8:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m. 
(b)  If a licensed business is open for less than the hours stated in subsection (a), then sales of malt beverages and wines shall be restricted to those regular store hours. However, in no event shall sales be made during hours other than described in subsection (a). 
(c)  All holders of licenses issued hereunder must, within three months after the issuance of such license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment as referred to within such period shall serve as forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license and no refund of license fee shall be made to the license holder. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009; Ord. of 1-22-2019) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20 (2009) 
Sec. 6-35. - Advertising. 
Licensees under this chapter shall not display any sign or decal either outside the premises or at any location in the county, which advertises the sale of malt beverages and wines, either directly, indirectly, or by inference or suggestion. Any advertising signs within the principal building shall not be displayed within view of the general public from the outside of the building. The county shall provide for all retail and consumption licensees an orange decalcomania sign to post on the front of the licensed location. 
(1)  Any license obtained under this chapter shall be displayed on the licensed premised in public view. 
(2)  Each licensee shall also post in a conspicuous place a sign with letters at least two inches in size stating: "The sale of alcoholic beverages to persons under the age of 21 years is strictly prohibited". 
(3)  Retail package licensees shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the edge of the shelf immediately below or above where the containers are placed the price of an alcoholic beverage exposed or offered for sale. No other sign may be exposed within or without the retail establishment showing prices or indicating that alcoholic beverages are for sale on the premises. 
(4)  No person holding a retail dealer's license to deal in distilled spirits by the package shall display any advertisement of or information regarding the price or prices of any distilled spirits in any show window or other place visible from outside the licensee's place of business. 
(5)  All retail consumption dealers and retail dealers in this state who sell at retail any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall post, in a conspicuous place, a sign which clearly reads: Warning: "Drinking alcoholic beverage during pregnancy can cause birth defects". 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-36. - Underage persons. 
(a)  If any license holder, agents or employees of license holders under this article sell alcoholic beverages to a person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages as provided by state law, the license shall be suspended for a minimum of 30 days. The board of commissioners in its sole discretion may suspend the license for a longer period of time or revoke the license, depending upon the severity of the offense evidenced by the facts in each case, including, but not limited to, consideration of prior violations of law by the license holder. If the board of commissioners determines a license holder and/or his agents and/or employees have sold alcoholic beverages to an underage person or persons on at least three separate occasions, then the license shall be revoked and application for a new license shall not be authorized until the expiration of 12 months following the date of revocation. 
(b)  License holders may not allow a person under the age of 18 years of age to sell malt beverages or wine. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly and intentionally act as agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person who is under the minimum age 21 to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, or otherwise procure for or furnish to a person who is under the minimum age 21 to purchase alcoholic beverages, as defined by state law, any alcoholic beverage, except for medical purposes upon the written prescription of a duly licensed physician under the laws of the state, or at a religious ceremony. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person who is under the minimum age 21 to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to falsely misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever in violation of this article or applicable laws. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the minimum age 21 to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to purchase, drink, or possess any alcoholic or malt beverage or wine in the county outside of any municipalities. 
(f)  It shall not be considered a violation of this article for a person who is under the minimum age 21 to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to purchase, drink, or possess any alcoholic or malt beverage if such person is at the time bona fidely acting for and on behalf of law enforcement agencies conducting investigations of license holders and/or their employees. 
(g)  No person shall allow or require a person in his/her employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(h)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his or her identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(i)  This Code section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries, or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages, which are sold for consumption off the premises (O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24). 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-37. - Sales on Christmas Day and election day. 
(a)  Except as specifically authorized by law, no person knowingly and intentionally shall sell or offer to sell alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day. This subsection shall not apply to bona fide nonprofit private clubs. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages on any election day shall be permitted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009; Ord. of 1-22-2019) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 22, 2019, changed the title of § 6-37 from "Sales on Sunday, Christmas Day, and election day" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 6-38. - Dispensing and miscellaneous regulations. 
The following dispensing and miscellaneous regulations shall apply to license holders under this article: 
(1)  License holders may not sell on the licensed premises less than 24 ounces of malt beverages, whether in a container or a multiunit container, unless they have consumption licenses or sell less than one-half pint of wine. 
(2)  License holders may not sell malt beverages or wines on the licensed premises to any person who is in an intoxicated condition (O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22). 
(3)  License holders shall not permit any disorderly conduct or breach of the peace on the licensed premises. 
(4)  License holders may not sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic or malt beverages and wines for which a license holder is not authorized to sell under his license. The license holder shall not allow brown bagging on the licensed premises. 
(5)  Malt beverages or wines may not be sold or offered for sale through vending machines on the licensed premises. 
(6)  Deliveries of malt beverages and wines to the licensed premises may be made only by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a license from the board of commissioners to deliver such beverages in the county. 
(7)  No retail license holder shall accept delivery of malt beverages and wines from any wholesale dealer unless the wholesale dealer has fully complied with the state laws regulating and taxing the sale of such beverages at wholesale. 
(8)  No retail or consumption license holder shall deliver malt beverages and wines at any location other than the licensed premises. 
(9)  All licensees shall store all malt beverages and wines in their possession only on the premises for which the license was issued. 
(10)  Every license holder shall have available on the licensed premises a copy of this article and shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article by all persons on the premises. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee hereunder or his agent to add to the contents of a bottle or refill an empty bottle or container in any manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any beverage licensed hereunder. 
(12)  No retail dealer shall knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking of any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the premises where sold or allow or permit the drinking of the contents of such package or packages on the premises where sold. This Code section shall not apply with respect to sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises (O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26). 
(13)  Any malt beverage possessed, sold, or offered for sale by a retail dealer which was purchased or otherwise acquired from any person other than a wholesale dealer authorized to do business under this chapter is declared to be contraband and shall be seized by the Commissioners or the appropriate local authorities and disposed of by the Commissioners in the manner provided in this title [article] (O.C.G.A. § 3-5-27). 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-39. - Taxes. 
The tax levied by this article shall be paid to Stephens County by each wholesale dealer on all beverages coming under this article within Stephens County by each wholesale dealer selling, shipping or in any way delivering malt beverages or wine to a retailer in Stephens County, who shall collect such deliveries on or before the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made. 
(1)  There is levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages outside municipalities in the county an excise tax in the following amounts: 
a.  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in and from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
b.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrels or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(2)  There is levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling wine outside municipalities of the county an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine by the package, which tax shall be $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter 
(3)  The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to any sales of wine or beer, which are exempt from taxation, by federal or state law. 
(4)  Except as otherwise expressly provided for by law, no person knowingly and intentionally shall possess, sell, or purchase any distilled spirits upon which the taxes imposed by this title have not been paid (O.C.G.A. § 3-3-29). 
(5)  A summary report made by each wholesale dealer shall show the exact quantities of taxed beverages, by size and type of container and the amount of excise tax collected. 
(6)  No person shall manufacture, distribute, sell, handle, or possess for sale, or otherwise deal in, alcoholic beverages without first obtaining all applicable licenses required by this title [article]. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within Stephens County any beverage taxed by this article on which the required tax has not been paid. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 
Sec. 6-40. - Revenue. 
Revenue produced pursuant to this article shall be used entirely for county uses outside municipalities. No revenue shall be used for purposes within any municipality in the county. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-41. - Audit of licensees. 
(a)  If the county deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, the licensee shall be notified of the date, time and place of the audit. The county may designate the county's internal auditor or other designated person to perform any audit authorized in this chapter. The licensee shall cooperate with the audit or a license(s) issued under this ordinance will be subject to suspension or revocation. 
(b)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly sales receipts showing income or operating statements; 
(2)  Daily sales receipt[s] showing malt beverage and wine and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees for wholesale packaging stores). 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets; 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports; and 
(5)  Federal income tax return with all form 1099s. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-42. - Distribution of required forms. 
Any forms required by this article shall be printed by the county and furnished to applicants and license holders. License forms shall be printed by the county and signed by the person in charge of issuing licenses for the county. A copy of this article shall be furnished to each license holder by the county. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-43. - Entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate activities on premises licensed for the sale of distilled spirits, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments. This article is not a de facto prohibition of legal expression but request[s] a balancing of the rights of the community and the adult entertainment establishments. This article does not allow any business or activity that is otherwise unlawful. 
Pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Georgia, article 3, section 6, paragraph VII: 
(1)  No person shall perform on a premises licensed hereunder acts of or acts which constitute or simulate: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing, or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or the displaying or any portion of any person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals. 
(2)  No person shall use on licensed premises artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform, simulate, or depict any of the prohibited conduct or activities described in subsection (1). 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to show, display, or exhibit, on licensed premises, any film, still picture, electronic reproduction, or any other visual reproduction or image of any act or conduct described in subsection (1) or (2) of this section. 
(4)  No erotic entertainment/dance establishment business shall serve, sell distribute or offer for consumption or possession any alcoholic beverages or controlled substances on the premises. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Secs. 6-44—6-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-61. - Required. 
No person shall engage in the business of wholesaling, retailing or otherwise providing malt beverages and wines of any kind in the unincorporated areas of the county without first obtaining a license therefore under this division. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-62. - Classification. 
Only the following classes of licenses shall be authorized under this division: 
(1)  [License required.] It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, at retail or wholesale, within Stephens County any malt beverage or wine, without having a license issued under the provisions of this division or in violation of the terms of such license or this division. The sale of malt beverages or wine within Stephens County is declared to be a privilege and not a right and such privilege shall not be exercised except as licensed hereunder. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell or offer for sale, at retail or wholesale, within Stephens County any alcoholic beverage not specifically licensed hereby, except for those sales authorized by the ordinance regulating the sale of malt beverages and wine at private clubs. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring an alcoholic beverage of any kind onto the premises of any restaurant or similar eating facility or to permit same within Stephens County except as provided for hereunder. 
(2)  Classes: The licenses shall be divided into the following classes: 
a.  Class B-1. Wholesale malt beverages, which shall permit only the sale of malt beverages at wholesale plus application fee; 
b.  Class B-2. Retail malt beverages by the package in food stores, grocery stores, supermarkets and convenience food stores, which shall permit the sale of malt beverages by the package as an item incidental to the sale of food and groceries plus application fee; 
c.  Class B-3. Retail malt beverages by the drink, which may only be issued for a restaurant, golf courses and private clubs, as defined herein plus application fee; 
d.  Class C-1. Wholesale wine, which shall permit only the sale of wine at wholesale plus application fee; 
e.  Class C-2. Retail wine by the package in food stores, grocery stores, supermarkets and convenience food stores, which shall permit the sale of wine by the package as an item incidental to the sale of food and groceries plus application fee; 
f.  Class C-3. Retail wine by the drink, which may only be issued for a restaurant, golf courses and private clubs, as defined herein plus application fee. 
(3)  Fees. The basic fees for each type of license listed in subsection (2) hereinabove shall be as follow: 

 
(4)  [Fees set by resolution.] The board will periodically set a nonrefundable application and/or renewal fee by resolution. License fees shall be such as are specified from time to time by resolution adopted by the board of commissioners. License fees shall be payable in advance for the entire year, beginning January 1 and ending December 31, of each year. The payment of license fees shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a license. License fees shall not be prorated for a part of a year, but the full license fee shall be payable for any part of a year. The suspension or revocation of any license granted pursuant to this article shall not entitle the licensee to a return of any portion of the license fee. 
(5)  [Modification of license.] In the event a licensee desires to modify or amend the license held by such licensee, a new application shall be made with such information as the Clerk may require to reasonably facilitating the evaluation of such modification accompanied by basic class fees and application fees. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-63. - Applications. 
(a)  All applications for licenses to sell malt beverages and wine shall be made in person by the applicant to the clerk of the board of commissioners in writing on forms furnished by the clerk. The application shall contain, but is not restricted to, the following information: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Age; 
(3)  Address; 
(4)  Length of residency in the county of the applicant; 
(5)  Name of business; 
(6)  Location of business; 
(7)  Description of the premises or place of business where the license is to be effective; 
(8)  Statement as to whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the applicant has made an application previously for any malt beverage or wine license and the disposition of such application; 
(9)  Whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime other than traffic violations; 
(10)  Whether a previous license issued to the applicant or any person with any interest in the applicant has been revoked by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government and the reason for such revocation; 
(11)  Whether any other person is interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses of the proposed business. 
(12)  Each applicant for a malt beverage or wine license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the business premises or a copy of the current lease for the premises upon which the license is to be effective. 
(13)  Proof that all state and local taxes for any real and personal property where the business is located are current. 
(b)  Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a scale drawing showing the nearest church, funeral chapel, school and college or shall have attached thereto an affidavit of a registered surveyor that the proposed location of the licensed premises complies with the distance requirements of this division and any state or federal law. 
(c)  Every application for a license shall comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(c) concerning fingerprints of the applicant. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009; Ord. of 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 6-64. - Qualifications and conditions of license holders. 
The following qualifications shall apply to applicants for a license under this division: 
(1)  All applicants for license shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall make written application to the Stephens County Clerk on forms furnished by the commissioners. The applicant shall answer all questions on the application, under oath, and shall supply all information and furnish all certificates, affidavits, bonds and other supporting data documents as required by this chapter. 
(3)  No license shall be granted under this chapter to any applicant who is not a citizen or resident legal alien of the United States. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any county employee, or his spouse or minor child directly involved in the issuance or alcoholic beverage licenses under this chapter to have any whole, particle [partial], or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the county. 
(5)  Except as otherwise specifically provided for by law, it is unlawful for any person to sell, possess, conceal, store, or convey any alcoholic beverage on which any tax or license fee imposed by this title [chapter] has not been paid. 
(6)  All owners who are residents of the county shall make application for a license in their own name. Where the owner is a corporation, partnership, association, or nonresident, the application shall be made in the name of the resident officer, partner or associate who owns a substantial interest in the business or in the name of the principal resident, managing officer, or managing agent. In such cases, the application shall show that the license is for the use of the owner who shall be named in the application. 
(7)  If the alcoholic beverage license applicant is not a legal resident of Stephens County, Georgia, the applicant must designate one or more residents of Stephens County as a managing officer or managing agent. In addition the managing officer or managing agent must be a lawful citizen of the United States or a legal resident alien. 
(8)  Where an application for a license is submitted for a nonprofit private club or a veteran's organization, the application shall be made in the name of the highest elected officer and/or the manager of the club or organization. 
(9)  When contrary to the public interest and welfare, no license shall be issued by the board of commissioner to an applicant under the following circumstances: 
a.  The applicant has been convicted or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately preceding the filing of the application for license; 
b.  The applicant has been convicted or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony not involving moral turpitude; 
c.  The applicant was convicted or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a misdemeanor, including, but not limited to, laws involving alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, wine, drugs, pornography, gambling, or tax law violations, if such conviction or plea tends to indicate that the applicant will not operate the business for which he is seeking a license in conformance with federal, state, or local laws, rules, regulations, or resolutions; 
d.  The applicant is an official or employee of the county; or 
e.  The applicant is a person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation where any manager, partner, officer, or director thereof has been convicted or pled guilty to any felony or lesser offense involving moral turpitude. 
(10)  Any licensee may not sell alcoholic beverages hereunder unless there is on duty at the licensed location at the time of such sale a person of at least 21 years of age who is in charge of that location at the time. Such on-duty personnel shall be present at the premises except for job-related absences not exceeding one hour. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009; Ord. of 7-28-2015) 
Sec. 6-65. - Fees. 
(a)  The applicant for a retail package license for the sale of malt beverages or wine shall pay to the clerk of the board of commissioners at the time of application the sum of $300.00 as an annual license fee, plus application fee for operation for one year at one location or one business where the product will be sold. 
(b)  The applicant for consumption on the premises for malt beverage or wine license shall pay to the clerk of the board of commissioners at the time of application the sum of $350.00 as an annual license fee plus application fee for operation for one year at one location or one business where the product will be sold. 
(c)  Any wholesale dealer in malt beverages or wines licensed by the state or the agent of such wholesale dealer will be granted a license upon payment of $100.00 annually for malt beverages, and $100.00 annually for wine plus the application fee; the distribution to be made outside the municipalities in the county. All appropriate and pertinent parts of this division shall be applicable to any applicant for or holder of a wholesale license to sell and/or distribute malt beverages and/or wine under this division. 
(d)  Each application for a license under this division shall be accompanied by a certified check or cash for the full amount of the license fee. Should the applicant be denied a license or should the applicant withdraw the application prior to its being submitted to the board of commissioners, a nonrefundable fee of $250.00 will be incurred to cover the cost of the application process. 
(e)  The license fees required by this section shall not be prorated for applicants whose businesses operate for less than one year. No refund shall be made to license holders who have their licenses revoked or suspended by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-66. - Approval procedures. 
(a)  After filing the application with the clerk of the board of commissioners, the applicant for a license under this division shall publish a notice of the application in a local newspaper in the county at least four times within the four weeks prior to the regular board of commissioners meeting at which the application is to be presented and considered. The notice shall contain the name of the person applying for the license and the name of the person for whom the application is submitted, if different, and the location of the proposed premises. An affidavit of the publisher or his authorized agent certifying that the advertisement has been published shall accompany each application. 
(b)  The application may be reviewed and considered by the board of commissioners at the next regularly scheduled board of commissioners meeting following the necessary publication of the application. The board of commissioners shall not act upon or vote upon the application until the second regularly scheduled board meeting following the publishing of the application. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-67. - Issuance. 
Wholesale, retail and consumption on the premises licenses for the sale of malt beverages and wine outside municipalities in the county will be issued by the board of commissioners pursuant to the rules and regulations set forth in this division. The holding of any licenses under this division is declared to be a privilege and not a right. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-68. - Renewal and transfer. 
(a)  A licensee under this division who desires to renew his license for a subsequent calendar year must file a renewal application with the clerk of the board of commissioners on or before November 15 of the preceding year. Payment of license fees for renewal shall be made at the time of application and, upon approval of the renewal application by the board of commissioners, the license will be issued. Applications for renewal shall be treated as applications for new licenses but need not be advertised and/or resurveyed. An application for renewal of an existing license may be acted upon by the board of commissioners at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the filing of the renewal application. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be transferred from one person to another in which the license was obtained, except in the case of the death of a person holding a license, in which event his executor or administrator may continue to operate under the license for six months or the balance of the year from the date of his qualification. 
(c)  Each license is issued for a specific location only and may not be transferred to another location without making a new application. 
(d)  Upon the death of any license holder, his personal representative or heirs may continue to operate under the original license for the balance of the year without payment of any fee, provided those persons are otherwise qualified as license holders. Otherwise the license may be transferred to a qualified transferee within 30 days after the condition of the estate of the deceased licensee will permit. In such case, the transferee shall pay a transfer fee equal to one-half of the original license fee. 
(e)  Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at another location must make a completely new application to transfer the license to the new location. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-69. - Building, location and distance requirements. 
(a)  No license under this division shall be issued for any location that is in violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. No license shall be issued for a location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the board of commissioners because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, or because of the effect, which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties and neighborhood. 
(b)  No license shall be issued for a location within an area where in the judgment and discretion of the board of commissioners, the number of malt beverage or wine licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
(c)  No license shall be issued for a location at which the operation of such a licensed business would violate any zoning rules and regulations of the county as now or hereafter adopted or amended. 
(d)  No license shall be issued for a location where a previous license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the board of commissioners, the problems which have arisen from the operation of a licensed business at such a location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare, or morals that the sale of malt beverages or wines be permitted at such a location. 
(e)  No license shall be issued for a location where it would violate state or local law, regulations or resolutions. 
(f)  No license for retail sales for consumption on the premises shall be issued under this division for a location where the nearest point of the main structure of the business is located within 300 feet of the nearest point of the main structure of any school or church as measured in a straight line between the two structures. The term "school" shall include kindergartens, primary and secondary schools, colleges and other educational institutions whether public or private. This provision shall not apply where it would prohibit the renewal of an alcoholic beverage license for the sale of malt beverages and wine at a location where a license holder had been granted a license under the terms of any prior county resolution relating to the sale of malt beverages and wines. If a school or church subsequently locates within 300 feet of a licensed premise, this provision shall not be applicable under such circumstances and such an event would not cause a license holder to be in violation of this provision or prohibit the renewal of a license. In such cases, the same license holder for the same place of business may renew the license as long as all of the other provisions of this division are complied with. 
(g)  No license shall be issued for any location in which the licensed premise contains a drive-in window for the sale of malt beverages and wine. 
(h)  The licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by authorized personnel of the county during regular business hours. 
(i)  Consumption on the premises licenses shall be issued only to restaurants, nonprofit private clubs and veteran organizations. Retail package licenses shall not be issued to restaurants, nonprofit private clubs and veteran organizations. 
(j)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell any malt beverage or wine for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any housing authority property. 
(k)  As used in this section, the term "school building" or "educational building' shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such building at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools and private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). The term "school building" includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. 
(l)  The term "church building" as used in this section shall mean the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes or worship. 
(m)  As to any location in the future, if the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibited in this section shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. The distance requirements herein shall not apply at any location for which a new license is applied for, if the sale of alcoholic beverages was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(n)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From property line of the tract on which is located the business regulated under this title; and 
(2)  To the property line of the tract on which is located the church, school ground or college campus; and 
(3)  Along a straight line which describes the shortest distance between the two property lines. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Cross reference— Building and building regulations, ch.18. 
Sec. 6-70. - Required reports and notices. 
(a)  A licensee under this division must report to the board of commissioners within five days any change in any interest in the licensee's business including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Any change in the division of the profits of the licensed business; 
(2)  Any change in the division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever; 
(3)  Any change in the payment of rents or leases; 
(4)  Any change in the ownership of any lease or building or land used in such business; 
(5)  Any change in the ownership of stock of any corporation that has an interest in the licensed business except for the sale of stock over the counter or through a recognized stock exchange; or 
(6)  Any change in the local management of a corporate business licensed under this division. 
(b)  After receipt of the notice of change in interest required by subsection (a), the board of commissioners shall notify the license holder within a reasonable time of any objection to the change in interest. It shall then be incumbent on that person to dispose of the interest within 30 days after the mailing of the notice by the board of commissioners, or in the event that the person fails to notify the board of commissioners of the transfer of such interest within 20 days after the acquisition thereof, then the license may be revoked by the board of commissioners until disposition of the interest has been made or notice is given to the board of commissioners of the transfer. 
(c)  The report reflecting the change in interest shall be on a form provided by the board of commissioners and shall be an amendment to the licensee's permanent license application which shall remain on file with the board of commissioners. The report shall be under oath and verified. 
(d)  At the time of each yearly renewal of a retail or consumption license on the premises, the licensee shall submit the monthly reports for the year reflecting the gross sales of food and alcoholic beverages at a 60/40 percent ratio along with each quarterly Georgia Sales and Use Report for the year to the clerk of the governing authority of Stephens County. The reports shall remain confidential. 
(e)  Copies of summaries of sales and state form ATT-122 shall be furnished to the clerk of the board of commissioners not later than the tenth day of each month by wholesale dealers selling malt beverages and wines to licensees. The report shall apply to deliveries made during the previous month. Copies of these reports shall be submitted with the excise tax described in section 6-39. 
(f)  No person knowingly and intentionally shall: 
(1)  Distill, manufacture, or make any distilled spirits, except as permitted by this title [chapter]; 
(2)  Manufacture, make, brew, or ferment any malt beverages or wine, except as permitted by this title [chapter]; 
(3)  Transport, ship, receive, possess, sell, offer to sell, distribute, or in any manner use any alcoholic beverages or alcohol, except as permitted by this title [chapter]; 
(4)  Failure to file any reports required by this title [chapter]; 
(5)  File any report required by this title [chapter] [that] is either intentionally false or fraudulent, or both; 
(6)  Fail to pay any tax or license fee imposed or authorized by this title [chapter] unless specifically exempted from such payment; 
(7)  Fail to have a sufficient bond filed with the commissioners as required by this title [chapter]; 
(8)  Evade or violate, or conspire to evade or violate, any provision or this title [chapter]. 
Any apparatus, article, or other tangible personal property used in the unlawful distillation, manufacture, or making of any alcoholic beverages is declared contraband and shall be destroyed by the officers or agents seizing the property or otherwise disposed of as the commissioners direct. 
Any person who violates the provisions of: 
Paragraph (1) of subsection (f) shall be guilty of a felony and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than one year nor more than five years; 
Paragraph (2) through (8) of subsection (f) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009; Ord. of 7-28-2015; Ord. of 12-12-2017) 
State Law reference— O.G.C.A. § 3-3-27. 
Sec. 6-71. - Gross sales requirement. 
(a)  Retail and consumption licenses shall be revoked if gross sales of groceries and food products (excluding sales of alcoholic beverages) fall below the sum of $3,000.00 monthly and if gross sales of groceries and food products (excluding sales of alcoholic beverages) fall below 50 percent of the combined business volume of groceries, food products and alcoholic beverages sold monthly for three consecutive months. 
(b)  Licensees who operate on a seasonal basis that sell alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises for six months or less per calendar year and have gross annual sales from alcoholic beverages of $500.00 or less shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection, but must otherwise meet all other requirements of this section. 
(c)  At the time of each yearly renewal of a retail or consumption license for the premises, the licensee shall submit the monthly reports for the year reflecting the gross sales of food and alcoholic beverages at a 60/40 percent ratio along with each quarterly Georgia Sales and Use Report for the year to the clerk of the governing authority of Stephens County. The reports shall remain confidential. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009; Ord. of 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 6-72. - Revocation or suspension. 
The following shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of any alcoholic beverage license issued under this division. The existence of such grounds shall be determined by the board of commissioners in its sole discretion: 
(1)  Violation by the licensee of any state or federal law or regulation, except misdemeanors, or of any resolution or ordinance of county, other than traffic violations. 
(2)  The failure of the licensee or his employees to report promptly to the sheriffs department any violation of law, regulation, county resolution or breach of the peace, disturbance, or altercation occurring on the premises 
(3)  Any conduct on the part of the licensee or his employees contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. 
(4)  Operating or conducting a business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals or in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(5)  The violation of any state or federal law or regulation, municipal ordinance, or county resolution or ordinance pertaining to alcoholic and malt beverages and wines. This ground specifically includes any violation of any provision of this article 
(6)  The violation by the licensee of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.). 
(7)  The violation by the licensee of any federal, state or local law prohibiting the sale of pornographic materials. 
(8)  Failure of the licensee to furnish to the clerk of the board of commissioners any report required by this division or any report requested in writing by the clerk. 
(9)  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who had an alcoholic beverage license revoked by any jurisdiction for violation of its laws or rules within a period of five years immediately preceding the filing of an application for a license under this division. 
(10)  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business that has been convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony not involving moral turpitude. 
(11)  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who has violated the provisions of this chapter or any law of the United Sates or any state law pertaining to the sale of malt beverages, wines or alcoholic beverages within the past five years from the date of conviction. 
(12)  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who has violated the provisions of this chapter or any law of the United States or any state law pertaining to the sale of malt beverages, wines, or alcoholic beverages within the past five years from the date of conviction. 
(13)  It shall be unlawful for any person employed or working in any capacity in any licensed premises to solicit or encourage patrons to purchase drinks to be consumed by or otherwise disposed of by any such person so employed or working (O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42). 
(14)  The following factors shall be considered on any revocation or suspension as set out above: 
a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this chapter and those set by Stephens County; 
b.  Impact of the offense on the community; 
c.  The cost to Stephens County related to compliance or enforcement efforts undertaken by Stephens County in pursuing the case; and 
d.  The cost incurred by Stephens County in order to mitigate a condition remaining as the result of the violation; 
(15)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature. 
(16)  Any peace officer or authorized agent of the commissioner shall declare as contraband any alcoholic beverage: 
a.  Not reported for collection of taxes under a reporting system established by the commissioner; 
b.  Found in any county, municipality, or unincorporated area of any county where the sale of alcoholic beverages is not lawful when the alcoholic beverage is intended for use or sale contrary to law; or 
c.  Sold, conveyed, or possessed, concealed, stored, or held for sale by any person who has not first obtained all licenses required by this title. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 6-73. - Recommendation of suspension or revocation by sheriff. 
(a)  The sheriff shall be authorized to suspend or recommend suspension or revocation of a license in the event of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Any licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
(2)  Any licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
(3)  Any licensee has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the county or a violation of any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; 
(4)  Any licensee has violated any provision of this article; 
(5)  Any licensee has been convicted of any drug-related, or sex-related crime by the state or the county regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; 
(6)  Any licensee fails to pay any fee, occupation tax, fine or other amount of money due to the county under this article or any other ordinance provision of the county; 
(7)  The performance of any act prohibited by this article or the failure to perform any act required by this article as well as the violation of any law, state or federal, relating to the business of the licensee. If such act, omission or violation is done by an agent, servant, employee, or officer of the licensee, the lack of knowledge on the part of the licensee or the lack of authorization for such act or omission or violation shall be no defense; 
(8)  The entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contender, or the conviction of any licensee with respect to a charge of violation of any of the laws of the United States or of the state relating to alcohol, or any crime, whether a felony or not, involving moral turpitude; 
(9)  Sales of beer or wine and/or any product covered under this article to any person under 21 years of age; or 
(10)  Any other act or omission with respect to the operation of a business licensed under this article which the board of commissioners shall find to be contrary to the public interest, or which shall render the licensee or the business location unfit for the continued operation or the business; 
(11)  The occurrence on two or more occasions within any 12-month period of fights, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, breach of the peace, and other similar conduct whether such conduct is committed by the licensee or by customers or others. 
(b)  In the event the sheriff recommends suspension or revocation of any license under this article, the sheriff and/or law enforcement officials shall forward to the county the facts, evidence and information leading to the recommendation of revocation or suspension by the sheriff for consideration of the Stephens County Board of Commissioners at the public hearing as provided in section 6-74 below. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009; Ord. of 7-28-2015) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 28, 2015, changed the title of § 6-73 from "Supervision or revocation by sheriff" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 6-74. - Hearings. 
(a)  A license holder under this division shall be entitled to a hearing by the board of commissioners concerning any alleged violation, which could lead to revocation or suspension of the license. The decision to revoke or suspend any license shall be in the discretion of the Stephens County Board of Commissioners. 
(b)  Upon the report to the board of commissioners of any violation of this chapter by the license holder, the clerk of the board of commissioners shall give notice to the license holder in writing to show cause before the board of commissioners why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
(c)  A written notice from the clerk shall specify the time and place for the hearing which shall be not less than three days or more than 14 days from the date of service of the notice. 
(d)  At the hearing the licensee shall have the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked. 
(e)  The board of commissioners shall hear relevant evidence as to the alleged violation of this chapter. 
(f)  The hearing need not be at a regular meeting of the board of commissioners but may be at such a time and place as shall be fixed in the notice. 
(g)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be by majority vote of the members present at the hearing; provided, however, two members must concur to pass any order. 
(h)  Within three days from the date of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall render a decision in writing and furnish a copy of the decision to the licensee. A decision of the board shall be effective immediately, whether or not the licensee can be personally served with a written copy of the decision. 
(i)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, a licensee who has had his license revoked may reapply for a license after 30 days have passed from the effective date of the revocation. Such a reapplication shall conform with all procedural requirements applicable to a new application. The board of commissioners shall consider all matters relevant to the application, including the previous revocation. 
(j)  No applicant may apply for a license during any period in which an existing license is under suspension. 
(Ord. of 10-27-2009; Ord. of 7-28-2015) 
ARTICLE III. - FARM WINERIES 
PURPOSE 
A farm winery may sell its wine and the wine of any other state farm winery licenses at retail in a tasting room or other facility on the premises of the winery for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises and to sell its wine and the wine of any other state farm winery licenses at retail for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises in tasting rooms at a location within the county that is one of the five additional locations in the state authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1(b), but only if the annual production of wine by the farm winery is made in the state in accordance with the source of berries, fruits or grapes as provided by the laws of the state and the rules and regulations of the state department of agriculture. 
(Ord. of 2-28-2012) 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY AND LICENSE 

Sec. 6-75. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board of commissioners means the Stephens County Board of Commissioners. 
Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of revenue. 
Distributor means a person or wholesaler who sells alcoholic beverage to retailers. 
Farm winery means a winery which makes at least 40 percent of its annual production from agricultural produce grown in the state where the winery is located and is located on premises, a substantial portion of which is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of grapes, berries, or fruits to be utilized in the manufacture or production of wine by the winery; or is owned and operated by persons who are engaged in the production of a substantial portion of the agricultural produce used in its annual production. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. 
Georgia farm winery means a farm winery which is licensed by the commissioner to manufacture wine in Georgia. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage, in the case of wine, any vintner. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Retail sales of wine means that each license for retail sales of wine and malt beverages consumption on the premises shall require that all consumption shall be at the farm winery site for which said license is issued. This shall include wedding, dining facilities, and festivals associated with the winery. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine providing samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine can be given free of charge or for a fee. 
Vintner means a winemaker or merchant who produces or makes wine from grapes. 
Wholesaler means a farm winery shall be granted a wholesale license for sale and distribution as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1. 
(Ord. of 2-28-2012) 
Sec. 6-76. - License required. 
(a) No entity shall engage in the business of a farm winery of any kind in the unincorporated area of the county without first obtaining a license therefore under this chapter and a license to operate a farm winery issued by the commissioner. It shall also be unlawful for any entity to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license except at tasting rooms licensed as provided herein and by the commissioner. 
(1)  Certain alcoholic beverages may be sold by a farm winery in the unincorporated area of the county under a license granted by the board of commissioners upon terms and conditions provided in this chapter and by state law. 
(2)  All licenses in this chapter shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this Code and the state law. 
(3)  All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled and is subject to any further ordinances which may be enacted." 
(4)  Any holder of a license for a farm winery issued pursuant to this chapter is required to apply for and obtain a farm winery license from the state before any sales commence. Additionally, county licensees are required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. 
(b)  A farm winery which is qualified and licensed by the state shall be allowed to manufacture wine or to distribute such wine at wholesale and at retail at its tasting room, provided that the farm winery has filed an application with copies of its license and permits from the state, along with the license fees and other requirements as hereinafter set out. A farm winery may also sell at retail in packages or for consumption on the premises or at additional licensed tasting rooms wine manufactured by other wineries. 
(c)  Retail sales of wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises licenses shall require that all consumption be at the farm winery site or approved tasting rooms, which includes wedding or dining facilities associated with the farm winery. 
(d)  In addition to the license for the farm winery operation, the board of commissioners may, upon application, issue additional licenses to the farm winery as to malt beverages as follows: 
(1)  Retail package dealer who sells malt beverages, including but not limited to beer, lager and stout, in unbroken packages at retail only and not for resale. 
(2)  Retail consumption dealer who sells malt beverages, including but not limited to beer, lager and stout, for consumption on the premises to consumers and not for resale. 
(3)  The farm winery must make an application for the sale of malt beverages but shall not be subject to any location restrictions, any of the required sales ratios, or to any other restriction. 
(e)  The board of commissioners may also issue a farm winery license for additional tasting rooms on or off the primary premises if the additional tasting room(s) are owned or leased by the primary farm winery owner and said rooms have been licensed by the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 2-28-2012) 
Sec. 6-77. - Applications. 
(a)  All applications for a farm winery license shall be made in person by the applicant to the clerk of the board of commissioners in writing on forms furnished by the clerk. The application shall contain, but is not restricted to, the following information: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Age; 
(3)  Address; 
(4)  Length of residency in the county of the applicant; 
(5)  Name of business; 
(6)  Location of business; 
(7)  Description of the premises or place of business where the license is to be effective; 
(8)  Statement as to whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the applicant has made an application previously for any malt beverage or wine license and the disposition of such application; 
(9)  Whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime other than traffic violations; 
(10)  Whether a previous license issued to the applicant or any person with any interest in the applicant has been revoked by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government and the reason for such revocation; 
(11)  Whether any other person is interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses of the proposed business. 
(12)  Proof that all state and local taxes for any real or personal property where the farm winery will be located are current. 
(b)  Each applicant for a wine license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the business premises or a copy of the current lease for the premises upon which license is to be effective. 
(c)  Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a scale drawing showing the nearest church, funeral chapel, school and college or shall have attached thereto an affidavit of a registered surveyor that the proposed location of the licensed premises complies with the distance requirements of this division and any state or federal laws. 
(d)  Every application for a license shall comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 (c) concerning fingerprints of the applicant. 
(Ord. of 2-28-2012) 
Sec. 6-78. - License fees. 
(a)  The license of the primary farm winery site shall cost $950.00, which shall cover the operation of the farm winery under the state farm winery laws and county application fee in addition: 
(1)  To sell wine or malt beverages, including but not limited to beer, lager and stout, in unbroken packages on the farm winery premises at retail and not for resale, which license shall be at no additional fee; 
(2)  To sell wine or malt beverages, including but not limited to beer, lager and stout, for consumption on the farm winery premises to consumers, which license shall be an at no additional fee; 
(3)  For each additional tasting room location on the primary farm winery premises, which license shall be at no additional fee; 
(4)  For each additional tasting room location off the primary farm winery premises that is owned or leased by the licensed entity and which is located off of the primary farm winery premises, which license shall be at no additional fee; 
(5)  For the wholesaler who sells beer, malt beverages or wine to a farm winery and whose principal place of business is located in the county, which license shall be at no additional fee. 
(b)  The board shall not prorate the annual license fee for partial year issuance. 
(Ord. of 2-28-2012) 
Sec. 6-79. - Days and hours of sale. 
Farm wineries operate during such days and hours as provided by the Farm Wineries Act, as amended, including but not limited to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2. 
(Ord. of 2-28-2012) 
Sec. 6-80. - Routes and signage. 
Farm wineries use routes and signage in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.4. 
(Ord. of 2-28-2012) 
Sec. 6-81. - License categories. 
(a)  The alcoholic beverage license issuable under article V of this chapter are: 
(1)  Farm wineries; 
(2)  Tasting rooms of farm wineries; 
(3)  Retail package dealer who sells malt beverages, including but not limited to beer, lager and stout, in unbroken packages at retail only and not for resale; 
(4)  Retail consumption dealer who sells malt beverages including, but not limited to, beer, lager and stout, for consumption on the premises to consumers and not for resale; 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall not issue an alcoholic beverage license for the sale of distilled spirits including, but not limited to, fortified wine to a farm winery. 
(Ord. of 2-28-2012) 
Sec. 6-82. - Revocation of state license. 
(a)  When the commissioner revokes any state farm winery license issued by the state, permission by the county shall automatically become invalid. 
(b)  A copy of the current state license shall accompany all application and renewals of licenses. Failure to present a valid copy of a current and valid state license will result in a refusal to issue or renew the license. Timely application for renewal is determined by the date on which a complete and proper application has been submitted. 
(c)  When the state revokes an alcoholic beverage permit or license issued under this chapter, the board of commissioners shall automatically revoke the county license without any action. 
(Ord. of 2-28-2012) 
Sec. 6-83. - Excise tax. 
An excise tax is hereby levied to be computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter on the first sale or use of the wine by the package that shall be paid to the county. Such tax shall be paid to the designee of the county board of commissioners by the licensee on wine sold in accordance with the terms hereof in the county. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any licensee in accordance with the terms hereof to sell or deliver wine in any manner without collecting said tax. 
(Ord. of 2-28-2012) 
ARTICLE IV. - TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENT LICENSE 
Purpose 
License may be issued to any person who meets the qualifications for a period not to exceed ten total days in any one year for an approved special event. To qualify for a temporary special event license an application must be submitted and the applicant must pay the fee as required in the county fee schedule and shall be required to comply with all the general ordinances, local, state and federal laws. Each individual special event shall not exceed three days. 
DIVISION 1. - TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 6-84. - Time limit of temporary license; criteria. 
(a)  The special event must meet the following criteria prior to the issuance of a license to sell alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  All applicants for license shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  The location at which the special event is to take place must be approved in writing by the owner of the property. 
(3)  Any special event license issued shall be non-transferrable. 
(4)  Applicants must comply with all local, state and federal laws governing the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  As a condition on the issuance of a temporary special event license, the licensee shall indemnify and hold the county harmless from claims, demand or cause of action which may arise from activities associated with the special event. 
(c)  The applicant seeking a temporary special event license must meet all requirements of chapter 6 of the Code of Stephens County, Georgia, except those altered by this section or those not applicable to a temporary special event. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 6-85. - License fees. 
A fee of $50.00 per day will be paid to the county clerk of the Stephens County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2017) 
Chapter 8 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1—8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the county administrator or his designee for the administration of this article. 
Special event and event mean any activity such as a festival or celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade or march, rally or assembly, or commercial filming, any event which takes place on public property, on a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, or occurs on private property and impacts government services on public rights-of-way; and which is anticipated to involve more than 50 total participants, including all participants, observers and vendors. Funeral processions shall not be considered special events within the meaning of this definition. 
Sponsor means any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for sponsoring, planning, producing and conducting an event. 
Vendor means any person who engages in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary itinerant basis on any public property, public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way. The term "vendor", as used in this article, shall not be construed to include or prohibit a permanent business, operating under the provisions of the business license ordinance and other applicable laws, from displaying goods or merchandise on a public sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to the permanent business structure so long as such displays do not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic and so long as other laws and ordinances pertaining to such business or displays are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § I, 5-6-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 8-32—8-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 8-51. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, group, organization, association, club or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any special event in the county without having obtained a valid permit for such event. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § II(a), 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-52. - Limitations and specifications. 
(a)  Geographic area; responsibility for police and sanitation service. A special event shall be limited to the specific geographic area within which the event is to take place and the sponsor of a special event shall be responsible for the provision of police and sanitation services within the boundaries of the event for a period of two hours past the conclusion of the event or until the area is cleared of all activities and structures related to such event. 
(b)  Duration. Except for clearing of the area, no special event shall be allowed to continue beyond the time approved on the permit for the event. 
(c)  Delineation of boundaries; areas of circulation. The outermost boundaries of the special event shall be fully and clearly described or may be shown on a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ by 11 inches in size, and attached to the application for a permit. All public streets and/or sidewalks within and adjacent to such area shall be clearly identified. The administrator shall require, as part of the approval for the event, that areas no less than five feet in width shall be designated and preserved for public circulation and access to adjoining business establishments outside the area delineated for the event. 
(d)  Maps for walks or runs. The sponsor of a special event such as a walk or run, as to which the provisions to subsection (c) of this section would not be practicable, shall submit with the application for a permit a map, which shall be no smaller than 8;frax;1;2 by 11 inches in size, showing the exact route of the course for the walk or run. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § II(b)—(e), 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-53. - Application; fee. 
(a)  The sponsor of a special event shall make application for a permit for such event at the office of the administrator on a form prescribed by the administrator. 
(b)  An application for a special event should be filed at least 30 days prior to the date the event is scheduled to occur. However, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the event. Applications will be processed in the order in which they are received. 
(c)  A nonrefundable application fee of $25.00 shall be paid at the time the application for a permit is filed. Such fee shall be payable to the county by cash, money order, or cashier's check. 
(d)  The application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the special event. 
(2)  If the special event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization or group, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization or group, and of the authorized and responsible heads of this organization or group. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the leader or chairman of the special event and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(4)  The date when the special event is to be conducted. 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
(6)  If an assembly, the location where the assembly will be held. 
(7)  The approximate number of persons who, and any animals and vehicles which will be involved in the special event; the type of animals and description of the vehicles. 
(8)  The hours when the special event will start and terminate. 
(9)  A statement as to whether the special event will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets or location proposed to be traversed. 
(10)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for any parade. 
(11)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at the assembly area or areas. 
(12)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade. 
(13)  If the special event is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the administrator a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the special event authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(14)  Any additional information which the administrator shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § III, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-54. - Identification of sponsor. 
The sponsor of an event, if a group or organization, shall be fully identified on the application. However, a special event permit shall be issued only to an individual person, who may be the actual sponsor or a designated agent of the sponsor, and such individual person shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements, of this article and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § IV, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-55. - Administrative review of application; special conditions. 
(a)  The administrator shall cause the application to be circulated to each government department and/or other agency whose services the administrator determines would be affected by the nature and activities of the proposed event. Each such department or agency shall review the application and note the services which it will be required to perform, the number of personnel to perform such services, the length of time to perform such services, the cost to perform such services, and any other information which would assist the administrator in facilitating the event and services required. The administrator may also consult with the managing officer of any municipality in which the event may take place. 
(b)  Each department of the government reviewing an application may recommend in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the event, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to ensure the safety, health and welfare of the community. In reviewing the recommendations of the departments, the administrator may impose such conditions or restrictions as a part of the permit and such special conditions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as provision of this article. A violation of such conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, §§ V, VI, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-56. - Final approval of permit; minimum review period. 
(a)  The administrator is authorized to approve and issue a permit for a special event after considering all comments and conditions of the reviewing departments and agencies as well as other information pertaining to the proposed event as described on the application, and after the payment of all applicable fees and costs. 
(b)  The administrator shall either issue or deny the permit no later than 15 days following the date the completed application is filed. If the permit is denied, the sponsor shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reason for the denial. 
(c)  The county administrator may deny a permit on the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for permit was made has on prior occasions made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event or activity previously permitted or has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or on behalf of the applicant. 
(2)  The application for permit (including any required attachments and submissions) is not fully completed and executed. 
(3)  The applicant has not tendered the required application fee with the application or has not tendered the required user fee, indemnification agreement, insurance certificate, or security deposit within the times prescribed by the administrator. 
(4)  The application for permit contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation. 
(5)  The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be sued. 
(6)  The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for permit was made has on prior occasions damaged county property and has not paid in full for such damage, or has other outstanding and unpaid debts to the county. 
(7)  A fully executed prior application for permit for the same time and place has been received, and a permit has been or will be granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit multiple occupancy of the particular area where the event is proposed to take place. 
(8)  The use or activity intended by the applicant would conflict with previously planned programs organized and conducted by the county and previously scheduled for the same time and place. 
(9)  The proposed use or activity is prohibited by or inconsistent with the classifications and uses of the public premises on which it is to take place. 
(10)  The use or activity intended by the applicant would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant, county employees or the public. 
(11)  The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with applicable licensure requirements, ordinances or regulations of the county concerning the sale or offering for sale of any goods or services. 
(12)  The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by law, by this Code and ordinances of the county. 
(d)  The administrator's denial shall set forth the reasons that the application is denied. If the permit is denied because a prior application was filed, the denial shall suggest alternate places and times for the special event. A denial may be appealed to the board of commissioners. The appeal shall be filed within five days after notice of denial. In the event of an appeal, the board of commissioners shall meet within seven days of the date that the appeal is filed, and shall hold a called meeting, if necessary, to consider the application within this time frame. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § VII, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-57. - Emergency issuance. 
In extraordinary circumstances, the administrator or the sheriff, as his designee, shall be authorized to waive or otherwise expedite any or all of the review process and to issue a special event permit upon payment by the sponsor of all applicable fees and costs for such event. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § VIII, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-58. - Permit fees. 
(a)  The fee for a permit to conduct a special event shall be based on services to be provided by the county for such event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to provide such services. Costs which shall be assessed to the sponsor or organization shall include the hourly wages of law enforcement personnel assigned to provide public safety at the event, the hourly wages of any sanitation workers who are assigned to the event, and the actual costs to the county of disposal of any waste. The costs assessed shall not include vehicle maintenance, depreciation, or any other administrative expense. The initial permit fee shall be the aggregate of the estimated costs of such services calculated by each government department. If, at the conclusion of the event, the cost of government services is greater than the initial payment, the sponsor of the event shall be billed for the difference. The applicant shall receive an itemization of all costs to be billed as expenses reimbursable to the county. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within 30 days of the billing date shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  The initial permit fee must be paid in full prior to the issuance of a permit and no later than 72 hours prior to the date of the event. 
(c)  The fees required in this section shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other ordinances or regulations that might be applicable. 
(d)  No sponsor of any special event, except as otherwise provided for, shall be exempt from the payment of the appropriate fees and charges required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § IX, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-59. - Liability. 
The sponsor of any special event shall indemnify and hold harmless the government of the county, its officers, employees and agents from liability of damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event. Proof of such waiver shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form. The sponsor shall be responsible for providing any and all other insurance that may be necessary for any special event. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § XI, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-60. - Duration. 
No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid prior to or past the date of the special event for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § XX, 5-6-2003) 
Secs. 8-61—8-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-81. - Vendors. 
(a)  Sales permitted. The sale of food (excluding the sale of alcoholic beverages) or any merchandise or services of any type by a vendor shall be allowed as a component of a special event, provided such vendor is approved and authorized in writing by the sponsor of the event, and shall be conducted in accordance with such conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the sponsor and submitted as part of the application for a permit. The sale of beer, wine, or any other alcoholic beverage is prohibited. 
(b)  Authorization. The sponsor of a special event shall have sole responsibility and authority to allow or disallow sidewalk or street vending as a component of an event and to designate the location and activities of such vendors. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to engage in such business at any location or in any manner not authorized by the sponsor of the event. 
(c)  Permit not required. Vendors authorized by the sponsor of an event as a component of the event shall not be required to obtain any separate vendor's permit to operate during the period of the event. However, all other vendors, of whatever nature, not authorized as a participant in the special event shall obtain the appropriate licenses and permits as required under other applicable ordinances. 
(d)  Unauthorized vending prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any vendor not authorized by the sponsor of a special event as provided under this section to engage in such business within a distance of 25 yards of such event from one hour before until one hour after the event. 
(e)  Food sales. The vendor of any food, whether hot or cold, as a part of a special event shall be subject to all rules and regulations of the county health department. It shall be the responsibility of the sponsor of an event to ensure compliance with this section by any such vendors. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § XII, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-82. - Glass containers prohibited. 
The use of glass containers within the area of any special event shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § XII, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-83. - Police services. 
Traffic and crowd control shall be provided by the county sheriff's department and the number of officers and/or special arrangements shall be determined by the sheriff. If the event takes place within a municipality, the sheriff may coordinate with the municipalities' law enforcement officials, the provision of traffic and crowd control services. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § XIII, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-84. - Toilet facilities. 
The sponsor of a special event shall be required to provide temporary outdoor toilet facilities at any event at which 200 or more persons are expected to be in attendance. The number of toilets and their locations shall be determined by the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § XIV, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-85. - Entertainment. 
Musical entertainment shall be provided in a manner consistent with the peace and good order of the community. The sponsor of the event shall be responsible for full compliance with chapter 34, article III of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § XV, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-86. - Fireworks. 
Any sponsor of an event desiring to conduct a public exhibition or display of fireworks shall first obtain a permit from the judge of probate court in accordance with the provisions set forth under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § XVI, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-87. - Tents, stages, and other temporary facilities. 
Tents, arbors, stages, grandstands or other temporary facilities constructed or erected as a part of a special event shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable building codes. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § XVII, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-88. - Street closing. 
The complete or partial closure of any street, sidewalk or other public way as a part of a special event shall be approved by the sheriff. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § XVIII, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-89. - Banners, signs, and other decorations. 
Temporary, noncommercial banners or signs may be permitted overhead across public streets for the purpose of designating "starting" and "finish" lines for a race. Small banners, pennants, signs or other decorations which do not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and which do not damage or deface any tree or public structure, may be allowed as part of a special event. The sponsor of the event shall be responsible for the removal of such banners, pennants or decorations within 48 hours after the close of the event. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § XIX, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-90. - Cessation of activities. 
The safety, health, welfare and good order of all citizens and the community shall be first and foremost and every special event shall be conducted in such manner. The sheriff may terminate any activity, whether a part of or the entire event, which does not meet this community standard. Upon notification of the event sponsor in person by the sheriff to cease any activity, it shall be unlawful for such sponsor and/or any participants to permit such activity to continue. 
(Ord No. 2003-01, § XXI, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-91. - Events taking place on public property. 
The sponsor of any event which takes place on public property shall be responsible for any damage to public property which occurs during the course of the event. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § XXII, 5-6-2003) 
Secs. 8-92—8-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 8-101. - Findings; public purpose. 
Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas and Garden Grove, California, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by Stephens County, Georgia; and based on the documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by law enforcement professionals and an expert in economic development, are familiar with conditions resulting in other localities, at the board of commissioners' hearing on November 7, 2005; and based on the evidence and testimony of persons who have appeared before members of the county board of commissioners on other occasions including the public hearing conducted on November 7, 2005, and on documentary evidence submitted to the board of commissioners, the county board of commissioners takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
It is the finding of the board of commissioners of the county that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment," (whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not) begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. The board of commissioners finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions would also result in this county. Furthermore, it is the finding of the county board of commissioners that other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited to, adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in surrounding communities. The board of commissioners finds that the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments upon the county are similar whether the adult entertainment establishment features live nude dancing or sells videotapes, DVDs, or other media depicting sexual activities. The board of commissioners of the county therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the board of commissioners of the county finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment. The board finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions and further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, this article is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-102. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which more than ten square feet of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale of any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. For purposes of this section, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult entertainment establishment shall be defined to include the following types of business: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein; 
(2)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities," as defined herein; 
(3)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) herein; 
(4)  Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" as defined herein or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or having a segment or section comprising more than ten square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; 
(5)  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
(6)  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined herein; 
(7)  The definition of "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or mainstream theater, which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution, or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. Performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise at least 80 percent of all annual performances or showings. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of videos, DVDs or other media which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Children's day care facility shall be defined as a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article the term "children's day care facility" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," or "pre-school." 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 20 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
Premises means the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult entertainment is performed. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall be defined to mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-103. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the unincorporated area of the county an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article without first procuring an annual license to do so except as specifically provided herein when the county administrator fails to approve or deny an application for an adult entertainment license within 30 days as required by this article. The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. No annual license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued by the county if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within the county in the amount of $750.00. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the county clerk of the county within ten days after the county administrator approves the initial application for an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal thereof. In any event, no adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the licensing and revenue manager on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal application received after November 30 shall pay, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs as hereinafter set forth in this article will be assessed. All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-104. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-105. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)  Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the unincorporated areas of the county shall make application to county clerk of the county. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the county, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name(s) of the operator(s) as defined herein and of the owner(s) as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee payable in cash or by certified check in the amount of $300.00 shall be paid to county clerk manager to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The county clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The application for license does not authorize the operation of, engaging in, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), if any, for a period five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s) are at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The operator(s)' height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the operator(s) at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension; 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  With respect to the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), all convictions, (excluding misdemeanor traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past five years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the permits unit of the county police department. 
(12)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operator(s); 
(13)  If the person or business entity on whose behalf application for a license is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(14)  At least three character references for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or any operator(s) or owner(s) and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted. The county shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s), who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(15)  The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(16)  A plat by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, its proximity to any residential area, church, school, public park or children's day care facility, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine or other adult entertainment establishment; 
(17)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual; 
b.  If application is made on behalf of a partnership, by a general partner; 
c.  If application is made on behalf of a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(c)  Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the county clerk and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the board of commissioners, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(d)  Investigation; standards for granting of license. The county shall have 30 days from the date of actual receipt of the application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s). The county clerk shall stamp the date of actual receipt of each application on the first page thereof and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within five business days of actual receipt of such application. The county administrator of the county shall approve or deny any application for an adult entertainment establishment license within 30 days of actual receipt of such application. The application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be granted if the county administrator finds: 
(1)  The required $300.00 investigative fee has been paid; 
(2)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(3)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of a "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 within a period of five years. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his first offender treatment; 
(4)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit revoked for cause by this county or any other county or municipality located in or out of this state prior to the date of application within the preceding five years; 
(5)  The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(6)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(7)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an operator(s) as defined herein on the premises at all times during which the business is open; 
(8)  The proposed premises will be located at least the minimum distances set forth in this article from any, church, school, public park or children's daycare facility or establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, or another adult entertainment establishment; and 
(9)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of and will not be in conflict with this article or any other law, ordinance or regulation, of the county, the state or the United States. 
The county administrator of the county shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment license if the application fails to meet any requirement contained in the county's ordinance regulating adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-106. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Location. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land on which a church, school, college campus, public park or children's day care facility is located; 
(2)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
For purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest points on the property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(1)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No employee employed as an adult entertainer shall have been convicted of an offense described in section 8-105(d)(3) of this article within the five years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment. Any adult entertainer who is convicted of any such crimes while employed as an adult entertainer shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "licensed premises" shall mean the premises where an adult entertainment establishment for which a license is obtained pursuant to this article operates, conducts or carries on its business. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Permit for employment. Before any person may work as an adult entertainer on a licensed premises, as defined in subsection (1), he or she shall file a notice with the county administrator of his or her intended employment on forms supplied by the county clerk and shall receive a permit for such employment from the county administrator. The prospective employee shall supply a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the county police department. The prospective employee shall also provide a list of all of his or her convictions of offenses described in section 8-105(d)(3) herein (including pleas of nolo contendere) within the past five years. The county administrator shall approve or deny the permit within 15 days of the application. If the prospective employee is found to meet the requirements of this subsection (b), and upon payment of the permit fee, the county administrator shall issue a permit approving such employment within 48 hours. Upon receipt of a permit, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the county administrator shall provide the prospective adult entertainer the reasons for the denial and the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, appeal to the board of commissioners which shall uphold or reverse the decision within 30 days of such appeal. If the county administrator does not approve or deny an application for a license within 45 days of the date such application was received by the county administrator, then on the expiration of the forty-fifth day: (1) the application shall be approved and the county administrator shall immediately issue the license for which application was made, and (2) the applicant shall have the right to begin operating in the manner allowed by the license for which application was made. The annual permit fee shall be $25.00. 
(3)  Suspension or revocation of permit; procedure. Violation by an adult entertainer of the provisions of this article and/or conviction of an offense described in section 8-105(d)(3) of this article shall subject an adult entertainer to suspension or revocation of the permit for employment. Whenever the county administrator finds that reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a permit for employment issued hereunder, he or she shall schedule a hearing before the county commission to consider such action and shall notify the employee at least 20 days prior to the hearing of the time and place of the hearing and the proposed action and grounds therefore. The employee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses with or without legal counsel. The county commission shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the employee promptly in writing. In the event that a permit for employment is suspended or revoked by the licensing and revenue board of appeals, a $50.00 appeal cost shall be assessed against the permit holder. 
(4)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors working as adult entertainers shall be considered as employees and shall be required to satisfy the provisions of this article relating to employees of adult entertainment establishments, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  Hours of operation. An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(d)  Display of licenses. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this article. 
(e)  Performance area. All dancing by adult entertainers at adult entertainment establishments shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(f)  Lighting. All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(g)  Covering of windows and doors. All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this article shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-107. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  Advertising without license. No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 18 years or an adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Sale, consumption of alcohol. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(d)  Contact between patrons, employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(e)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  Public indecency prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(g)  [Admission of minors unlawful.] It shall be unlawful for a licensee, employee or patron to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises, including the parking lot or curtelage. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-108. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of sections 8-106 or 8-107 of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each day of operation in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-109. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-110. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  Cleaning of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the county and the state. 
(b)  Inspection of licensed premises. The county marshal shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments, to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes of the county. 
(c)  Inspection for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The county sheriff shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-111. - Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. 
(1)  A license may be denied to persons or entities that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements of the county's ordinance regulating adult entertainment establishments found at sections 8-103 through 8-107 of this Code. 
(2)  Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license: 
a.  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
b.  Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this article; 
c.  With respect to the applicant, operator(s) and owner(s), conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license under section 8-106(b)(1) above. 
(b)  Denial; procedure. Within 30 days of actual receipt of an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the county administrator shall either approve or deny the application. In no event shall the county administrator's decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be withheld for more than 30 days after actual receipt of the application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than 30 days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The county administrator shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the county administrator of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than 30 days following actual receipt of the application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by this sentence shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations contemplated by the application, the county administrator shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the county administrator denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five business days of such denial. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the county, its officials, employees or agents pursuant to this article, may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the superior court of the county or any other court of competent jurisdiction including, but not limited to, a mandamus petition pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 9-6-20—9-6-28. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation; procedure. Whenever the county administrator finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the board of commissioners shall schedule a hearing to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefore. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The board of commissioners shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five business days of the decision. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-112. - Miscellaneous. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-113. - Severability. 
If any portion or subsection of this article or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-114. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-115. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All resolutions or ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-116. - Physical layout of establishment. 
Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the adult entertainment establishment is located. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2005) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34. 
State Constitution reference— Power of county to provide animal control services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 
State Law reference— Dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; removal of identifying item from animal, O.C.G.A. § 16-9-71; destroying or injuring police dog or police horse, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-107; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; inspection of animals, carcasses, meat, and meat food products, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-100 et seq.; game and fish, O.C.G.A. title 27; technical assistance for control or elimination of wild or abandoned dogs, O.C.G.A. § 27-1-7; hunting with dogs, O.C.G.A. § 27-3-16 et seq.; killing of dogs pursuing or killing deer, O.C.G.A. § 27-3-49; guide dogs and service dogs for persons with disabilities, O.C.G.A. § 30-4-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; civil liability for damage done by animals, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL 

Sec. 10-31. - Title and purpose of article. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the animal control ordinance. The purpose of this article is to establish an animal control department and officer of such department. The further purpose of this article is to set forth requirements for possessing animals and fowl, including, but not limited to, vaccination, confinement, disposition, humane disposal, abandonment, registration, and other provisions. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § I) 
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means any domesticated animal which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of such property. Any domesticated animal shall also be considered abandoned which shall have been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of such animal unattended and without food and water for any period of time sufficient to create a danger to the health of such animal. 
Animal means any and all types of animals, both domesticated and wild. 
Animal auction means any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this article. Individual sales of animals by owners are not auctions. 
Animal control department means the Toccoa-Stephens County Animal Control Department, which is established by the board of commissioners and is charged with enforcing the provisions of this article. 
Animal control officer means an individual employed by the board of commissioners or its designee to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, animal auction, kennel, performing animal exhibition, or animal shelter, or other facility engaged in the handling of animals, except that this term shall not include veterinary medical facilities, licensed research facilities, facilities operated by government agencies, or licensed animal dealers regulated by the USDA under the provisions of U.S. PL 89544 and 91579. 
Animal shelter means a facility designated or recognized by the county governing authority for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this article or the laws of the state. 
At large means off the premises of the owner or custodian of the animal or fowl, and not under the immediate control of the owner or custodian. 
Board means the animal control board. 
Confined means kept in a building, pen, or fenced area, secured by a leash or other enclosure built to prevent intrusion or escape by any animal. 
Cruelty means every act, omission or neglect whereby unjustifiable pain, suffering, maiming or death may be caused or permitted to any animal. 
Dangerous animal means any dog or other animal that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property at any time; 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or other animals without provocation after the animal has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal and after the owner has been notified of such classification; 
(3)  Causes reasonable fear of bodily injury to any person by attacking or threatening to attack such person; or 
(4)  Has killed another domesticated animal. 
Fowl means any and all fowl, domesticated or wild. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon verbal approval or command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which it is located. 
Humane manner means care of an animal to include, but not limited to, adequate heat, ventilation and sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species, and breed. 
Kennel means an establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling, buying, boarding, exhibiting, letting for hire, or training for a fee, animals. 
Licensing authority means the agency of the county, or designated representative thereof, charged with administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this article. 
Neutered and spayed mean rendered permanently incapable of reproduction. 
Nuisance means an animal that: 
(1)  Damages, soils, or defecates on private property other than the owner's or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner. 
(2)  Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking. 
(3)  Chases vehicles or attacks other animals. 
(4)  Causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions. 
(5)  Molests, attacks, or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public or private property, unless the animal is a guard dog actively performing its duties while confined to the property of the owner or responsible person. 
Owner, tenant, custodian means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust, owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal within the county, or knowingly permitting a dog or other animal to be in his care, or who permits a dog or other animal to remain on or about the premises. 
Potentially dangerous animal means any dog or other animal that without provocation bites a human being or other animal on public or private property. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and if the animal is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; records of any animal control officer as provided in this article; or records of any dog control officer provided for in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Restraint; under control means that an animal is confined by a fence, pen, cage or secure enclosure to the premises of its owner or secured by a leash, chain or lead of sufficient strength to prevent it from escaping from the premises of its owner or is restrained by a leash, chain or lead or confined in an automobile when away from the premises of the owner. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
Vicious means any animal which has attacked or has attempted to attack without reasonable provocation any person or animal. 
Wild and exotic animals means any monkey or other nonhuman primate, or any raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, ferret, bear, wild rabbit, tarantula, wild rodent, and reptiles, including, but not limited to, crocodiles, alligators, snakes, caiman, and gravials, and any other animal so designated by the animal control department. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § II) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-33. - Penalty. 
Any person violating this article may be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for the first offense and not more than $500.00 for each subsequent offense. Punishment is mandatory for any such subsequent offense. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § XVI(4)) 
Sec. 10-34. - Creation and staffing of animal control department. 
There is created the Toccoa-Stephens County Animal Control Department which shall have the primary responsibility for animal control in the unincorporated areas of the county. The department shall be staffed by such employees as may be deemed feasible and appropriate from time to time by the county board of commissioners, taking into account the need for such employees and available budgetary resources. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § III(1)) 
Sec. 10-35. - Responsibility and duties of animal control department. 
The animal control department shall comply with intergovernmental agreements among local government and have the following responsibilities and duties: 
(1)  Be responsible for the operations of any animal shelter which may be established by the board of commissioners in the performance of such duties and the keeping of such records related to animal control and welfare as the board of commissioners may require. 
(2)  To cooperate with the county health department in the enforcement of rabies control regulations and animal control directives. 
(3)  To cooperate with the county humane society. 
(4)  To take up and impound animals which are in violation of this article. 
(5)  To prosecute in the courts of the county, as well as any appeals therefrom, any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § III(2)) 
Sec. 10-36. - Appointment of animal control officer. 
An animal control officer shall be appointed who shall serve pursuant to this article and whose duties shall be, but shall not be limited to, the duties of a dog control officer as those duties are set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-20—4-8-30. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § IV) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-91 et seq. 
Sec. 10-37. - Rabies vaccinations required. 
No person shall own, keep or harbor any animal capable of being infected with rabies, that is over three months of age, within the county unless such animal is vaccinated for rabies. All animals shall be vaccinated for rabies by licensed veterinarians. A certificate of vaccination for rabies shall be issued to the owner of each animal vaccinated along with a vaccination tag indicating the year in which it was issued. The rabies tag shall be secured to a collar on the animal in a manner that it cannot be easily removed or lost by the animal. Tags are not transferable from one animal to another animal. The animal control department may adopt such other rabies control regulations as it deems necessary for the protection of the public health and safety. The owner of such animal shall retain in his possession a certificate of vaccination or other written proof that such animal has been given a current vaccination. All rules and regulations of the county board of health and the state department of human resources presently existing or as adopted in the future pertaining to rabies control and vaccinations are incorporated in this section by reference as though fully set forth in this section. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § V(1)) 
Sec. 10-38. - Confinement of biting animal. 
Any animal that is known to have bitten, scratched or attacked a person shall be confined for the purposes of rabies observation to an animal control facility, to a veterinary facility or to such other facility as may be directed by the animal control officer for a period of ten days after the date of the bite, scratch or attack. All expenses incurred for such confinement and observation shall be paid by the owner of such animal. Only animals which appear well shall be released from quarantine or impoundment. All animals capable of being infected with rabies that have come in contact with a rabid animal shall be destroyed by a humane method or shall be quarantined and/or vaccinated. If no vaccinations have been given within the previous 12 months, the animal may be vaccinated and then quarantined for 90 days. If vaccinated within the previous 12 months, the animal shall be revaccinated and then quarantined for 30 days. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § V(2)) 
Sec. 10-39. - Veterinary report. 
Whenever a veterinarian is called upon to examine an animal capable of transmitting rabies and that has bitten, scratched or attacked any person, he shall promptly report the results of his examination to the county board of health and the animal control department. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § V(3)) 
Sec. 10-40. - Possession of vicious animal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or maintain within the county any animal that is a vicious animal, unless such animal is confined in a proper enclosure. It shall be unlawful to permit the animal to leave such enclosure unless the animal is muzzled so as to make it impossible for the animal to bite. In the discretion of the animal control officer and a licensed veterinarian, a vicious animal shall be surrendered to and put to death by the animal control officer to prevent further injury to the public when it has been involved in one or more unprovoked attacks where bodily injury resulted. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § VI(1)) 
Sec. 10-41. - Posted warning. 
Clearly visible signs, including a symbol designed to inform children, shall be posted warning that there is a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal or other animal on the property by the owner. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § VI(2)) 
Sec. 10-42. - Impoundment. 
Any animal that is out of control or unattended or otherwise in violation of this article, whether or not the animal is on public or private property, may be impounded by the animal control department in accordance with rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § VII(1)) 
Sec. 10-43. - Redemption. 
It shall be the responsibility of the animal control department to attempt to notify the owner, if known, or can be reasonably ascertained, of every animal impounded, by telephone if possible, or written notice at the residence of the owner within one working day of the impoundment. The owner of the animal may claim and take custody of the animal within five days of such impoundment by the payment of required fees and the cost of inoculation and veterinary services. Any person reclaiming an animal shall pay a $20.00 impoundment fee for the first impoundment, $25.00 for the second impoundment, and $30.00 for each subsequent impoundment plus $10.00 per day for board plus the cost of inoculation and/or veterinary services. The owner shall be liable for the costs of impoundment and other applicable costs without regard to whether the animals is reclaimed. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § VII(2)) 
Sec. 10-44. - Adoption of impounded animals. 
The animal control department may offer for adoption any animal unclaimed after five days following impoundment or any animal that has been donated to the department for the purpose of adoption as provided for in this article. Any animal may be donated for adoption only by a resident of the county and may be made available for adoption upon the determination by the animal control officer that the animal is in reasonably good health and temperament. No unclaimed animal which is not neutered or spayed shall be released from the animal control department without written agreement from the person adopting the animal that such animal will be sterilized within 30 days from the date of adoption. Adopted animals under six months old must be sterilized by the time the animal is seven months old. The person adopting the animal will be responsible for any cost included in the adoption fee. Written proof of sterilization must be forwarded to the department by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § VII(3)) 
Sec. 10-45. - Disposition of unredeemed or unclaimed animals. 
Any animal or fowl not redeemed within five days after the owner is notified may be disposed of by euthanasia or adoption. The owner of the hospital or shelter is made an agent of the county for this purpose, and his actions in this regard are declared to be for a governmental purpose. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § VII(5)) 
Sec. 10-46. - Injured animals. 
After a reasonable inquiry and investigation to determine the owner of an animal, the animal control department or other authorized agent shall have the authority to humanely dispose of any animals which are diseased or injured, whenever it shall appear that any such animal is suffering great pain and whenever the animals do not bear a tag identifying the owner. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § VII(7)) 
Sec. 10-47. - Escape, injury, or theft. 
Employees of the animal control department shall exercise reasonable care to prevent the injury, escape, or theft of any animal which is in their custody or which they are attempting to bring into their custody under the provisions of this article, but they shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § VII(8)) 
Sec. 10-48. - Animals running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any horses, cattle, mules, sheep, hogs, goats, or fowl to permit them to run at large in the county or to stray from the premises of the owner or keeper or to go upon the premises of any other person. This does not include dogs and cats that have been properly vaccinated and are wearing a collar with an appropriate vaccination tag. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § VII(9)) 
Sec. 10-49. - Animal shelter. 
An animal shelter is created by the animal control department. The animal shelter shall have the animals impounded by or donated to the animal control department. In addition to the fees established in this article, the animal control department shall establish fees for the apprehension, adoption and disposal of animals impounded under the provisions of this article. Such fees in all events shall be sufficient for the animal control department to recover its costs incurred in the administration of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § VII(10)) 
Sec. 10-50. - Guard dogs. 
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or custodian of any residential or commercial property on which a guard dog is kept for security purposes to post a notice in a prominent and conspicuous location on such property. Such notice shall comprise the words "Warning Guard Dog" and shall be in a clearly contrasting color. Such letters shall be not less than one inch in width and not less than five inches in height. If a guard dog is confined within a fenced area, such notice shall be conspicuously posted upon such fence at every entrance and exit of the fence. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § VIII) 
Sec. 10-51. - Animals in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring an animal onto the confines of any Stephens County Park or Government Building premises. The provisions hereof shall not apply to a bona fide seeing eye dog, other guide dog, or to horses, livestock, or other animals that are participants in a horseshow or authorized animal exhibition. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § IX; Ord. No. 04-03, 6-11-2004) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 50. 
Sec. 10-52. - Abuse of animals. 
The animal control department shall be authorized to remove or cause to have removed to a safe location any animal that appears to be abused or suffering undue pain from abuse or neglect, as may be necessary to prevent further suffering. The owner or possessor of the animal shall be charged with cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § X) 
Sec. 10-53. - Animal giveaway. 
No person in the county shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement, or offer such animal as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § XI) 
Sec. 10-54. - Removal of waste or carcass. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to refuse or fail to immediately remove any feces deposited by such animal upon the public sidewalks, public streets, public parks or any other public property in the county. 
(b)  The owner of a dead animal located upon the public streets and ways shall remove the same so as not to constitute a nuisance. If the owner fails to do so, the county shall remove and dispose of such carcass, and charge the cost of such removal and disposal to the owner of the carcass, if known, when any animal is found on private property. The owner of the dead animal or the owner of the premises upon which such animal is located shall remove the animal immediately at his own cost. Upon failure to do so within a reasonable time, the county shall remove the animal. The cost shall be collected from the owner of the dead animal and/or the property. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § XII) 
Sec. 10-55. - Nuisance. 
No person shall allow any animal over which he has custody or control to remain on his property or premises if the animal shall constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § XIII) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 34-71. 
Sec. 10-56. - Wild and exotic animals. 
No person shall own, keep, or harbor or permit to be kept or harbored a wild or exotic animal within the county, other than those licensed and approved in writing by the animal control department, which licenses may be granted upon presentation of evidence satisfactory to the animal control department that appropriate safeguards for the protection of the public are maintained. The animal control department may impound any wild or exotic animal that is owned, kept or harbored in violation of this article, and may destroy or rehabilitate any such animal upon conviction of its owner or other responsible person for violation of this article, notwithstanding the impoundment provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § XIV) 
Sec. 10-57. - Restraint. 
(a)  Maintenance of premises and disturbing noises. An owner of an animal shall maintain such owner's premises in such a manner as not to constitute either a private nuisance to adjoining property owners or a nuisance to the public generally. Pens in which animals are confined or maintained shall be cleaned regularly so that they are kept free from offensive odors which would disturb any person residing within a reasonable distance of such premises, and the animals themselves shall be restrained in such a fashion that noise emanating therefrom shall not be disturbing to such persons. 
(b)  Confinement of animals. An animal, whether vaccinated or not vaccinated, shall be confined such that the animal is within an adequate fence or enclosure or within a house, garage or other building, or shall be confined by a chain or leash affixed to its collar and attached to some substantial stationary object adequate to prevent the animal from running at large. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § XV) 
Sec. 10-58. - Conduct of hearings. 
Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(e), the county board of health is designated to conduct the hearings provided for in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. 
(Res. of 1-3-1989) 
Sec. 10-59. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by the animal control department, the county marshal/code enforcement officer or the sheriffs department, or authorized representative. Upon information known to, or sworn statement lodged with, the county administrator or authorized officers of the animal control department that any owner of an animal is in violation of this article, a summons may be served upon authority of the county administrator by authorized officers requiring the owner of the animal to appear before the county magistrate court on a day and time certain to stand trial for violation of this article. If such violation has been witnessed by an officer, a subpoena may be issued to the person supplying the information on which a formal charge may be made to appear at such time and date to testify on behalf of the county. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § XVI(1)) 
Sec. 10-60. - Obstruction of officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere with, harass, or otherwise obstruct the performance of any officer or authorized representatives of the animal control department in the official performance of his/her duties as provided for this article. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § XVI(2); Ord. of 8-12-2014) 
Sec. 10-61. - Power to issue citations. 
Officers of the Toccoa Police Department, officers of the animal control department, and the county marshal/code enforcement officer or authorized representatives are authorized to issue a summons relative to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-16-1999, § XVI(3); Ord. of 8-12-2014) 
Chapter 14 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Aviation, O.C.G.A. title 6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT ZONING 

Sec. 14-31. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Toccoa Airport Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § I) 
Sec. 14-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Airport means the Toccoa Airport. 
Airport elevation means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area. 
Airport hazard means any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for or is otherwise hazardous to the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport. 
Airport reference point means the point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
Board of adjustment means the board consisting of five members appointed by the Toccoa-Stephens County Airport Authority as provided in this article. 
Height means, for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
Landing area means the area of the airport used for the landing, takeoff or taxiing of aircraft. 
Nonconforming use means any structure, tree, or use of land which is lawfully in existence at the time of that regulation prescribed in this article or an amendment thereto becomes effective and does not then meet the requirements of this article. 
Noninstrument runway means a runway other than an instrument runway. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other representative. 
Runway means the paved surface of an airport landing strip. 
Structure means an object constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission lines. 
Tree means any object of natural growth. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § II) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-33. - Penalties. 
Each violation of this article or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated under this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00 or imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § XII) 
Sec. 14-34. - Zones. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the noninstrument approach zones, transition zones, horizontal zone and conical zone. Such areas and zones are shown on the Toccoa Airport zoning map consisting of one sheet, prepared by the City of Toccoa and dated December 20, 1961, which is attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and made a part of this article. The various zones are established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Noninstrument approach zone. A noninstrument approach zone is established at each end of all noninstrument runways on the Toccoa Airport for noninstrument landings and takeoffs. The noninstrument approach zone shall have a width of 250 feet at a distance of 200 feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 2,250 feet at a distance of 10,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Transition zones. Transition zones are established adjacent to each noninstrument runway and approach zone as indicated on the zoning map. Transition zones, symmetrically located on either side of runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning map. Transition zones extend outward from a line 125 feet on either side of the centerline of the noninstrument runway, for the length of such runway plus 200 feet on each end; and are parallel and level with such runway centerlines. The transition zones along such runways slope upward and outward one foot vertically for each seven feet horizontally to the point where they intersect the surface of the horizontal zone. Further, transition zones are established adjacent to noninstrument approach zones. These transition zones have variable widths, as shown on the zoning map. Such transition zones flare symmetrically with either side of the runway approach zones from the base of such zones and slope upward and outward at the rate of one foot vertically for each seven feet horizontally to the points where they intersect the surfaces of the horizontal and conical zones. 
(3)  Horizontal zone. A horizontal zone is established as the area within a circle with its center at the airport reference point and having a radius of 5,000 feet. The horizontal zone does not include the noninstrument approach zones and the transition zones. 
(4)  Conical zone. A conical zone is established commencing at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extending to a distance of 8,000 feet from the airport reference point. The conical zone does not include the noninstrument approach zones and transition zones. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § III) 
Sec. 14-35. - Height limitations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the height limit established in this article for such zone. Such height limitations are computed from the established airport elevation and are established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Noninstrument approach zones. One foot in height for each 20 feet in horizontal distance beginning at a point 200 feet from, and of the elevation of, the end of the noninstrument runway and extending to a point 10,200 feet from the end of the runway; 
(2)  Transition zones. One foot in height for each seven feet in horizontal distance beginning at any point 125 feet normal to and at the elevation of the centerline of noninstrument runways extending 200 feet beyond each end thereof, extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 990 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits of one foot vertical height for each seven feet horizontal distance measured from the edges of all approach zones and extending upward and outward to the points where they intersect the horizontal or conical surfaces; 
(3)  Horizontal zone. One hundred fifty feet above the airport elevation or a height of 1,140 feet above mean sea level; and 
(4)  Conical zone. One foot in height for each 20 feet of horizontal distance beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone extending to a height of 300 feet above the airport elevation. 
(b)  Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to 45 feet above the surface of the land. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § IV) 
Sec. 14-36. - Use restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § V) 
Sec. 14-37. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of August 7, 1962, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing contained in this article shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to August 7, 1962, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Toccoa-Stephens County Airport Authority to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the Toccoa-Stephens County Airport Authority. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § VI) 
Sec. 14-38. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. Except as specifically provided in subsections (a)(1), (2) and (3) of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations prescribed in this article. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. 
(1)  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and the conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when because of terrain, land contour or topographic features such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zone. 
(2)  In the areas lying within the limits of the noninstrument approach zones but at a horizontal distance of not less than 2,200 feet from each end of the runways, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such noninstrument approach zone. 
(3)  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this article except as set forth in section 14-35. 
(b)  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on August 7, 1962, or on the effective date of any amendments to this article or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the building official determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. 
(e)  Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the Toccoa-Stephens County Airport Authority at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § VII) 
Sec. 14-39. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the building official to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed in this article. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the building official upon a form furnished by him. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the building official shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by him. Applications for action by the board of adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the building official. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § VIII) 
Sec. 14-40. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  There is created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building official in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which such board of adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass. 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the Toccoa-Stephens County Airport Authority and each shall serve for a term of three years and until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of one year, two for a term of two years and two for a term of three years. Members shall be removable by the appointing authority for cause upon written charges, after a public hearing. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this article. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the building official and shall be a public record. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this article. 
(e)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the building official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to effect any variation in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § IX) 
Cross reference— Other boards and commissions, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 14-41. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the building official made in his administration of this article, if of the opinion that a decision of the building official is an improper application of these regulations, may appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(b)  All appeals under this section must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the building official a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building official certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the agency from which the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § X) 
Sec. 14-42. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment, may appeal to the superior court of the county as provided in 1961 Ga. Laws, page 2423. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § XI) 
Sec. 14-43. - Conflicting regulations. 
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1962, § XIII) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building and location requirements for malt beverages and wine, § 6-69; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; erection of streets, § 66-44; design standards for blocks and lots, § 66-181 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Constitution reference— Building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 
State Law reference— Buildings and housing, O.C.G.A. title 8; adoption and administration of codes, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-25, 36-13-1 et seq.; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. title 25; electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors and utility contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; nonresident contractors, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 2-3-2010, adopted Feb. 3, 2010, amended art. II in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. II derived from Ord. No. 93-1, §§ 1—5, adopted Aug. 17, 1993. 

Sec. 18-31. - Adoption. 
(a)  It is the intent of the Stephens County government to enforce the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
(1)  International Building Code; 
(2)  International Mechanical Code; 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code; 
(4)  International Plumbing Code; 
(5)  National Electric Code; 
(6)  International Fire Code; 
(7)  International Residential Code for One- and Two- Family Dwellings; and 
(8)  Georgia State Energy Code. 
(b)  The following appendices of said codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  Standard Building Code: Appendix C, J; 
(2)  Standard Mechanical Code: Appendix: n/a 
(3)  Standard Plumbing Code: Appendix D; 
(4)  Standard Gas Code: Appendix : n/a 
(5)  Standard fire Prevention Code: Appendix n/a 
(6)  IRC One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code: Appendix n/a. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Sec. 18-32. - Application of codes; administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this division [article] is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes as allowed heretofore adopted. Hereinafter all of the codes heretofore adopted shall be referred to as the "technical codes," as may be adopted by the state or local jurisdiction. 
(b)  Code remedial. 
(1)  General. These codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare; through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(2)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(3)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan, under the requirements of this code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The county, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system, or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to inspection or permitting. 
(c)  Scope. 
(1)  Applicability. 
a.  General . Where, in any specific case, different sections of these codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
b.  Building . The provisions of the Standard Building Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures except in one- and two- family dwellings. 
c.  Electrical . The provisions of the National Electric Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alteration, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
d.  Gas . The provisions of the Standard Gas Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two- family dwellings. 
e.  Mechanical . The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, except in one- and two- family dwellings. 
f.  Plumbing . The provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code, as amended, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewage system. 
g.  Fire prevention . The provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
h.  Energy . The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as amended, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
i.  International Residential One- and Two- Family Dwelling . The provisions of the International One- and Two- Family Dwelling Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- and two-family dwelling or appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
j.  The Unsafe Building Abatement Code . The provisions of this code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(2)  Federal and state authority . The provisions of this code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(3)  Appendices . Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(4)  Referenced standards . Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(5)  Maintenance . All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(d)  Building department . There is hereby established a department to be called the building inspection department and the person in charge shall be called the building official. The qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel to be established by the governing body. 
(1)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this code, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of the specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(2)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(3)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of this code, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this code shall be defended by the department of law until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(4)  Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report to the governing body covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report as summary of the decisions of the board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
(e)  Existing buildings. 
(1)  General . Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. If such work exceeds 50 percent of market value of the building then said building shall be brought to current codes. 
(2)  Change of occupancy . If the occupancy of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
(f)  Special historic buildings . The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structure shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Sec. 18-33. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the technical codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Sec. 18-34. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)  General . The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(b)  Right of entry . 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provisions of this code, or whenever the building official has reason to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first show proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  Whenever the building official shall have first obtained an administrative warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code. 
(c)  Stop work orders . Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(d)  Revocation of permits . 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application . The building official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this code in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions . The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this code. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures, or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Secs. 18-35—18-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Permits for manufactured homes and trailers, § 46-71 et seq. 

Sec. 18-71. - Required. 
(a)  The county will require a building permit for all construction projects that either: 
(1)  Alter the existing footprint of a structure; 
(2)  Are 150 square feet or greater or are more than one story; or 
(3)  Require water/sewer or electricity connections. 
(b)  Examples of projects which require a permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Commercial buildings; 
(2)  Residential buildings; 
(3)  Location of a mobile home; 
(4)  Location of a travel trailer used as a part-time or seasonal residence; 
(5)  Garage; 
(6)  Carport; 
(7)  Completion of any unfinished areas within a residence or building; 
(8)  Boat docks (costing more than $5,000.00). 
(c)  Examples of projects which do not require a permit include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Roofing material change; 
(2)  Exterior siding change; 
(3)  Replacement of floor covering; 
(4)  Painting; 
(5)  Wallpapering; 
(6)  Sidewalks or driveways; 
(Ord. No. 87-1, § I, 7-7-1987; Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Sec. 18-71.1 - Violations; penalties. 
The enforcement of the building permit ordinance will be placed with the board of commissioners or their designee and will include the following penalties: 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of Stephens County, and upon conviction such a violation shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60, subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and subject to imprisonment for no more than 60 days or both, except where otherwise provided by general law, or by subsequent amendment of O.C.G.A § 15-10-60. O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60,et seq. shall govern the trial of any violation of this article, and any violation of this article may be tried upon citation as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. The county board of commissioners or its designee will have the authority to issue stop work orders when violations are discovered. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Sec. 18-71.2. - Provisions of electric power, construction or grading. 
No electric power is to be connected to property and no construction or grading may take place until a building permit is issued. Minor land clearing activity unrelated to a building construction project is allowable without a building permit, unless the property is in a mountain protection zone or a stream buffer, and provided that such clearing is not in violation of local or state law. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Sec. 18-72. - Compliance with requirements. 
No building permit will be issued until all other local and state laws have been met. These ordinances include, but are not limited to: minimum lot size ordinance; soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance; Georgia Planning Act, O.C.G.A 111-12-3.01; Stephens County Mobile Home Ordinance; mountain protection ordinance; flood damage control ordinance; watershed ordinance; wetland protection ordinance; subdivision ordinance; and state law dealing with state highway access. 
(Ord. No. 87-1, § II, 7-7-1987; Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Sec. 18-72.1. - Validity; expiration prior to completion. 
Building permits will be valid for one year from the date of application for new structures and six months for a mobile home. Building permits are not renewable and if the permit expires prior to completion of the project a replacement permit must be purchased. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Sec. 18-73. - Violation. 
Failure to secure a building permit required by this article shall be a violation of a duly adopted ordinance of the county. The procedure for enforcement of this article shall be as provided in article 4 of chapter 10 of title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.). Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 87-1, § V, 7-7-1987) 
Sec. 18-74. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Application. 
(1)  When required . Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
EXCEPTION: Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
a.  Any portable heating appliance; 
b.  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
c.  Any portable cooling unit; 
d.  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code; 
e.  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
f.  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
g.  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(2)  Work authorized . A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits will be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs . Normal repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(4)  Information required . Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations . An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned (building) 12 months, (mobile home) six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless an inspection is conducted within six months of the permit issuance, and a minimum of one approved inspection must be conducted within one year of last inspection to keep permit active. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements . When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data . The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional . 
a.  The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data for the following: 
1.  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
2.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
3.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
b.  For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
c.  EXCEPTION: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity . Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings . Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies . The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan . A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identifies with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan . A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review . The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Affidavits . The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the Board of Commissioners/road department for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in chapter 22 of the Standard Building Code. 
(e)  Contractors' responsibilities . It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit . 
(1)  Permit intent . A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this code. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned (building) 12 months, (mobile home) six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless an inspection is conducted within six months of the permit issuance, and a minimum of one approved inspection must be conducted within one year of last inspection to keep permit active. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of affidavit . Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans . When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance". One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas system, etc. has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and subject to imprisonment for no more than 60 days or both. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same were paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. No. 87-1, § III, 7-7-1987; Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Sec. 18-75. - Fees. 
Fees for building permits required by this article shall be as set by the board of commissioners by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 87-1, § IV, 7-7-1987) 
Sec. 18-76. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection 18-76(b). He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located is such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and as many inspections as necessary until the building official is satisfied that the technical codes have been met, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.  Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents are complete. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. All branch circuit wiring is in place for all receptacles and lighting outlets, all feeders to panel. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed and before backfill is put into place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and braces are put in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, DWV and water tests are in place, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
d.  Note: See section 311 of the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, test placed on piping and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. The inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final piping inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of this code and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)  Energy. 
a.  Foundation inspection. To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
b.  Frame inspection. To be made before exterior wall insulation concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior wall insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.  Final inspection. o be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(g)  Written release . Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems . Reinforcing steel, structural frames insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection . In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Sec. 18-77. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)  Certificate of completion . Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building for acclimatization of sensitive materials systems to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(h)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy . An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies . It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent proprietor or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Sec. 18-78. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Sec. 18-79. - Construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(a)  Appointment . There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of five members and two alternates. The governing body shall appoint the board. 
(b)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  Membership . The construction board of adjustment and appeals should consist of five members. Such board members should be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience in the technical codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members, there should be two alternate members, one member at large from the building industry and one member at large from the public. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(2)  Terms. The terms of office of the board member shall be staggered so no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. The two alternates, if appointed, shall serve one-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(3)  Quorum and voting . A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this code, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed shall vote. 
(4)  Secretary of board . The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(c)  Powers . The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the technical codes. 
(d)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decision of the building official . The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.  The provisions of this code do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of this code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Variances . The construction board of adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this code to other buildings, structures or service systems. 
d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
e.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(3)  Condition of variances . In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this code. 
(4)  Notice of appeal . Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed 15 calendar days after the building official renders his decision. Appeals shall be in the form acceptable to the building official. 
(5)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems . In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(e)  Rules and regulations . The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 15 calendar days after the notice of appeal has been received. 
(1)  Decisions . The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of this code, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Secs. 18-80—18-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER CONSERVATION IN CONSTRUCTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Requirements for toilets, shower heads and faucets, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 18-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, shower head, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 1, 3-5-1991) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-112. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the board of tax assessors of the county. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief real estate appraiser of the county. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating any provision of this article shall be tried before the magistrate court of the county. The procedure for enforcement of this article shall be as provided in article 4 of chapter 10 of title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.). Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 6, 3-5-1991) 
Sec. 18-113. - Residential buildings. 
No construction may be initiated within the unincorporated limits of the county for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 2, 3-5-1991) 
Sec. 18-114. - Commercial buildings. 
There shall not be initiated within the unincorporated limits of the county the construction of any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of section 18-113. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 3, 3-5-1991) 
Sec. 18-115. - Applicability. 
The requirements of section 18-113 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes the replacement of toilets, showers, or both. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 4, 3-5-1991) 
Sec. 18-116. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 18-113, 18-114 and 18-115 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or shower heads within such existing building; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or shower heads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the board of tax assessors. A fee of $50.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 5, 3-5-1991) 
Secs. 18-117—18-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUILDING INSPECTORS 

Sec. 18-151. - Code enforcement employee qualifications. 
(a)  Building official qualifications . The building official shall have at least ten years' experience. or equivalent, as an architect, engineer, inspector, contractor, or superintendent of construction, or any combination of these, five years of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. The building official should be certified as a building official through a recognized certification program. 
(b)  Chief inspector qualifications . The building official may designate chief inspectors to administer the provisions of the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing codes. Each chief inspector shall have at least ten years' experience or equivalent, as an architect, engineer, inspector, contractor, or superintendent of construction, or any combination of these, five years of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. They should be certified through a recognized certification program for the appropriate trade. 
(c)  Inspector qualifications . The building official may appoint or hire such number of officers, inspectors, assistants and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. A person shall not be appointed or hired as an inspector of construction who has not had at least five years' experience as a building inspector, engineer, architect, or as a superintendent, foreman, or competent mechanic in charge of construction. The inspector should be certified through a recognized certification program for the applicable trade. 
(d)  Minimum education and experience requirements . The following shall be the minimum education and experience requirements for the building official, chief inspector, and inspector positions: 
(1)  High school diploma. 
(2)  Minimum of five years of experience in construction methods and materials used in residential, commercial, institutional and industrial structures including the building structure, electrical, mechanical and plumbing crafts. 
(e)  Necessary special requirements. The following shall be the minimum special requirements for the building official, chief inspector, and inspector positions: 
(1)  Valid driver's license. 
(2)  Must successfully complete ICC building inspection course within 24 months of employment. 
(3)  Must successfully complete Georgia Fire Academy fire inspectors course within 36 months of employment. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2010) 
Secs. 18-152—18-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSING NUMBERING AND SIGNAGE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-5-13, adopted May 12, 2009, adopted a City of Toccoa ordinance establishing standards for addressing structures within the cities of Avalon, Martin, and Toccoa and for the unincorporated portions of Stephens County. Said ordinance amended similar provisions set out herein as Art. VI, §§ 18-201 through 18-205 and derived from Ord. No. 07-01, adopted Feb. 27, 2007; and Ord. No. 09-01, adopted May 12, 2009. 

Sec. 18-201. - Penalties. 
If the owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or building refuses to comply with the terms of this article by falling to affix the number assigned within 60 days after notification, of [or] failing with[in] such 60-day period to remove any old numbers affixed to such house, or house entrance, or elsewhere, which may be confused with the number assigned thereto, he shall be punished as provided for in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 2009-5-13, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 18-202. - Designation of street numbers. 
Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public and private streets within the corporate limits of the City of Toccoa shall be in conformity with numbers issued by Stephens County and the Stephens County Emergency Communications Department. 
(Ord. No. 2009-5-13, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 18-203. - Posting of designated street address. 
(a)  The owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or building in which a number has been assigned will be notified in writing by Stephens County of the number assigned. 
(b)  Within 60 days after the receipt of such written notification from the county, the owner or occupant or person in charge of a house or building to which a number has been assigned shall affix the number on a stake or post in close proximity to the road in front of the house or building near the end of the driveway so as to be clearly visible on both sides of the stake or post to emergency responders. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of such owner or occupant or person in charge thereof upon affixing a number to remove any number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned to such structure by Stephens County. 
(d)  Each primary building, mobile home parks, apartments, houses converted to apartments or houses containing apartments, and duplexes, triplexes and quadraplexes shall display the number assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied by one [more] than one business or family dwelling, each separate front entrance may display a separate number. 
(e)  Numerals indicating the official numbers for which [each] principal building or each front entrance to such building shall be posted in a manner and to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located. Each number shall be at least three inches high, shall be reflective, and shall be placed on a contrasting background. 
(f)  For all commercial and industrial structures numerals indicating the official numbers for which [each] principal building or each front entrance to such building shall be posted in a manner and to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located. Each number shall be at least six inches high, shall be reflective, and shall be placed on a contrasting background. 
(Ord. No. 2009-5-13, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 18-204. - New structures. 
No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the owner or developer has procured from Stephens County the official number of the premises. Final approval of the certificate of occupancy of any principal building erected or repaired after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the requirements of section 18-203. 
(Ord. No. 2009-5-13, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 18-205. - Cities of Avalon, Martin and unincorporated Stephens County. 
(a)  Notifications. The owner, occupant or person(s) in charge of any house, building or structure to which a number has been assigned will be notified in writing by Stephens County Emergency Communications Department as to the number, address, for that house, building or structure. 
(b)  Location of numbers and signs. Within 15 calendar days after the receipt of such notice, the owner, occupant or person(s) in charge of the house, building or structure to which the number has been assigned shall affix the number at the driveway of said house, building or structure; with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Mobile home parks. Where such residences do not have a clearly defined driveway, the occupant shall post the numbers on the mobile home where they are clearly visible from the access road. 
(2)  Apartments. For those units that have clearly defined walkways, the numbers must be posted at the end of the walkway, as well as on the door of each unit. For those apartments that do not have clearly defined walkways, the number must be posted on the door. 
(3)  Houses converted to apartments or houses containing an apartment. The address will on the residence in a clear fashion in order to distinguish the location of each apartment; or the house from the apartment. Said address shall be clearly visible from the road. 
(4)  Duplexes, triplexes and quadraplexes. The address shall be posted at the walkway for each unit; said address shall be clearly visible from the road. 
(c)  Design of numbers and signs . Each number shall be three inches high, reflective; placed on a contrasting background. The numbers shall be visible from both directions of the roadway. The sign shall be placed at a height sufficient as to be seen by any responding emergency personnel. The numbers can be posted on the mailbox, if the mailbox is located at the driveway to the residence. If you use a post office box as your avenue for receiving mail, your assigned residence number, address, must still be displayed in the same location and manner as mentioned above. This requirement is in effect for all public, as well as private, drives. 
(d)  Road and street signage . All public streets and roads shall be named by the government jurisdiction within which the road to be named is located. Once named, each road, public or private, shall be marked with a sign which shall be of a reflective background and white, three inches high, reflective lettering. Public roads shall have a green background, where private drives shall have a blue background. 
(e)  Designation of private drives. For the effective delivery of public safety services certain roads and drives shall be designated and posted as a private drive. To be designated as a private drive the structure must meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Contain three or more habitable structures as defined by the Standard Building Code; and/or 
(2)  Barns, shed and other outbuildings shall not be considered in the designation of a private drive; and/or 
(3)  The habitable structure is not visible from the public roadway. 
(4)  The emergency communications director or his designee shall make every effort to accommodate requests from citizens concerning the naming of private drives. If property owners on a private drive to be named cannot agree to the naming of the private drive; then the emergency communications director shall determine the name of the private drive in question. 
(f)  Existing signage. All existing signage that does not meet the requirements of this section shall be removed according to the policy established by the Stephens County Board of Commissioners. It shall be the duty of such owner or occupant or person in charge thereof upon affixing a number to remove any number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned to such structure by Stephens County. 
(1)  Each primary building, mobile home parks, apartments, houses converted to apartments or houses containing apartments, and duplexes, triplexes and quadraplexes shall display the number assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied by one [more] than one business or family dwelling, each separate front entrance may display a separate number. 
(2)  Numerals indicating the official numbers for which [each] principal building or each front entrance to such building shall be posted in a manner and to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located. Each number shall be at least three inches high, shall be reflective, and shall be placed on a contrasting background. 
(3)  For all commercial and industrial structures numerals indicating the official numbers for which [each] principal building or each front entrance to such building shall be posted in a manner and to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located. Each number shall be at least six inches high, shall be reflective, and shall be placed on a contrasting background. 
(g)  Penalties. In the event that the owner, occupant or person in charge of any house, building or structure to which a number has been assigned refuses to comply with this article by failing to display the assigned numbers in the previously designated location(s) and fashion within 15 calendar days after notification, he or she shall be forwarded a second notice request asking them to comply with this standard within 15 calendars [calendar days] of the second request. If they have not done so after the second request they may be fined up to $25.00 per day for each day that he or she fails to comply with said notice. 
(Ord. No. 2009-5-13, 5-12-2009) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 8; taxation, ch. 70; excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, § 70-31 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Constitution reference— General powers of counties as to taxation and other revenues, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV. 
State Law reference— Commerce and trade, O.C.G.A. title 10; certain persons prohibited from investigating business for issuance of county license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9; professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. title 43; specific, business, and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TIMBER HARVESTING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Notice of timber harvesting, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24. 

Sec. 22-31. - Penalties. 
Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be guilty of a violation of a county ordinance, amenable to the process of the magistrate court of the county and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 in the discretion of the magistrate court. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 6, 8-15-1995; Ord. of 10-25-2016) 
Sec. 22-32. - Notification. 
(a)  Requirement. Any person who cuts or otherwise harvests timber growing in the county shall give written notification to the county marshal/code enforcement officer prior to the start-up of such harvesting activities if possible, but in no event later than 24 hours after entering the property of such harvesting activities. Further, such persons shall give notice of cessation of cutting within 24 hours after the job is completed. 
(b)  Form. All persons giving the notice required by subsection (a) of this section shall provide the following information for each separate tract to be harvested thereby: 
(1)  A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
(2)  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5; 
(3)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber. 
(c)  [Notice.] Notice pursuant to subsection (b) of this section may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via telefacsimile, e-mail, or by mail. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, §§ 1, 2, 8-15-1995; Ord. of 10-25-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24. 
Sec. 22-33. - County permit and surety bond. 
(a)  Subject to such notice requirements provided in section 22-32(b), a person must provide the county an indemnity bond or other acceptable security conditioned to pay any damages to any part of a county or county-maintained road caused by the timber harvesting operation. Notice shall not be or remain effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered such bond or other acceptable security to the county marshal/code enforcement officer. The bond shall be in the amount of $5,000.00 and shall be issued in favor of the board of commissioners. Such persons shall provide only one bond or other acceptable security per calendar year in which it is delivered regardless of the number of tracts harvested so long as the bond or other acceptable security remains in effect. Otherwise, a valid replacement bond or other acceptable security must be obtained and delivered to the county marshal/code enforcement officer no later than the close of business on the fifth business day following the day that the county filed a claim to recover damages against the then-existing bond. Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, the notification required by this section shall not be required in connection with timber harvesting to clear a site for construction or placement of a residence; however, such site shall not exceed one acre in area, and any necessary access to the residence site. 
(b)  The application for a permit shall include the same information as the notification form required under section 22-32(b). 
(c)  The board of commissioners, acting through the county road superintendent, county marshall or lawful designee, having full authority over county and county-maintained roads, may take all necessary action to protect the integrity and condition of the county road system and may issue stop work orders at any time if it is deemed necessary in the county road superintendent's judgment to protect the county road system. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 3, 8-15-1995; Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 4-2-1996; Ord. of 10-25-2016) 
Sec. 22-34. - Liability for additional road damages. 
The timber harvesting contractor and/or transporter shall be liable to the county for any damage to the county and county-maintained roads caused by the transport of timber in whatever amount that exceeds the amount of the indemnity bond necessary to return such roads to their normal and usual condition. 
Number 3 stone will be spread on all access points into a logging operation from a county road. Also, all access points will have at least an 18-inch or more pipe according to terrain conditions and water runoff to allow for proper drainage. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 4, 8-15-1995; Ord. of 6-11-2013; Ord. of 10-25-2016) 
Sec. 22-35. - Safety regulations. 
Any person harvesting or transporting timber in the county shall comply with the following safety requirements: 
(1)  No equipment, trucks, trailers or machinery shall be parked on a county or county-maintained road or its right-of-way. 
(2)  For any logging operation in the county, or within 1,000 feet of the county line if outside of the county but utilizing a county road or county-maintained road to access the timber harvesting operation, the person harvesting timber shall post at a minimum two signs approaching the timber harvesting operation from both directions, one sign 500 feet from the entrance to the timber harvesting operation stating "Slow, truck entering highway," and one sign 1,000 feet from such entrance stating "Warning, logging operation ahead." Each sign shall be a minimum of 36 inches by 36 inches, orange in color, and posted at least three feet off the traveled surface of the road. The sign shall be maintained so as to be easily visible by traffic approaching the entrance to the timber harvesting site from either direction. 
(3)  Each timber harvester/contractor shall furnish the signs required in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 5, 8-15-1995; Ord. of 10-25-2016) 
Secs. 22-36—22-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOOR TO DOOR PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 22-71. - Intent and purpose. 
The intent of the board of commissioners in enacting this article is to regulate the sale of goods and services by solicitors or canvassers at residences in the county in order to diminish criminal activity in the county and abusive techniques utilized by any such solicitor or canvasser which adversely affects the public health, safety and welfare in the county. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of door-to-door solicitation, nor is it an attempt to adversely affect interstate commerce. Instead, this article is intended to balance competing interests, reduce criminal activity and protect county citizens from abusive sales techniques versus the conduct of proper commercial sales activity. This article is not intended to allow any business activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2015) 
Sec. 22-72. - Definitions. 
In this article, the term "solicitor" or "canvasser" means any person who solicits orders on behalf of a firm, corporation, company, association, partnership or individual for any goods, wares or merchandise or other things of value, from house to house. Any person who obtains orders for merchandise or other things of value shall be deemed a solicitor. The term "solicitor" or "canvasser" shall not mean an individual or field sales representative working for or on behalf of a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization, or students or parents of students (i.e., PTA, booster club organizations) participating in approved school-sponsored fund raisers. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2015) 
Sec. 22-73. - Solicitor/canvasser permit. 
(a)  Permit required; applicability of division. 
(1)  Resident/nonresident solicitors/canvassers. All solicitors or canvassers are subject to all rules and regulations of this article. 
(2)  All solicitors or canvassers are required to purchase a permit from the Stephens County Probate Judge. 
(b)  Application; investigation of applicant; grounds for denial. 
(1)  No solicitor/canvasser shall be authorized to solicit orders until he files an application with the Stephens County Probate Judge and obtains a permit and registers as a solicitor. This application shall be upon forms prescribed by the Stephens County Probate Judge. Upon application, the Stephens County Probate Judge, within ten days, shall examine the police record, if any, of the applicant. No permit shall be given to any applicant who shall have either a pending charge or a conviction for a crime of moral turpitude or an offense involving the elements of assault and battery, or any civil judgment involving unethical and improper business actions, including but not limited to action which would constitute fraud and deceit under the laws of the state. 
(2)  No application for a permit under this section shall be received or acted upon if the applicant has submitted the same or a similar application for a permit within the preceding 12 months, which prior application has been dismissed, denied or abandoned. No permit shall be granted if the applicant is in violation of this article or has, within 12 months preceding the application, been in violation of this article or any law or ordinance regulating the activities for which such permit is sought. 
(c)  Fee. The applicant for a solicitor's permit shall pay a fee of $35.00 as specified by the Stephens County Board of Commissioners, as cost for investigation and regulation under this article. This fee shall be used for payment of the cost of such registration, investigation and regulation of persons subject to this article. A permit issued under this article shall be valid for one year from the date the permit is issued. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2015) 
Sec. 22-74. - Conduct of business by solicitors/canvassers; information to be provided to customers. 
(a)  Information card required; contents. The supervisor of the license office shall provide to each solicitor/canvasser an information card, and the solicitor/canvasser shall present the card to each household he visits. It is the responsibility of the solicitor/canvasser to make sufficient copies of the information card to furnish a copy to each household he visits. Such card shall contain such information as required by the Stephens County Board of Commissioners. The following statements may appear on the information card: 
The solicitor/canvasser is not to enter your home except at your express invitation. You have the right to refuse entry or to ask the solicitor/canvasser to leave the premises, and if he/she should fail to leave the premises after your instructions, he/she shall be in violation of the laws of this state and/or ordinances of Stephens County. 
Report any discourteous conduct to the Stephens County Sheriff's Office. 
A solicitor/canvasser shall place his/her name and permit number in the blank provided on the card and shall present it to the occupant of each home that he visits. 
(b)  Failure to present information card. It shall be unlawful for a solicitor/canvasser to fail to present the card to the resident or occupant of a home at which the solicitor/canvasser solicits business. 
(c)  Announcement to occupant. At each house, the solicitor/canvasser shall announce to the owner or occupant of the home his name and that he has been issued a permit by Stephens County as a solicitor/canvasser, and shall announce the purpose of his call and present the card provided for by this section and shall allow time for the occupant or owner to read the card. 
(d)  Entry on private property. No solicitor/canvasser shall enter a home without the express invitation of the occupant or owner. If a "no soliciting" sign is posted, no soliciting shall be made. 
(e)  Courteous conduct required; compliance with request to leave premises. A solicitor/canvasser shall at all times maintain a courteous decorum and shall not use opprobrious, vulgar or slang words to any homeowner or occupant. No solicitor/canvasser shall remain upon the premises of an occupant or owner after such occupant or owner has requested the solicitor/canvasser to leave or indicated that he is not interested in purchasing the solicitor's/canvasser's product. 
(f)  Misrepresentation of effect of permit. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor/canvasser to represent by word, action or deed that the issuance of a permit by the county license bureau in any way represents approval or condonation of either the actions of the solicitor/canvasser or his product. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2015) 
Sec. 22-75. - County records of solicitors/canvassers; complaints against solicitors/canvassers. 
(a)  The probate judge's office shall maintain true and accurate records of the name and identification number of each solicitor/canvasser, together with other information required by this division, and shall supply a copy to the Stephens County Sheriff's Office within three business days of application. The Stephens County Sheriff's Office shall maintain a log of all complaints for each solicitor/canvasser or organization represented by solicitors/canvassers. 
(b)  If the Stephens County Sheriff's Office receives any ordinance violation complaints concerning a particular solicitor/canvasser, or three violation complaints concerning an organization, the Stephens County Sheriff's Office shall notify the solicitor/canvasser and the organization the solicitor/canvasser represents of the complaints, and the Stephens County Probate Judge may suspend the permit until such time as the solicitor/canvasser or organization can show cause that he or it is in compliance with the rules and regulations of this division. 
(c)  The Stephens County Sheriff's Office shall maintain a true and accurate log of each complaint, showing the name of the complainant and the substance of the complaint. Such records shall be available to the solicitor/canvasser or his company or organization, and shall be deemed a public record. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2015) 
Sec. 22-76. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement authority of this article shall be vested with the Stephens County Sheriff's Office or any other duly authorized sheriff's deputy of the county and the county marshal. Enforcement shall be based upon personal observation and upon a complaint lodged with the Stephens County Sheriff's Office. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2015) 
Sec. 22-77. - Penalties. 
In addition to section 22-75 of this article, any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 60 days or both. Upon determination that the solicitor/canvasser has violated the ordinances of the county, the Stephens County Board of Commissioners shall schedule a hearing to determine if the solicitors/canvassers permit shall be revoked. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2015) 
Sec. 22-78. - Appeals by solicitors/canvassers. 
If any solicitor/canvasser or his company is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of commissioners, he shall have the right to appeal as provided by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2015) 
Sec. 22-79. - Separability clause. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or any portion of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or if the provision of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid or unconstitutional. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Commissioners of Stephens County to provide for separable and divisible parties and it hereby adopts any and all parts hereof as may not be held invalid for any reason. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2015) 
Sec. 22-80. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective immediately upon passage. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2015) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution relating to civil defense or emergency management saved from repeal, § 1-10(16). 

Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Energy emergency means a condition of danger to the health, safety, welfare, or economic well-being of the citizens of this state arising out of a present or threatened shortage of usable energy resources; also any condition of substantial danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of this state resulting from the operation of any electrical power-generating facility, the transport of any energy resource by any means whatsoever, or the production, use or disposal of any source material, special nuclear material, or byproduct, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 68 Stat. 919, 42 USC 2011, et seq.; also any nuclear incident, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, occurring within or outside this state, substantially affecting the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of this state. 
Energy resources means all forms of energy or power including, without limitation, oil, gasoline, and other petroleum products; natural or synthetic gas; electricity in all forms and from all sources; and other fuels of any description, except wood. 
(Res. of 8-20-1957, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 26-32. - Creation of emergency management council. 
The county emergency management council is created and shall include the following: 
(1)  County commissioner. 
(2)  Director of emergency management. 
(3)  County sheriff. 
(4)  County health officer. 
(5)  County road superintendent. 
(6)  County director of family and children services. 
(7)  American Red Cross representative. 
(8)  Others, including representatives of business, labor, civic and patriotic organizations as appointed by the council. 
(Res. of 8-20-1957, § 2) 
Sec. 26-33. - Powers and duties of emergency management council. 
It shall be the duty of the county emergency management council and it is empowered to: 
(1)  Develop a county emergency management plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the county, both private and public. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend for consideration by the board of commissioners a resolution necessary to implement the emergency management plan. 
(3)  Consider and recommend to the county emergency management council for approval mutual aid plans and agreements. 
(4)  Have such other duties as may be determined by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 8-20-1957, § 3) 
Sec. 26-34. - Office of director created. 
There is created the office of the county emergency management director. Such officer shall be nominated by the board of commissioners and appointed by the state director of emergency management. The emergency management director shall: 
(1)  Represent the board of commissioners on all matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Require and direct cooperation of county officials in the preparation and implementation of emergency management plans. 
(3)  During periods of emergency, direct the services of any county officers or employees. 
(4)  During periods of emergency, obtain vital supplies and equipment lacking, needed for the protection of life and property and bind the county for the value thereof and, if required immediately, requisition same. 
(Res. of 8-20-1957, § 4) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-91 et seq. 
Sec. 26-35. - Organization generally. 
Officers and employees of the county with volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency and all groups, organizations and persons who make the agreements on operation of law shall be charged with duties necessary for the protection of the life and property in the county during such an emergency and shall constitute the county emergency management organization. 
(Res. of 8-20-1957, § 5) 
Sec. 26-36. - Divisions of organization. 
The functions and duties of the county emergency management organization shall be distributed among the services as listed below. Each division shall be under the direction of a chief and deputy chief appointed by the emergency management council. The chief of services will include public officials such as sheriffs, chiefs of police and fire departments, and heads of agencies dealing with transportation, communications, and other services as well as private business persons who through their profession, knowledge and experience are particularly qualified to head divisions requiring specialized knowledge and experience. The services are established as follows: 
(1)  Law enforcement services. 
(2)  Fire services. 
(3)  Transportation services. 
(4)  Medical and health services. 
(5)  Communications services. 
(6)  Family and children services. 
(7)  Information and education services. 
(8)  Supply services. 
(9)  Rescue services. 
(10)  GOC coordinator services. 
(11)  Engineering services. 
(Res. of 8-20-1957, § 6) 
Sec. 26-37. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county, volunteering in service pursuant to this article shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such service they shall have the same immunities as persons and employees of the county performing similar duties. 
(Res. of 8-20-1957, § 7) 
Sec. 26-38. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization or the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by the virtue of this article. 
(2)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this county or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)  Wear, carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the emergency management council. 
(Res. of 8-20-1957, § 8) 
Sec. 26-39. - Plan. 
A complete and adequate emergency management plan will be formulated by the emergency management council. This plan will be based upon plans formulated in the state, mutual aid agreements and recommendations by chiefs of divisions. 
(Res. of 8-20-1957, § 9) 
Secs. 26-40—26-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 26-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fees means any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), means the condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the state is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary assistance by the state to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several localities and relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster or emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. The subsequent recovery period shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
Temporary dwelling means any manufactured home, mobile home or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district or by any other regulations in any area of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-1-1999, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-72. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county; all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; however, any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection may be carried out according to the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code, or any portion thereof, where: 
(1)  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2)  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, or the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary manufactured home, mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structure or park permits in any zoning district or any area of the county while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and the county building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 6-1-1999, § 1) 
Chapter 30 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-1 et seq.; probate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-1 et seq.; magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-1. - Imposition of penalties for jail construction and staffing. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 15-21-90—15-21-95 shall be in effect in the county in accordance with the provisions thereof, and the board of commissioners agrees to expend the funds collected thereunder for the purposes provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-21-90—15-21-95. The additional penalties provided for therein shall be imposed and collected in the cases to which they are applicable. 
(Res. of 10-17-1989) 
Sec. 30-2. - Imposition of court fees to provide for county court functions. 
Any person against whom a fine is imposed or community service work imposed by the magistrate, state and superior courts of Stephens County, Georgia for the violation of any of the laws or ordinances of Stephens County, Georgia or the laws of the State of Georgia shall be subject to and have assessed a fee in the amount of $10.00 per violation. Said fee to be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by magistrate, state and superior courts. 
(Ord. of 11-22-2016) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 50; planning, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Soil and water conservation, O.C.G.A. § 2-6-1 et seq.; control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 34-31. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Stephens County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2001-2, § I, 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 34-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Board means the state board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below the original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
District means the county soil and water conservation district. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sediment resulting from a land disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 34-33(a)(5). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device, such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the county soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sedimentation control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sediment control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing longterm vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing shortterm vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any adjacent area subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2001-2, § II, 6-5-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-33. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968. 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying. 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; however, construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 34-34. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 34-34 and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority. 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include: 
a.  Raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; 
b.  Feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; 
c.  Producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chicken, hens and turkeys; 
d.  Producing plants, trees, fowl or animals; 
e.  The production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; and 
f.  Farm buildings and farm ponds. 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting, however, when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 34-34(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices. 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(8)  Any project involving 1.1 acres or less; however, this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters; and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams that do not have water in them yearround; however, any person responsible for a project which involves 1.1 acres or less, that involves land disturbing activity, and is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained in this subsection shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section. 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality provided that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 34-34(b) and (c); provided, further, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb five or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1. 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, provided that any such land disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 34-34(b) and (c). 
(11)  Public water system reservoirs. 
(b)  Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in section 34-34(b) and (c), issuing authorities shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued; and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Ord. No. 2001-2, § III, 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 34-34. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events, up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  Prevention of erosion, sedimentation. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut and fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type, so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by the means of bridges or culverts, except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings must be kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., the Metropolitan River Protection Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. 
b.  Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation cover as long as a protective vegetation cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; however, any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; however, small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board providing for notice to the division or local issuing authority of the location and extent of the piping and prescribing methodology for minimizing the impact of such piping and for measuring the volume of water discharged by the stream. Any such pipe must stop short of the downstream landowner's property, and the landowner must comply with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. 
b.  Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation cover as long as a protective vegetation cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; however, any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed. 
(d)  Stricter requirements authorized. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions that contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Presumptions. The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2001-2, § IV, 6-5-2001) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6. 
Sec. 34-35. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances that regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party that may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the board of commissioners to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the board of commissioners and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. These plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 34-34(b) and (c). Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)  A fee, in the amount of $25.00 per acre, shall be charged for each application. A maximum fee per application is $1,000.00. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 34-34(c)(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(5)b. of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(5)  a.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
b.  The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part of the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. This subsection shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 34-34(b) and (c). Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures, including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  The following data are required for the site plan: 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information, notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at the project site and description of the proposed project. 
c.  Name, address and phone number of property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule, showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities." 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for yearround seeding. 
i.  Detailed drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  The following maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection." 
(3)  Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and features such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., that might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 34-34(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(5)b. of this section are met, and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the county tax commissioner certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2001-2, § V, 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 34-36. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The board of commissioners will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or the division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials; nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The district or the commission, or both, shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission, or both, may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The division may periodically review the actions of the counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinances and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as an issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2001-2, § VI, 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 34-37. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining the permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of this article, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; however, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 34-35(b)(5)b. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part of the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section, any person who violates any provision of this article, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. 
(2)  The following penalties shall apply to land disturbing activities performed in violation of any provision of this article, any rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article: 
a.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy; and 
b.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each violation involving land disturbing activities other than as provided in subsection (d)(2)a. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2001-2, § VII, 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 34-38. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the board of commissioners within seven business days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2001-2, § VIII, 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 34-39. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any person to violate the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or to pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2001-2, § IX(C), 6-5-2001) 
Secs. 34-40—34-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 9, 2012, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III, §§ 34-71—34-79 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Nov. 5, 2002, §§ I—IX. 
Cross reference— Nuisance of animals, § 10-55; telecommunications facilities as nuisances, § 74-122. 

Sec. 34-71. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to define specific types of nuisances in order to protect residents from annoyance and health hazards of certain aggravating circumstances; delineate residents' responsibilities and prohibited acts in the community. It is important for a county to appear clean, well kept, and generally clear of public nuisances, eyesores, and unhealthy conditions. The appearance of a county weighs heavily in the decisions of prospective residents and businesses in locating to a particular area. A clean, safe, and well-kept county can stabilize or increase property values, provide a healthy environment, and make citizens proud of the area in which they live. Accordingly, a county needs a set of regulations to keep the area clean, remove unsightly conditions, and prevent unhealthy and unsafe conditions from occurring. It is therefore the purpose and intent of this chapter to encourage a clean, healthy, and satisfying environment, one free of nuisances, eyesores, and unhealthy, unsafe, or devaluating conditions. To this end, the chapter seeks to regulate and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the county, as well as the values and aesthetics of properties within the county. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012) 
Sec. 34-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable code means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided by state law as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code applicable under state law or adopted by ordinance or resolution of the county; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by the county provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Close means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of the Georgia Controlled Substance Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The terms "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other buildings or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, or poultry or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners of Stephens County. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of the property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the county board of commissioners for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the county board of commissioners as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Junk means something of poor quality, little meaning, little worth or little significance. 
Junked motor vehicle means any abandoned, nonfunctioning, dilapidated, or discarded motor vehicle and includes any parts thereof not currently in use on an operable vehicle with a current tag and vehicle tag registration, including, but not limited to, any motors or component parts, doors, hoods, trunk lids, windshields, tires, wheels, seats, and any and all other similar automobile parts. 
Nuisance means anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. That which annoys or disturbs one in possession of his property, rendering the ordinary use or occupation thereof uncomfortable; that which endangers life or health, gives offenses to the senses or obstructs reasonable and comfortable use of property; the unreasonable, unwarrantable or unlawful use by a person of his own property, whether person or real, or that individual's own improper, indecent, or unlawful personal conduct which results in an obstruction or injury to the right of another or the public. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable man. Nuisances include, but are not limited to, any act or omission to act to perform a duty or the permitting of a condition or thing to exist, which act, omission, condition or thing: 
(1)  Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health of safety of others; 
(2)  Offends decency; 
(3)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch, or drainage; 
(4)  Is offensive to the senses; 
(5)  In any way renders others persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 
(6)  Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
Nuisance per se means an act, occupation, or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings, or such nuisance as declared to be a nuisance per se herein. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgage of record. 
Plainly audible as applied to noise nuisances means any loud unnecessary or unusual noise that disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area which includes the business area as well as public streets and sidewalks in the county. 
Private nuisance means one limited in its injurious effects to one or a few individuals. 
Property means any lot, tract, or parcel of real estate whether improved or unimproved. 
Public authority means any official appointed by the county, or his designee, to enforce state and county law and rules relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county. 
Public nuisance means one which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
Public officer means the officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
Rubbish means useless waste or rejected, worthless and nonsensical material. 
Sexual crimes means lewdness, prostitution, sodomy, the solicitation of sodomy, or masturbation for hire. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-73. - Specific nuisances. 
The following are specifically declared to be nuisances whether on occupied lands, public or private property, are hereby declared to be and constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated; although this section shall not be construed to be limiting and with regard to its enumeration of public nuisances. 
(1)  Toilets, other sanitary facilities, plumbing or sewers not in compliance with the rules and regulations of the county board of health or the state department of human resources. 
(2)  Conditions conducive to the excessive breeding of flies, mosquitoes, or other insects in relation to surrounding conditions as determined by the public authority. 
(3)  Pollution of the air by gases, vapors, fumes, mists, dust, or smoke in quantities sufficient to be disagreeable, discomforting, or detrimental to health or well-being in relation to the conditions of the surrounding area, as determined by the public authority. 
(4)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors or stenches, as well as the conditions, substances, or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches including, but not limited to, smoke and fires. 
(5)  Accumulation of rubbish, trash, garbage, refuse, junk, construction debris and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber, or other such items or any foul, decaying or putrescent material kept in such quantities or used in such a manner or place as to be or become offensive, objectionable, a breeding place for rodents or detrimental to health or well-being. 
(6)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(7)  Keeping of horses, mules, asses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or similar animals or fowl except under the following conditions: 
a.  Any housing or enclosures used by such animals or fowl shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health department. 
b.  All such animals or fowl, except dogs in areas where confinement of dogs under the rabies control regulations does not apply, shall be kept in adequate enclosures or tethered. 
c.  Diseased animals or fowl, which might infect healthy animals or cause a menace to the public health shall be isolated or destroyed, as the public authority deems necessary. 
d.  In the case of bona fide licensed pet shops, veterinary hospitals, stockyards poultry houses, and similar commercial establishments, the public authority may modify these requirements where undue hardship would result from their strict enforcement. 
e.  No living animal shall be abandoned on any property in the county. 
f.  Such animals or fowl (except those raised in a commercial poultry house for profit or for distribution to a brokerage house) shall be kept at minimum distances from any occupied building (except that of the dwelling unit owner) and shall be provided with average minimum floor or ground area in the enclosure or housing in which it is kept as required and in strict compliance with all state and federal laws governing said distances and average minimum floor or ground areas. It shall be the responsibility of the keeper of such animals or fowl to comply with all state and federal legal requirements governing the above reference minimum distances and average minimum floor or ground areas. 
(8)  Garbage, trash, solid waste, belongings or any other items originating from the property of a landlord and being left on the street for more than 24 hours following an eviction. 
(9)  Circumstances where the owner or occupant of a building, structure or property utilizes the premises of such property for the open storage of any junked motor vehicle, ice box, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building rubbish or similar items. In that regard, it shall be considered a nuisance if such owner or occupant does not keep the premises of such property clean and does not remove from the premises all such abandoned items as listed in this subsection including, but not limited to, weeds, hedges, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc., upon notice from the public officer. 
(10)  Any neglected property as defined in this subsection shall also be considered a nuisance and such neglected property means a parcel or parcels of land which have been developed and have been neglected by the owners by not keeping it cut to prevent overgrowth or by allowing the property to be used as a dumping ground for foreign materials. Neglected property shall also be defined to include abandoned home places and/or buildings which have fallen into disrepair and constitute a nuisance. 
(11)  Dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, safety, welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county, or vacant, dilapidate dwellings, buildings, or structures in which unlawful sexual and drug crimes are being committed. 
(12)  All noises that may annoy or inhibit others in their enjoyment of the use of their property. 
(13)  Any method of human excretion disposal that does not conform to the provisions of local ordinances, or state or federal law. 
(14)  Riding off-road vehicles on public roads or upon property of another without permission of the property owner. 
(15)  Household garbage only will be accepted at the convenience center sites. 
(16)  A ten-bag limit per day and bag size limited to 30 gallons at each convenience center site. A fine of $25.00 per bag will be issued over ten bags. 
(17)  No dumping of any household garbage or debris outside of gate of any convenience centers or landfill. A fine of $25.00 will be issued per bag. In addition to the fine set forth herein, any violation may also be subject to other penalties as provided in the Code of Stephens County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012; Ord. of 4-12-2016) 
Sec. 34-74. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, business, or interested parties, owner or lessee, tenant, or other, having possession, ownership or control of private property to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation of a nuisance within the unincorporated areas of the county. Any violation of this article, or violation of any other provisions of this Code the result of which is the creation or maintenance of a public or private nuisance, shall subject the violator to penalties as provided in section 1[1-9] and, additionally, the remedies provided in this article for abatement shall apply. 
No person shall create, maintain, support, aid or continue a nuisance, such as: 
(1)  Television sets, phonographs, radio receiving sets, musical instruments or any similar device for the production or reproduction of sound which is plainly audible in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighboring residents or any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. 
(2)  Animals or fowl, otherwise permitted to be kept, which, by any sound, cry, or behavior, shall cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness in any residential neighborhood. 
(3)  General noises which are blatantly foreign and are plainly audible to the normal order of a community which shall cause the disturbance of peace, quiet and comfort of residents or any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness in the area. 
(4)  Standards to be considered in determining whether subsection (1), (2) or (3) of this section has been violated shall include, but will not be limited by the following: 
a.  The volume of the noise; 
b.  The intensity of the noise; 
c.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
d.  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
e.  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
f.  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
g.  The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
h.  The duration of the noise; 
i.  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and 
j.  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(5)  Leaving garbage, trash, solid waste, belongings or any other items originating from the property of a landlord on the street for more than 24 hours following an eviction. 
(6)  Circumstances where the owner or occupant of a building, structure or property utilizes the premises of such property for the open storage of any junked motor vehicle, ice box, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building rubbish or similar items. In that regard, it shall be considered a nuisance if such owner or occupant does not keep the premises of such property clean and does not remove from the premises all such abandoned items as listed in this subsection including, but not limited to, weeds, hedges, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc., upon notice from the public authority. 
(7)  Any neglected property as defined in this subsection shall also be considered a nuisance and such neglected property means a parcel or parcels of land which have been developed and have been neglected by the owners by not keeping it cut to prevent overgrowth or by allowing the property to be used as a dumping ground for foreign materials. Neglected property shall also be defined to include abandoned home places and/or buildings which have fallen into disrepair and constitute a nuisance. 
(8)  Noxious or hazardous products used in a manufacturing or industrial activity that produces caustic or corrosive acids, chlorine or other noxious gasses, explosives, fertilizer or glue, or products involving hair or fur as products or by-products of the manufacturing process. 
(9)  Noxious or hazardous processes in a manufacturing or industrial use that involves hazardous waste treatment of disposal, land or water based disposal of hazardous or toxic wastes, pertroleum refining, processing of sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast, processing or refining of human or animal waste, rendering or refining fats and oils, tanning or finishing of leather or other hides, except taxidermy, and wood preservation. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012) 
Sec. 34-75. - Disposition of garbage, trash, property by landlords, or unfit buildings or structures. 
(a)  Any property, trash, belongings or other items left on the street for more than 24 hours following an eviction shall be subject to collection for a fee. The landlord or property owner shall be responsible for the payment of the collection fees which shall be set by the county administrator. 
(b)  Once the public authority reports that a violation of subsection (a) of this section has occurred, the public authority will notify, by certified mail, the landlord and/or have the property posted if, in fact, there is no applicable address for such landlord. The notice shall contain a provision that the landlord and/or property owner shall have seven days from the date of the notice to remove the property, trash, belongings or other items left on the street. If the items are not removed at the end of the seven-day period, then the county shall have the right to remove the items and a fi. fa. shall be issued against the landlord and/or property owner for the costs involved. 
(c)  The costs of removal shall be determined by the county administrator and the county public works department based upon the amount of items removed as well as the time involved in the removal of such items. 
(d)  The county has the right to exercise its enforcement power to repair, close, or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings, or structures in subsection 34-73(9) in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012) 
Sec. 34-76. - Enforcement. 
Upon information being made known that any violation of this article is occurring, a citation shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 by any member of the sheriff's department, county marshal or by any other agent of the county who is authorized to enact or enforce ordinances on behalf of the county, requiring the violator to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for violation of this article. 
The public officer and public authority shall be authorized: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the county in order to determine a dwelling, building, or structure therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes or sexual crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes or sexual crimes being committed; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in the manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To delegate any of his functions and powers as is permitted by this article or otherwise specifically authorized by the governing authority. 
Whenever a nuisance in violation of this chapter is found to exist within the jurisdiction of the county, the magistrate court or state court shall issue a written order and notice to abate to the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance, to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012) 
Sec. 34-77. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating the terms of this article or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, may be punished as provided in section 34-78. Separate offenses shall be deemed to be committed on each day during on or which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)  In addition to all other provisions of this article, any violation of this article is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction in the superior court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012) 
Sec. 34-78. - State rules and regulations. 
(a)  Adopted. The rules and regulations of the state department of human resources entitled and published as chapter 290-5-14 are hereby adopted as written in revised form of September 10, 1986 and amended. 
(b)  Enforcement. Prosecutions for violations of this section shall be upon citation as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62 and 15-10-63. The county health department sanitarian is hereby authorized to issue citations for the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or six months imprisonment, or both, provided that the judge shall probate not less than 120 days of any sentence imposed, and if such violation is continued, each day's violation shall be a separate offense. Violations of this section may also be handled by the seeking of civil remedies. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012) 
Sec. 34-79. - Conflict with other laws. 
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal or state law. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012) 
Secs. 34-80—34-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-34-2, adopted Oct. 12, 2010, added art. III, consisting of sections 34-90 through 34.96, to the Code. Inasmuch as art. III already existed, the new provisions have been redesignated as art. IV at the editor's discretion and the sections have been renumbered as herein set out to maintain Code style and to allow for growth between divisions. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-90. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the citizens of Stephens County by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased postdevelopment stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of postdevelopment stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2  Require new development to and redevelopment to maintain the predevelopment hydrologic response in their postdevelopment state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution, and to maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum postdevelopment stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post development storm water management standards; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the longterm responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety or to the integrity of downstream water resources; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval, or disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 34-91. - Procedures. 
Drop-off. Include a copy of these comments and one set of plans; do not drop off money or easement documents. 
Bring to County Clerk, 37 West Tugalo Street, Toccoa, GA 30577. Allow up to five business days for rereview. 
Section rereview. Include a copy of these comments and one set of plans. Do not drop off money or easement documents. 
Bring to the Board of Commissioners Office, County Clerk, 37 West Tugalo Street, Toccoa, GA 30577. Allow up to ten business days for rereview. 
FYI: If all comments are not addressed after the third review, a meeting will be required with county staff, designer and owner/developer. 
Approved by Commission _____ 
Signature of Chairman _____ 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 34-92. - Definitions. 
Applicant means any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms and procedures to procure official approval of a project or a permit to carry out construction of the project 
Buffers means the riparian buffers as defined in Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the [U.S.] Army Corps of Engineers, and any other buffers that may be established by municipality or government body. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Department means the Stephens County Engineering or Public Works [Department]. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
SWMF (stormwater management facility) means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means all easements appurtenant or attached to a tract of or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Floodplain means any land area, such as lowland and relatively flat areas adjoining state water, susceptible to being inundated by water from any source including those areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on flood insurance rate maps and identified or defined through standard engineering analysis by other government agencies or a licensed professional engineer, but not yet incorporated into a FEMA flood insurance rate map. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff as determined by the department, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater, such as fueling stations, [and] vehicle repair and maintenance facilities. A list of these land uses is provided in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means the U.S. Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced; to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. NRCS, HSG information may be found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual appendix B. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete' or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, building construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and oilier contaminants from land to surfacewater and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a byproduct of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, and mining; construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year-frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in operational control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the department to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article or by state or federal law, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Postdevelopment refers to the time period or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist based on the proposed project, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Predevelopment refers to the time period or the conditions that exist on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish predevelopment conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminate or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located, 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques as listed in the most recent edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and green space, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, stream bank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to. enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management manual means the most recent edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume II (Technical Handbook), produced by the Atlanta Regional Commission. (Hereinafter in this chapter [article] referred to as the ("Georgia Stormwater Management Manual "). 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit or retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of runoff. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 34-93. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and land disturbance activity applications, unless exempt pursuant to chapter 66. 
(a)  New development and redevelopment sites. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation or addition of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves replacement of acre or more of impervious cover or other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size: that is determined by the transportation and public works director to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Any development or redevelopment project that is upstream of a known, public flooding problem as identified by the county or shown on FERM panels. 
(b)  Guidelines for redevelopment. Sites per redevelopment projects the following guidelines shall apply unless the project is upstream of a known flooding problem as identified by the county. Stormwater design plans for redevelopment projects shall be consistent with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, except for water quality and recharge and overbank flood protection volume requirements do not apply. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or biller provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive shall control. 
(d)  Stormwater design manual. The department will utilize the policy, criteria and information, including technical specifications and standards in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local requirements, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. This includes any addenda or updates to the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual of local design guidelines as approved by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 34-94. - Exemptions from requirements. 
The following activities are exempt from this ordinance: 
Platted individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures provided that they do not result in the creation or addition of 10,000 square feet of impervious cover; 
Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
Land disturbing activities conducted for the purpose restoration of streams, stream banks, riparian zones, or other environmentally protected areas. 
Repairs to any stormwater management facility deemed necessary by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 34-95. - Variance procedure. 
The Stephens County Board of Commissioners shall hear and decide all variance requests from the requirements of this chapter. A formal written application for a variance shall be filed with the county clerk. 
(a)  The following procedures shall apply to all applications: 
(1)  The application for variance shall state the specific variances sought and the reasons for granting. 
(2)  It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide sufficient justification for granting the variance. 
(3)  The county staff shall prepare an evaluation statement concerning each application for variance. The evaluation shall consider the circumstances and supporting documents supplied by the applicant and other generally available technical information pertaining to the variance request the evaluation statement may include recommendations by the staff concerning the variance to the board. 
(4)  In passing upon such applications, the board of commissioners shall consider all technical evaluation and relevant factors presented by the applicant and the government and the standards specified ill other section of this chapter. 
(5)  After hearing and upon consideration of the application evidence and applicable law the board of commissioners may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. 
(b)  If a variance is granted, it shall be granted upon findings by the hearings board that the following standards of been met: 
(1)  That failure to grant the variance could result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(2)  That granting the variance will not result in increased stormwater pollution, increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public; 
(3)  That the necessity for a variance the result of conditions on the property which have been self-imposed by the applicant; and 
(4)  That the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Secs. 34-96—34-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec 34-105. - Report. 
Stormwater management report shall contain the following: 
(a)  A Georgia licensed professional engineer seal, signature, and date; 
(b)  Engineer's phone, email, address and fax; 
(c)  Developer's name, phone, email, address and fax; 
(d)  Militia district; 
(e)  Tax parcel(s); 
(f)  Date of preparation; 
(g)  Narrative explaining the purpose of the report; 
(h)  An executive summary of the report's findings organized similar to the provided below; 
(i)  Prior to approval of the report, the applicant shall certify and provide documentation that all other applicable environmental permits (wetland, septic, etc,) have been acquired for the site; 
(j)  All wetland reports, buffers, and permits shall be submitted with report: 
NPDES general permit for construction (Ga EPD); 
ACOE 404 Permit (wetlands); 
Georgia EPD stream buffer variance; 
Special permits (GDOT, easements, etc.). 
(k)  Provide a table of contents and either provide page numbers or tabs referencing sections for the following: 
Executive summary; 
Hydrology calculations, tables, summaries, etc.; 
Water quality (if applicable); 
Floodplain delineation; 
Environmental permits; 
Details of outlets, dams, or any applicable structure or condition; 
Cross sections of creeks, ponds, outlets, etc., where applicable; 
Maps pre, post, basin area, floodplain, etc.; 
Annotated checklists; 
Ten percent downstream analysis; 
Appendix; 
Design engineer is to provide site review tool for BMPs in report; 
Other data as may be required. 
(l)  Below is a chart show acceptable mythology [methodology] different applications. 
TABLE 2-1  Methods for Runoff Computation 

 
Flow summary. SCS methodology or approved other (approval must be in writing by county engineer) 
(All basins must have an individual pre and postdeveloped analysis) 
• Basin, return frequency two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50- and 100-year events 
• Predeveloped flow at property line for each basin for each event; 
• Postdeveloped flow at property line for each basin for each event; 
• (Postdeveloped flow at property line must be less than or equal to predeveloped flow) Any concentrated flows or flows shall have a downstream drainage easement. 
º Routed flow; 
º Bypass flow. 
Times of concentration summary. 
• Subarea; 
• Pre-post overland flow, minutes; 
• Pre-post shallow concentrated flow, minutes; 
• Pre-post open channel flow, minutes; 
• Predeveloped Tc, minutes; 
Curve number summary. 
• Subarea; 
• Predeveloped curve number with all calculations and supporting documentation; 
• Postdeveloped curve number with all calculations and supporting documentation; 
• For the site, use predeveloped CN less than or equal to 55 unless approved by this office. Postdeveloped flows at every location where runoff will leave the development must be less than or equal to predeveloped flows. 
Gutter spread calculations summary. Gutter spread shall be measured from the face-of-curb. Inlets and catch basins shall be placed to limit the spread to the following: 
• Local streets (25 mph or less)—50 percent of travel lane feet plus gutter at low section where inlets are on both sides of road and 75 percent of travel lane plus gutter on standard inlets, but in no case should be more that eight feet on side of the street. 
• Collector and arterial roads—Less than 50 percent outside travel lane plus gutter. 
• All inlets should show Q bypass, Q in, contributing area, Tc, flow path, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 34-106. - Stormwater management ponds. 
• Ponding elevations must be shown on profile of dam/outlet detail. 
• Free board (minimum two and one-half feet from top of dam to 100-year storm ponding elevation and one-half foot from invert of emergency spillway. 
• Emergency spillway must be able to safely pass the 100-year storm event inflow. Calculations for emergency spillway routing must be provided. If principal spillway is used as emergency bypass, it must be sized to pass the unrouted (inflow) 100-year storm event. 
• No slopes shall be greater that 3:1. 
• Top of all dams must be greater than or equal to ten-foot minimum width. 
• Maintenance easement must be provided ten feet beyond the toe of slope and ten feet beyond top of bank. 
• No utilities can be located within 20-foot of any portion of pond structure, dam, outlet, rip rap, etc. 
• Calculations showing outlet pipe for detention ponds will accommodate 100 percent plus of Q-100 unrouted, if no earthen embankment emergency spillway is proposed. 
• Twenty-four-hour detention of the one-year storm is required if water quality protection is required, unless other options approve by county engineering. 
• Provide a cross-section of detention pond embankment including outlet pipe, emergency spillway, embankment slopes, minimum embankment top width, outlet control structures, headwalls, and riprap. Verify that minimum one-half inch freeboard above maximum water surface elevation to elevation of emergency overflow is to be provided. There shall be a minimum of two and one-half feet to top of dam from the 100-year ponding elevation for all dams, earthen, concrete, etc. 
• The minimum distance from outlet invert to adjoining property line, right-of-way, stormwater buffer shall be greater than 20 feet. Drainage and access easements shall be provided on all conveyances. 
• Maximum ponding for parking lot detention: six inches on ten-year storm, nine inches on 100-year storm. 
• The rational method may not be used for detention pond design. 
• The following outlet control structure pipe sizes are required based on outlet orifice diameter: 

 
• If the primary outlet is to serve as the emergency overflow all associated weirs, orifices, pipes, outlets, energy dissipaters, etc. must be designed and properly sized to safely pass the un-routed 100-yr event pond inflow via the system. 
• All outlet structures shall be RCP and shall have detail with ponding elevations shown, top of dam, emergency spillway, etc. 
• Principal spillway shall be RCP or HDPE. 
• All inflow pipes pipe to the pond less than or equal to 48 inches must be greater than 50 feet (horizontal) from the face of the outlet control structure or any opposing toe of slope and for pipes greater than 48 inches the distance must be 100 feet. If distance is less than specified, then baffles or diversion berms must be placed. The methods used must be of a permanent nature and easily maintained. Methods employed are subject to county approval and lesser distance, even with diversion methods, is subject to county approval. 
• Dams shall be constructed with base of dam, structure installation, and then the dam construction. Dams shall be built in lifts no greater than six inches and each lift compacted to 95 percent standard proctor. Compaction test results may be required by Stephens County Public Works and it is the contractor's responsibility to coordinate with public works. For fills in excess of ten vertical feet, geotechnical testing may be required and it is the responsibility of the contractor, developer, or owner to coordinate with Stephens County for requirements. See Stephens County's Construction Standards. 
• If detention for project is claimed to be provided in a regional detention facility that was permitted prior to January 1, 2001, provide a copy of the original study that met the regulations at the time the facility was permitted. ACOE input maybe required if using Lake Hartwell. The project shall provide proof that the detention facility was designed and intended to operate with the flows generated by the site in question along with all other current or proposed drainage. If detention for project is claimed in an existing facility, provide documentation that: 
(1)  Existing facility was certified in last 18 months; or 
(2)  Documentation that facility meets the development requirements when the facility was approved and additional drainage area and conditions were approved in the original concept; or 
(3)  That redesign and construction will be preformed to bring facility into compliance with this Code. 
• All stormwater management facilities are to have an "as-built" survey stamped by a state registered land surveyor and a have all routing, BMPs "signed off" by engineer certifying the pond and flows does not exceed the "design parameters" set forth in this article. The report shall contain at a minimum the original design parameters (Q, WSEs, freeboard, etc) and a detail of the pond (plan and section) and outlet (section). Also the as-built routed (Q, WSEs, freeboard, etc.) and a detail of the pond (as-built plan and section) and outlet (as-built section detailing orifice size, elevation, etc.) shall be provided, along with other information as requested by county. 
• If pond is private, copies of maintenance agreements shall be provided to county. 
• Preparation of stormwater concept plan and meeting with county staff to review prior to submitting plans or plat. Concept plans shall include at a minimum the outline information in section 1.5 of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
• Landscaping plan for SWMF per appendix F of the bluebook. 
• Storm-drain design (See article II). 
• All open channel design (See article II). 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Sec 34-107. - Energy dissipation summary. 
Provide energy dissipater calculations/designs for outlet headwalls of pipes and detention ponds. The following energy dissipaters may only be used in the corresponding Froude number range: 

 
• Velocities must be notated on all pipe profiles and the associated energy dissipaters shown on profile. 
• The velocity of the flow as it leaves the apron shall be shown on profile 
• Non-erosive velocity from Storm Water Design Manual (GREEN BOOK) 
• Energy dissipation measure shall be design for the 25-year storm frequency and in accordance with the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia", latest edition. 

 
Downstream receiving conveyance velocity summary (by individual basin): 
• Study point hydraulic structure/basin; 
• One- two- five- ten- 25-, 50-, 100-year predeveloped flow velocity; 
• One- two- five- ten- 25-, 50- 100-year postdeveloped flow velocity; 
• Current condition of the channel (stable or is it eroding); to be justified with adequate documentation; 
• Adverse impact expected from proposed project; 
• Necessary detention. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Sec 34-108. - Maps. 
• A map showing drainage areas used for pipe design. 
• A map showing drainage areas for all hydrographs. Preferably county GIS. 
• A map showing all on-site drainage areas, off-site drainage areas, and all pond bypass areas considered in detention calculations. 
• Calculations determining the capacity of existing pipe to carry the proposed discharges. No drainage pipe shall be under pressure. The 100-year HGL shall be within the all pipes. 
• Calculations showing discharge of concentrated flows into the streets do not exceed the following flow rates: 

 
Maps should show time of concentration (TC) calculations for all flow paths, curve number calculations for both predeveloped and postdeveloped conditions for all basins. 
All outlet structures shall be RCP and shall have detail with ponding elevations shown, top of dam, emergency spillway, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 34-109. - Ten percent downstream analysis. 
Analysis of downstream conditions shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
Ten percent downstream analysis (from all ponds and site in general); 
• Ten percent downstream analysis (where site area, is less than ten percent of the drainage basin area); 
• Identification of all affected structures between lower limit of site and ten percent analysis point; 
• Analysis of all affected structures between lower limit of site and ten percent analysis point; 
• Prerouting and postrouting analysis; 
• Describe in combination with a topographic map, all culverts, obstructions, existing and potential erosion problems, elevations of existing improvements, and existing drainage complaints, between the downstream property line and the ten percent point; 
• Analyze downstream watercourses and receiving conveyances to determine 25-year flow channel velocities. If the nonerosive velocity of the stream is exceeded, detention may be required. Provide calculations with cross-section, depth of flow and velocity in channel; 
• Analyze existing pipe systems and culverts for compliance with current development regulation design criteria. Culverts should pass QIOO. If existing pipes are not adequate for increased 100-year flow, detention may be required. (DR 8.2.Ic); 
• Hydrograph comparisons for the one-, two-, five-, ten- 25- 50- and 100-year storms for both the downstream property line study point and the point where the drainage basin equals ten times the project area; 
• A detailed written description of the first 500 feet off site; at least one photograph looking downstream with some object included in the photograph for scale shall be included; 
• Predeveloped on-site hydrograph; 
• Basin area at study point excluding on-site area hydrograph; 
• Postdeveloped on-site hydrograph; 
• Since downstream analysis indicates adverse impacts are expected, provide stormwater detention in basin(s) for the one-, two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50- and 100-year storm event. Route the 100-year storm through the pond so that there is no overflow from the pond; 
• Detain the runoff from the one-year storm for 24 hours. Use the SCS runoff equation to size the volume required. Use appropriate equations to size the orifice 
• Schedule a meeting to discuss any county comment(s); 
• All hydrographs shall be based on a 24-hour storm. 
•  Orifices less than three inches in diameter must be protected from clogging. A trash rack (maximum mesh opening of d/2) with a surface area of at least 10 square feet shall protect all orifices 15" or less in diameter. Provide detail. Racks should be easily cleaned and maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 34-110. - Water quality. 
Currently stormwater quality is not required in Stephens County. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 34-111. - Parking lots. 
Parking lots, streets or alleys cannot be used for detention. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 34-112. - Performance bonds. 
If the ponds are intended to be accepted by Stephens County, a performance bond is required prior to the issuance of a permit in the amount of 100 percent of the cost of construction of the stormwater management system. The developer or contractor shall be liable for all repairs and maintenance for a minimum of two year period after the project's completion date but prior to county acceptance. Prior to acceptance, the county will perform an inspection and said inspection shall not be performed any sooner than 18 months or later than 24 months from the project's completion date. The bond shall be held for a minimum of two years from the project's completion date or until all repairs noted in the final inspection have been corrected and approved by the county. If required repairs are not completed in time specified at inspection, bond may be used to complete repairs. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34-2, 10-12-2010) 
Chapter 35 - ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 35-1. - State-promulgated rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations of the Georgia DCH [Department of Community Health], including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, and which are expressly incorporated herein, are hereby adopted and approved for enforcement as reference to the State of Georgia as set forth herein under Chapter 35, Environmental Health, in the Stephens County Code of Ordinances. 
(a)  Control of Rabies, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-2. 
(b)  Food Service, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-14. 
(c)  Tourist Accommodations, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-18. 
(d)  Land Disposal of Domestic Septage, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-25. 
(e)  On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-26. 
(f)  Drinking Water Supply, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-55. 
(g)  Solid Waste, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-56. 
(h)  Swimming Pools and Recreational Water Parks, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-57. 
(i)  Special On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-59. 
(j)  The Georgia Smoke Free Air Act of 2005, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-61. 
Copies of those DCH rules and regulations are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, where the same are available for inspection and copying by the public during regular county operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 2010-35-1, 10-12-2010) 
Secs. 35-2—35-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENACTMENTS 

Sec. 35-40. - Local board of health enactments. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq., in addition to the above-referenced rules and regulations of the Georgia DCH, the following rules and regulations have been enacted by the Stephens County Board of Health and are hereby adopted by the Stephens County Board of Commissioners in accordance with state law, and are further hereby adopted and approved for enforcement as set forth herein: 
(a)  Rules and regulations concerning rabies control enacted by Stephens County Board of Health resolution dated May 5, 2010, which are hereby set forth verbatim herein and adopted by the board of commissioners upon lawful adoption of this chapter. 
Copies of those rules and regulations enacted by the Stephens County Board of Health and having been adopted by ordinance of the board of commissioners are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, where the same are available for inspection and copying by the public during regular county operating hours. 
(b)  In addition, the rules and regulations concerning minimum lot sizes for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems which are contained in the Department of Community Health Division of Public Health Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set out at length herein. The Stephens County Board of Commissioners may, however, require larger minimum lot sizes for utilization of on-site sewage management systems in zoning or land use districts providing for septic service, and in the event there is a conflict between the minimum lot size(s) set forth in the DCH's Public Health Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems and that established by the Stephens County Board of Commissioners, the larger lot size(s) established by the board of commissioners shall control and take precedence. 
(c)  A fee schedule for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-referenced state-promulgated rules and regulations and local board of health enactments, including permit and inspection fees, has been established by the Stephens County Board of Health, and is hereby approved and adopted by the Stephens County Board of Commissioners. A copy of this fee schedule, including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and is available for inspection and copying by the public during regular county operating hours. 
(d)  The enforcement and prosecution of this chapter shall be within the jurisdiction of Stephens County and the Stephens County Board of Health, and their authorized designee(s) or agent(s), and all law enforcement personnel of Stephens County. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any natural person or persons or any legal entity including, and not limited to, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or trust, to violate any of the above-identified rules and regulations, and/or to fail or refuse to pay any fee established by the Stephens County Board of Health, and approved and adopted by the Stephens County Board of Commissioners, for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-identified rules and regulations, including all permit and inspection fees. 
(f)  . Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20, any person or persons or any legal entity including, and not limited to, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or trust, violating any provision of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(g)  Each day during which a violation of any provision of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this chapter shall constitute, and shall be considered, a separate offense. 
(h)  The Stephens County Magistrate Court shall have original jurisdiction upon any offense charged pursuant to this chapter. 
(i)  In addition to the rights and remedies set forth herein, or as otherwise authorized by law, Stephens County and the Stephens County Board of Health retain and reserve the right to seek equitable relief, injunction, abatement, or any appropriate action or proceeding to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Failure or refusal to pay any fee approved for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-identified rules and regulations, including all permit and inspection fees, may result in suspension and/or revocation of any permit issued by the Stephens County Board of Health. 
(j)  Violations of all DCH promulgated rules and regulations and all local board of health enactments identified herein may be prosecuted by an accusation or citation with or without a prosecuting attorney in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, and any successor statute; and the Stephens County Board of Commissioners authorizes the county attorney or his designee to prosecute violations of this chapter, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-66 and any successor statute. In addition, the solicitor of the county and his or her assistants shall also have the authority to prosecute all citations or accusations issued for violation of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this chapter. 
(k)  This chapter, and the enforcement and prosecution of this chapter by Stephens County and the Stephens County Board of Health and their authorized agent(s) or designee(s), does not in any way effect, stop, prescribe, regulate, limit, or in any way control or prohibit the Georgia DCH, and its agent(s) or designee(s), from initiating or undertaking any action or proceeding to enforce compliance with its rules and regulations. 
(l)  This chapter shall become effective immediately upon its adoption by the Stephens County Board of Commissioners. Any and all existing or preexisting ordinances and provisions in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-35-1, 10-12-2010) 
Chapter 38 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Conservation and natural resources, O.C.G.A. title 12; flood control projects, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq.; emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-31. - Statutory authorization of article. 
The legislature of the state delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 1, § A, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-32. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other properties which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 1, § B, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-33. - Statement of purpose of article. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 1, § C, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-34. - Objectives of article. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 1, § D, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-35. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing walls is new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the field representative's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
Field representative means the county conservation district office field representative. 
Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency where the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including the basement, such as the top of slab in concrete slab construction or the top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking cars. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include longterm storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this article. 
Mangrove stand means an assemblage of mangrove trees which is mostly low trees noted for a copious development of interlacing adventitious roots above the ground and which contain one or more of the following species: black mangrove (Avicennia nitida); red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle); white mangrove (Lanauncularia racemosa); and buttonwood (Conocarpus erecta). 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes the terms "park trailers," "travel trailers" and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include the term "travel trailers" and other similar vehicles. 
Manufactured home park and manufactured home subdivision mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured home is affixed including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets is completed. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (PL 97-348)), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure, including a manufactured home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
Substantial improvement means, for a structure built prior to the enactment of this article, any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure the closest of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration on any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or state inventory of historic places. 
Variance means a grant or relief to a person from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 2, 8-4-1987) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-36. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall subject such person to punishment as provided in section 1-9. In addition, such person shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 3, § G, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-37. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 3, § A, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-38. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard, identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study dated February 15, 1984, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 3, § B, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-39. - Compliance with article and applicable regulations. 
No structure or land shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 3, § C, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-40. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 3, § D, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-41. - Interpretation and application of article. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 3, § E, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-42. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the board of commissioners, or by any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 3, § F, 8-4-1987) 
Secs. 38-43—38-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 38-61. - Designation of field representative. 
The field representative is appointed to implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 4, § A, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-62. - Duties of the field representative. 
The duties of the field representative shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this division have been satisfied. 
(2)  Advise the permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the floodplain. For purposes of this division, the term "adversely affects" mean damage to adjacent properties because of rises in flood states attributed to physical changes of the channel and the adjacent overbank areas. 
a.  If it is determined that there is no adverse effect, and the development is not a building, then the permit shall be granted without further consideration. 
b.  If it is further determined that there is an adverse effect, then technical justification, i.e., a registered professional engineering analysis, for the proposed development shall be required. 
c.  If the proposed development is a building, then the provisions of this division shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 4, § C, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-63. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this division prior to the commencement of any development activity. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 4, § B(1), 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-64. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the field representative on forms furnished by him prior to any development activities and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed construction, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and, the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. The applicant shall provide the following: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all proposed structures. 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed. 
c.  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria in section 38-92(2). 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. In the construction stage, the following shall be provided: A flood elevation or floodproofing certification after the lowest floor is completed. Within 21 calendar days of establishment of the lowest floor elevation, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be duty of the permit holder to submit to the field representative a certification of the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Such certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, such certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work done within the 21-day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The field representative shall review the flood elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make such corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 4, § B(2), 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-65. - Use of other base flood data. 
When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 38-38, the field representative shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer section 38-92. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 4, § D, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-66. - Information to be obtained and maintained. 
The field representative shall: 
(1)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all new or substantially improved structures. 
(2)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed. Certification of such floodproofing shall be obtained in accordance with section 38-92(2). 
(3)  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the field representative shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(4)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the field representative and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 4, § E, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-67. - Alteration of watercourses. 
The field representative shall: 
(1)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources office of planning and research prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(2)  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 4, § F, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-68. - Interpretation of special flood hazard boundaries. 
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual physical conditions), the field representative shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 4, § G, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-69. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall act as an appeals board and shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the field representative in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person or any taxpayer aggrieved by the decision of the board of commissioners may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section, except for subsection (h)(1) and (h)(4) of this section, and provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not result in the structure losing its historical designation. 
(e)  In passing upon such applications, the board of commissioners shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this article, and: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(f)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsections (a)—(e) of this section and the purposes of this article, the board of commissioners may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(g)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)  Conditions for variances are as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. In the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building; 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The field representative shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 4, § H, 8-4-1987) 
Secs. 38-70—38-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 38-91. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
b.  All manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
c.  Specific requirements for manufactured homes shall be that: 
1.  Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
2.  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side; 
3.  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and 
4.  Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
c.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall meet the requirements of new construction. 
d.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the standards set out in section 38-92(3)a. 
(3)  Utilities. 
a.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
b.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
c.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
d.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(4)  Subdivision proposals. 
a.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
b.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
c.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
d.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) and other proposed development which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(5)  Additional requirements for manufactured homes, manufactured home parks and subdivisions. 
a.  All manufactured home subdivisions and manufactured home parks located within zone A on the community's FIRM shall file an evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes with appropriate disaster preparedness authorities and the field representative. Furthermore, such parks and subdivisions shall provide: 
1.  Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler; and 
2.  In the instance of elevation on pilings: 
i.  Lots large enough to permit steps; 
ii.  Piling foundations placed in a stable solid no more than ten feet apart; and 
iii.  Reinforcements for pilings more than six feet above the ground level. 
b.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones A1—30, AH, and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of this section. 
(6)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-38 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If subsection (6)a. of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
c.  Prohibit the placement of any manufactured homes, except in an existing manufactured home park or existing manufactured home subdivision. 
(7)  Encroachments. The cumulative effect of any proposed development shall not adversely affect the area of special flood hazard. This determination is to be made in accordance with section 38-62(3). 
(8)  Alterations and repairs. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall meet the requirements of new construction. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 5, § A, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-92. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 38-38 or section 38-65, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including a manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of subsection (3) of this section. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure (including manufactured homes) shall either have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
a.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with the accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of section 38-64(2). 
b.  Where floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure in accordance with this section or section 38-93(2), then a registered, professional engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing methods are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the base flood. Such certification, including an indication of the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which structures are floodproofed shall be provided to and manufactured by the official as set forth in section 38-64(2). 
(3)  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both direction. 
b.  Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevation. 
c.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
d.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 5, § B, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-93. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-38 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including the basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including the basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 5, § C, 8-4-1987) 
Sec. 38-94. - Standards for small streams. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-38, where small streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where no floodways have been provided, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be located within a distance of the stream bank equal to five times the width of the stream at the top of the bank or 20 feet on each side from the top of the bank, whichever is greater, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with elevations established in accordance with section 38-65. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, art. 5, § D, 8-4-1987) 
Chapter 42 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 26; courts, ch. 30; personnel, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Sheriffs, O.C.G.A. § 15-16-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROBATION DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 42-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the Toccoa-Stephens County Probation Department. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 7) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-32. - Creation and establishment. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-100, the board of commissioners, as the governing authority of the county, approves the creation and establishment of a county probation system to provide general supervision and collection services for all moneys to be paid by a defendant according to the terms of the sentence imposed on the defendant as well as any moneys which by operation of law are to be paid by the defendant in consequence of the conviction, to provide counseling, and to provide other probation services for persons convicted of a misdemeanor in the state court of the county and placed on probation in the county. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 1) 
Sec. 42-33. - Title. 
The probation system created by this article shall be known as "the Toccoa-Stephens County Probation Department." 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 7) 
Sec. 42-34. - Services to city. 
The probation system established by this article shall likewise provide the same probation services to the Municipal Court of the City of Toccoa upon approval of this article by the City of Toccoa and upon the concurrence of the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Toccoa. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 2) 
Sec. 42-35. - Services to magistrate court. 
The probation system established by this article shall likewise, with the concurrence of the chief judge of the magistrate's court of the county, provide the same probation services to the county magistrate court. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 3) 
Sec. 42-36. - Continuance of system. 
The probation system established by this article shall continue in existence on a year-to-year basis and until the occurrence of the earlier of the following events: 
(1)  The adoption of a resolution by the board of commissioners terminating the probation system; or 
(2)  The adoption of a resolution by the City of Toccoa terminating the City of Toccoa's participation in the probation system created by this article. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 5) 
Sec. 42-37. - Cost. 
The cost of the probation system established by this article shall be paid by the county and the City of Toccoa in accordance with this article. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 6) 
Sec. 42-38. - Chief probation officer. 
(a)  The chief probation officer shall be an employee of the county and, except as may be inconsistent with this article, shall be subject to the general personnel policies established for county employees by the board of commissioners and shall be entitled to the same employee benefits, such as health insurance, as made available to the employees of the county. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall furnish a suitable office and utilities, telephone, desk, typewriter, and appropriate chairs for the use of the department. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 8) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-91 et seq. 
Sec. 42-39. - Job description of chief probation officer. 
The chief judges of the affected courts shall establish a job description for the chief probation officer, which job description shall set out in such detail as the judges may deem appropriate the duties, responsibilities, and authority of the chief probation officer. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 12) 
Sec. 42-40. - Selection of chief probation officer. 
The position of chief probation officer shall be filled as follows: 
(1)  The chief judges of the affected courts shall establish a procedure for the advertisement and solicitation of applications of persons interested in the position of chief probation officer. From the applications submitted, the chief judges of the affected courts shall establish a procedure for the selection of that person deemed best qualified. 
(2)  The chief judges of the affected courts (or a majority thereof) shall select the person deemed best qualified and shall submit the name of the person recommended for appointment as chief probation officer of the department along with a proposed salary and method of computation of salary for approval to the board of commissioners. The recommendation shall also propose an effective date of employment. 
(3)  Upon approval by the board of commissioners, the person nominated by the majority of the chief judges of the affected courts, shall be elected to the position of chief probation officer, who shall serve at the pleasure of such board and chief judges. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 9) 
Sec. 42-41. - Duties of chief probation officer. 
The chief probation officer shall have such duties, responsibilities, and authority as a probation officer of the department of corrections under existing state law, except as may be inconsistent with this article or except as may be specifically modified, from time to time, in writing by the majority of the chief judges of the affected courts. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 11) 
Sec. 42-42. - Bond. 
The chief probation officer shall be bonded in an amount not less than the annual budget of the department. The cost of the surety bond shall be an expense of the department. The bond shall be approved by the chief judge of the state court of the county and thereafter filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 15) 
Sec. 42-43. - Chief probation officer to attend court sessions. 
(a)  The chief judges of the affected courts shall coordinate court schedules so that, if possible, the chief probation officer may be in attendance at all sessions of the court from which the department receives probationers. The chief judges shall cooperate in an effort to avoid conflicting court schedules. In the event of a conflict regarding instruction to the chief probation officer regarding trial attendance at conflicting times, the chief judge of the state court of the county shall issue appropriate directions to the chief probation officer to resolve the conflict. 
(b)  The chief probation officer shall consider each of the judges of the affected courts to be the chief probation officer's supervisor in regard to cases originating from the court of that particular judge. In the event of conflicting instructions from two or more judges, the chief judge of the state court of the county shall resolve the conflicting instructions and the chief probation officer shall act in accordance with instructions of the chief judge of the state court of the county. 
(c)  The chief judges of the affected courts shall develop and approve uniform written forms for use by the chief probation officer as well as guidelines for the handling of probation services to the end that all cases handled by the department shall be uniformly administered and the chief probation officer shall administer all cases, as uniformly as possible, regardless of the court from which the case originated. 
(d)  If the chief judges, or a majority thereof, of the affected courts become dissatisfied with the chief probation officer of the department, the chief judges, or a majority thereof, may relieve the chief probation officer from his or her duties in such courts, in which event the majority of such judges shall immediately recommend to the board of commissioners that such chief probation officer be discharged, giving reasons therefor, whereupon the board of commissioners shall immediately discharge the chief probation officer. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 10) 
Sec. 42-44. - Probation fee. 
(a)  In every case that a court of this county sentences a defendant to probation or any pretrial release or diversion program under the supervision of the department, in addition to any fine or order of restitution imposed by the court, there shall be imposed a probation fee as a condition of probation, release, or diversion in the amount equivalent to $23.00 per each month under supervision, and in addition, a one-time fee of $50.00 where such defendant was convicted of any felony. The probation fee may be waived or amended after administrative process by the department and approval of the court, or upon determination by the court, as to the undue hardship, inability to pay, or any other extenuating factors which prohibit collection of the fee; however, the imposition of sanctions for failure to pay fees shall be within the discretion of the court through judicial process or hearings. Probation fees shall be waived on probationers incarcerated or detained in a departmental or other confinement facility which prohibits employment for wages. All probation fees collected by the department shall be paid into the general fund of the state treasury, except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 17-15-13(f), relating to sums to be paid into the state crime victims emergency fund. 
(b)  In addition to any other provision of law, any person convicted of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391 or 16-13-2(b) who is sentenced to probation or a suspended sentence by a municipal, magistrate, probate, state, or superior court shall also be required by the court to pay a one-time fee of $25.00. The clerk of court, or if there is no clerk the person designated to collect fines, fees, and forfeitures for such court, shall collect such fee and remit the same to the general fund of the state treasury not later than the tenth day of the month after such fee is collected and shall be subject to rule and attachment in the same manner as clerks of superior court for failure to so collect and remit. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 13) 
Sec. 42-45. - Remittance of fees. 
The chief probation officer shall collect all probation supervision fees assessed defendants given probated sentences and shall deposit such fees in a separate account daily as received. The chief probation officer shall remit to the board of commissioners at least monthly a check representing all probation supervision fees collected during the second preceding month. For example, on September 1 the chief probation officer shall remit all fees collected during the month of July. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 16) 
Sec. 42-46. - Accounting of fees. 
(a)  The chief probation officer shall maintain an accurate accounting of all probation supervision fees collected. The accounting shall include the total fees collected from defendants sentenced by the Municipal Court of the City of Toccoa, defendants sentenced by the magistrate court of the county and defendants sentenced by the state court of the county. 
(b)  Within one month following the close of the fiscal year of the board of commissioners, the chief probation officer shall prepare a summary accounting reflecting thereon the entire cost of the operation of the department, including salary, fringe benefits, office overhead (such as telephone, stationery, long distance telephone calls and support personnel, if any), as well as the employer's share of state and federal tax items (such as social security and unemployment tax) and workers' compensation insurance. The cost of utilities, equipment, and supplies provided by the board of commissioners shall be added as a cost of operation of the department; however, the value of the office space (rental value) shall not be considered as a cost of the department. 
(c)  From the total cost of the operation of the department as determined in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, the chief probation officer shall allocate the cost between the City of Toccoa and the county according to the percentage of the fees collected from the respective courts of such governmental entities. The cost allocated to the City of Toccoa shall be in direct proportion to the fees collected from the defendants sentenced by the Municipal Court of the City of Toccoa. 
(d)  From the total fees collected during the preceding fiscal year from defendants sentenced by the Municipal Court of the City of Toccoa, the total cost allocated to the City of Toccoa shall be deducted. If the resulting balance is a positive amount, the board of commissioners shall remit a check to the City of Toccoa for the positive amount of the balance within 30 days after receipt of the accounting by the chief probation officer. If the resulting balance is negative, the board of commissioners shall submit a bill to the City of Toccoa upon receipt of the accounting of the chief probation officer. The City of Toccoa shall pay to the board of commissioners the balance of any such bill within 30 days after the receipt thereof. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 17) 
Sec. 42-47. - Budget. 
At such time as requested by the board of commissioners, the majority of the chief judges of the affected courts shall submit a proposed budget for the forthcoming fiscal year, which budget shall be subject to approval by the board of commissioners. In submitting the proposed budget, the judges shall realistically assess the projected collection of probation supervision fees for the forthcoming fiscal year and shall not, except in unusual circumstances, submit a proposed budget wherein the projected anticipated collection of probation fees shall be less than the proposed budget. If a budget is submitted greater than the projected probation supervision fees collected, the judges shall specify the reasons for the anticipated shortfall. 
(Res. of 5-4-1993, § 14) 
Chapter 43 - ALARMS 
ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 

Sec. 43-1. - [Purpose.] 
Stephens County desires to develop and promote a program which will address abuse and waste of emergency resources, reduce unnecessary safety risks posed to the county emergency response personnel and citizens during false alarm responses and reduce the numbers of false alarm dispatches within the unincorporated portion of the county. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2018) 
ARTICLE II. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 43-2. - Alarm defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the word "alarm" shall mean any equipment, device or system used for the purpose of providing burglar alarms, fire alarms, or other security alarms. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 43-3. - Reserved. 
Sec. 43-4. - False alarms limited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of an alarm to have over three false alarms per 12 consecutive months transmitted from a central or relay office to the Stephens County Emergency Response Personnel. The 12-month period begins on the date of the first false alarm. It shall be the duty of the owner of the alarm to comply with this section. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2018; Ord. of 3-26-2019) 
Sec. 43-5. - Audible false alarms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of an alarm to have over three false audible alarms per 12 months from the date of the first false alarm. 
(b)  The alarm user will be fined for each false alarm call beginning with the fourth occurring per 12 months at the following rate of $300.00 for the fourth alarm, $400.00 for the fifth alarm, and $500.00 for the sixth and subsequent alarms. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner of the alarm to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2018; Ord. of 3-26-2019) 
Sec. 43-6. - False alarm exemptions. 
An alarm will not be considered false if it is determined that the alarm was caused by: 
(a)  A natural or manmade catastrophe, or other "Act of God" such as tornadoes, floods, earthquakes, or other similarly violent conditions. 
(b)  Vandalism causing physical damage to the property. 
(c)  Attempted entry of a location causing visible, physical or other evidence of damage to the location which has caused the alarm to sound. 
(d)  Severe weather or failure of electrical power not caused by the subscriber. 
(e)  The test of a local alarm system by an authorized alarm agent or alarm company employee who is present at the premises inspecting, servicing, repairing, or installing the alarm only if the authorized alarm agent or alarm company notifies 911 prior to the test. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 43-7. - Appeals. 
The alarm use[r] can file a written appeal to the county administrator by setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten days after receipt of notification of a false alarm. The filing of an appeal with the county administrator stays the assessment of the fine and suspension until the Stephens County Board of Commissioners makes a final decision. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2018) 
Chapter 46 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; planning, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Constitution reference— Taxation of trailers and mobile homes, Ga. Const. art. VII, § I, ¶ III. 
State Law reference— Factory built buildings and dwelling units, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq.; The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; tourist courts, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq.; manufacture, sale and transport of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-38; taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-490 et seq.; excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLACEMENT OF MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Appendices "A," "B" and "C" to Ordinance No. 96-1 are maintained in the office of the board of commissioners and are available for review. 

Sec. 46-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to set forth requirements for the placement of manufactured homes and travel trailers in the county, including requirements for building permits, sanitary permits, moving permits, tiedowns, piers, connections to electrical, water and sanitary systems, and annual location permits. This article also establishes requirements for the development and construction of manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks and manufactured home subdivisions built after March 20, 1996. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § I, 3-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person seeking to install a preowned manufactured home in the unincorporated area of Stephens County. 
Building means any structure having a roof or other covering and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the county building official or any of his or her assistants. 
Building official means the county building official or the county marshal/code enforcement officer. 
Certificate of compliance means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a preowned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this chapter, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for relocation. 
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a residence complies with current building codes and ordinances as set forth in section 18-77 and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupation. 
County means the unincorporated area of Stephens County, Georgia. 
DCA means the state department of community affairs. 
Dwelling means a building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used for permanent living quarters for one or more persons. 
Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, providing complete living facilities for one family. 
Family means one or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. 
HUD means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction means the unincorporated areas of Stephens County, Georgia. 
Lot includes the term "plot" or "parcel." 
Manufactured home means a structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC § 5401 et seq. ("HUD Code"), effective June 15, 1976, which, as of March 19, 1996, means the following: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight feet or more in width or 40 feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the HUD Code. 
Manufactured home park means premises where more than five manufactured homes are parked for living or sleeping purposes, or where spaces or lots are set aside and offered for rent for use by manufactured homes for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure or facility used by occupants of manufactured homes on such premises. This definition shall not include manufactured homes sales lots. Instances in which more than five manufactured homes are occupied as a single dwelling unit by the owner of the land involved shall be exempted from this definition. 
Manufactured home subdivision means a parcel of land planned, developed and offered for the purpose of placing manufactured homes for use as permanent or semipermanent dwelling units. 
Mobile home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight feet or more in width or 40 feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and was constructed prior to June 15, 1976. 
Modular home means a factory-fabricated transportable structure built in two or more sections for incorporation at a building site on a permanent foundation to be used for residential purposes and synonymous with multiunit HUD approved manufactured homes, Southern Building Code Congress International (SBCCI) approved homes, and DCA's Industrialized Buildings Act (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq.). 
Park model home means a standard term in the RV industry used for recreational, seasonal or permanent occupancy built on a single chassis, mounted on wheels for transport to a permanent or semipermanent location, of no more than 399 square feet, with a standard toilet rather than an RV toilet, without RV holding tanks, with a 110-volt power only, and designed to be permanently connected to utilities. 
Preowned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
Sound condition means to include, but not [be] limited to, being structurally sound for safety and well being of citizens and/or occupants. No warping, holes, rot, structural damage or disrepair shall be evident. Structure shall be free from damage, injury, decay. Structure must be in a firm, solid and substantial condition. 
Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, vacation and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body length not exceeding 35 feet. 
Travel trailer park means a parcel of land which has been planned and developed to accommodate five or more travel trailers, tents or other camping units for temporary occupancy of not over 60 days' duration. 
Used and occupied, as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the terms "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § II, 3-19-1996; Ord. of 8-9-2011(1)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-33. - Remedies and penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  In case any building or structure is (or is proposed to be) erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is (or is proposed to be) used in violation of any provision of this article, the building official or other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. Where a violation of these regulations exists with respect to a structure or land, the building official may, in addition to other remedies, notify all public utilities and county service departments as to such violation and request that service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises are no longer in violation of this article. 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who does any act prohibited by this article, or who fails to discharge any duty imposed by this article, shall be guilty of a violation of a county ordinance, amendable to the process of the magistrate court of the county, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. It shall be the duty of the sheriff of the county or the building official to enforce the provisions of this article. Upon information constituting probable cause made known to any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this article that a violation of same has occurred, a citation and summons may be issued to the alleged violator requiring him to appear before the magistrate court of the county on a day and time certain, to answer the charge contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § VIII, 3-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-34. - HUD Code and DCA approved manufactured homes. 
Only HUD Code or DCA approved manufactured homes will be permitted to be located in the county. Mobile homes are not permitted to be brought into the county. All manufactured homes which are not in an approved manufactured home park must be located at an approved site of not less than an area specified by the septic tank permit. Approval of the site is obtained by application for and the issuance of a building permit for the site and a sanitary permit for wastewater hookup for the site. The building permit is available at the building official's office. The sanitary permit is available at the county health department office. No relocation permit to move a manufactured home into or within the county for occupancy may be obtained until the building and sanitary permits have been issued. Manufactured home relocation permits are available at the county tax commissioner's office. The office of the building official will notify the tax commissioner's office that building and sanitary permits have been issued before the tax commissioner's office issues a relocation permit. After the above three permits are issued, a manufactured home may be moved into the county or within the county and installed for occupancy on the approved site. Manufactured homes may be brought into the county for resale by a dealership without a building permit or sanitary permit, and the tax commissioner's office may issue a relocation permit for such purpose. Installation of the manufactured home on the approved site must comply with section 46-35 in order to obtain building official approval. Approval of the installation is necessary to obtain permanent electrical service and a current location permit. The above requirements do not apply to travel trailers which are not acceptable for permanent occupancy and may be used for 60 days only as a temporary residence. All travel trailers must display a current state license before movement. Manufactured home location permits will not be issued for travel trailers. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § III, 3-19-1996; Ord. of 7-9-1999; Ord. of 8-9-2011(1)) 
Sec. 46-35. - Manufactured home installation requirements. 
(a)  All manufactured homes must be permanently connected to water, sewerage and electrical service. 
(1)  Water service may be public or private. Connection procedures must meet the county's then current plumbing code requirements and must be freezeproof above and below ground. The building official will inspect. 
(2)  Plumbing for sewerage must also meet the county's then current plumbing code requirements. The sewerage system itself must be approved by the county health department as part of the sanitary permit required under section 46-34. 
(3)  Electrical service must meet requirements of the then current county electrical code, or, if not applicable, the most recent National Electrical Code. Electrical service installation must be in accordance with the sketch, table and notes at appendix A to Ordinance No. 96-1 or the servicing power company will be advised to deny a hookup request. 
(b)  All manufactured homes must be installed on a pier system with permanent skirting of a material manufactured for the purpose of underpinning manufactured housing or of a masonry type material and secured with tiedown devices. A description of acceptable piers, pier placement, tiedown and tiedown placement are at appendix B. These requirements must be met with respect to number and type, or the installation will not be approved. Mobile homes and manufactured homes in use on March 19, 1996, must comply with the requirements of this section. The building official will inspect such structures. 
(c)  Permanent connection of travel trailers to water, sewer or electrical service is prohibited. Permanent installation of travel trailers on piers or jacks is also prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § IV, 3-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-35.1. - Previously owned manufactured homes. 
Any previously owned manufactured homes planning to be relocated into Stephens County from outside the county or relocated within the county will be subject to a code compliance inspection before the home can be allowed to be relocated into or within the county. 
Not withstanding anything to the contrary, a preowned manufactured home may be moved into or relocated within the county provided the following conditions are met: 
Said manufactured home is inspected by the county building inspector, or an approved third-party inspector, at the building inspector's discretion, prior to being relocated in the county and must pass the inspection requirements as provided by the Georgia Fire Safety Commissioner. This inspection shall be completed and all items to be corrected agreed upon before actual building permit to relocate a preowned manufactured home is issued. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2011(1)) 
Sec. 46-35.2. - Minimum health and safety standards. 
All preowned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of compliance by the building inspector: 
(1)  HUD Code: Every preowned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(2)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all preowned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or the occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(3)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water and waste pipe of a preowned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(4)  Heating system. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Unvented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(5)  [Electrical systems.] Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Each preowned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
(6)  Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(7)  Egress window. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(8)  Ventilation. The kitchen shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(9)  Smoke detectors. Each preowned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2011(1)) 
Sec. 46-36. - Standards for manufactured home parks. 
(a)  Minimum design standards and restrictions. 
(1)  Manufactured home parks may be established and existing parks may be expanded, provided a detailed site plan is first submitted to and approved by the building official and all other requirements of this article are met. More than five manufactured homes on any tract shall constitute a manufactured home park which must meet all requirements of this section unless specifically excepted in section 46-34. 
(2)  The minimum land area of any mobile home park shall be five acres. Each lot within the park shall have a minimum area as set forth in exhibit C. All lot lines and the type of sewage disposal proposed for each space shall be clearly delineated on the site plan prior to approval by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  No manufactured home within the park shall be located closer than ten feet to any exterior boundary line, and the front setback for each manufactured home shall be at least 30 feet from the front lot line. 
(4)  Manufactured homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least 25 feet unless occupied as a single dwelling by the owner of the land involved. 
(5)  All lots shall abut upon interior driveways which shall have not less than a 30-foot right-of-way and have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
(6)  All interior streets within the park shall be graded, drained, based and paved in accordance with the county's requirements for an accepted right-of-way. If a proposed street is to be greater in length than 300 feet, a plan profile for the road system shall be submitted along with the site plan. The board of commissioners shall approve all road construction specifications at the time the final plat is submitted. 
(7)  Off-street parking for the park shall be provided at a rate of two parking spaces per each manufactured home lot. 
(8)  The park street system shall be adequately maintained and lighted by the owner. The lighting units shall be so spaced and equipped to provide for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicle traffic at night. Mercury vapor or high or low pressure sodium lights are required at not less than 500-foot intervals installed with a minimum height of 18 feet. 
(9)  If a swimming pool is developed or planned as a part of the park, it shall be enclosed by a chainlink, masonry or wood fence not less than four feet high. The entire installation must meet the requirements set out in the current edition of the Southern Building Code Congress "Standard Swimming Pool Code." 
(10)  All park grounds should be maintained with grass, trees, and/or shrubs to enhance the appearance of the park and to prevent soil erosion or the creation of dust during dry weather. 
(11)  No individual lot in any park may be sold or control of that lot transferred with the intent or effect of a sale unless that lot and the park shall meet all requirements of chapter 66. 
(12)  No more than ten percent of the lots may be allocated for temporary use by travel trailers, the length of such use to be limited to not more than 60 days per travel trailer occupying any such space in the park. 
(13)  Park management must maintain a register of all park residents. The register must be available at reasonable times to any authorized person inspecting the park. 
(b)  Service buildings. Accessory structures and community service facilities are permitted for the convenience and well-being of park residents. Such structures may include, but are not limited to, the following uses: 
(1)  Park management offices, repair shops, and storage. 
(2)  Community sanitary facilities. 
(3)  Community laundry facilities. 
(4)  Community postal facilities. 
(5)  Indoor community recreation areas. 
(6)  Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the use of park residents but not to include manufactured home sales or repair facilities of any type, including automobile repair; provided, however, that no owner of a manufactured home in which he is residing shall be prevented from selling such manufactured home or from performing minor repairs on any automobile which he owns. 
(c)  Water supply and sewage disposal. Every park must have a public, community or private water and sewer system which shall be approved by the county health department and the local water department, when appropriate. Water and sewer approval shall be obtained prior to final approval of a site plan by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § V, 3-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-37. - Travel trailer parks. 
(a)  Minimum design standards and restrictions. 
(1)  Travel trailers parks may be established and existing parks may be expanded, provided a detailed site plan is submitted to, and approved by, the building official before any construction or improvements begin. Five or more travel trailers on any tract shall constitute a travel trailer park. 
(2)  The minimum land area of any travel trailer park shall be five acres. Each lot within the park shall have a minimum area of not less than 2,000 square feet, and lot lines shall be clearly delineated. 
(3)  Lots may be set at an angle, set parallel to the street, or varied in other ways provided that the arrangement is approved by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Each lot within the park shall have a minimum of 35 feet of street frontage and shall have a minimum depth of 75 feet. 
(5)  Off-street parking for the park shall be provided at a rate of one parking space per each travel trailer lot. 
(6)  All travel trailer lots shall abut upon an interior driveway. All interior driveways shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
(7)  Each lot shall be equipped with a suitable and approved electrical outlet, a threaded potable water standpipe and faucet, an approved connection to the community sewer system except at tent-only sites, a firepit with a permanent masonry or stone enclosure, a picnic-type table and a covered trash and garbage container. Garbage shall be removed daily from campsites. 
(8)  All interior streets within the park shall be graded and stabilized, which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. 
(9)  No permanent structures, no manufactured homes and no nonmotorized vehicles, except those falling under the definition of travel trailers, shall be permitted on any approved lot within the park. 
(10)  If a swimming pool is developed or planned as a part of the park, this facility shall be enclosed by a chainlink, masonry or wood fence not less than four feet high and shall meet the same requirements for pools in the manufactured home parks. 
(11)  All park grounds shall be maintained with grass, trees, and/or shrubs to enhance the appearance of the park and to prevent soil erosion or the creation of dust during dry weather. 
(12)  All travel trailer parks must be equipped with men's and women's restrooms with toilets, showers and lavatories at a ratio of two fixtures for each sex per 20 trailer spaces, and a central sanitary dump station. 
(13)  Each park must provide on-site public telephone access. 
(b)  Service buildings. Community service facilities and accessory structures are permitted for the convenience of park patrons. Such structures may include, but are not limited to, the following uses: 
(1)  Park management offices. 
(2)  Community laundry facilities. 
(3)  Community sanitary facilities. 
(4)  Indoor community recreation areas. 
(5)  Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the exclusive use of park patrons. 
(c)  Water supply, garbage and sewage disposal. Every park must have a public, community or private water and sewer system which shall be approved by the county health department and the local water department, when appropriate. Water and sewer approval shall be obtained prior to final approval of the site plan by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § VI, 3-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-38. - Manufactured home subdivisions. 
The minimum design standards and restrictions for manufactured home subdivisions are as follows: 
(1)  Manufactured home subdivisions may be established and developed in accordance with chapter 66 in every respect. 
(2)  No community facilities other than sewer or water systems as needed are required. 
(3)  Each lot shall contain a manufactured home site which can accommodate a manufactured home installed in accordance with the standards enumerated elsewhere in this article. 
(4)  Each lot is limited to installation of only one manufactured home. 
(5)  Travel trailers may be placed on lots with water and sewer service for 60 days or less on an occasional basis. Travel trailers shall not be placed as a single-family dwelling in lieu of a manufactured home. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall not be installed in subdivisions other than manufactured home subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § VII, 3-19-1996) 
Sec. 46-39. - Conflict with other laws. 
Should any requirement or standard in this article conflict with any other law, rule or regulation of any local, state or federal body or agency having jurisdiction, then the stricter of such requirements or standards shall be applied. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § IX, 3-19-1996) 
Secs. 46-40—46-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Permits, § 18-71 et seq. 

Sec. 46-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official, manufactured home and mobile home are defined as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 1, 11-18-1985) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-72. - Punishment. 
Any person who does any act prohibited by this article, or who fails to discharge any duty imposed by this article, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 10, 11-18-1985) 
Sec. 46-73. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall move a manufactured home or a mobile home in the county without first obtaining a permit from the tax commissioner of the county authorizing such relocation. No relocation permit shall be issued unless the person applying for the permit specifies the new location to which the manufactured home or mobile home is to be moved. 
(b)  No person shall move a manufactured home or a mobile home into the county for location within the county or move a manufactured home or a mobile home out of the county whose location has been in the county without first obtaining a permit from the tax commissioner of the county authorizing such relocation. No relocation permit shall be issued unless the person applying for the permit specifies the new location to which the manufactured home or mobile home is to be moved. 
(c)  Previously owned manufactured home inspection process. An application for a compliance inspection permit will be filed with the county building department. 
(1)  Provide to the building inspections department the following information: 
a.  Make, model, year of manufacture and description of basic layout of home. 
b.  Current location of home and directions to address. 
c.  Current home owner's name and telephone number. 
d.  Dates and times the home will be available and open for inspection. 
(2)  Pay inspection fees prior to scheduling an inspection. 
Fees for compliance inspection permits shall be as set by the board of commissioners by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 3, 11-18-1985; Ord. of 8-9-2011(1)) 
Sec. 46-74. - Payment of taxes required. 
No permit required by this article shall be issued until the person applying for the relocation permit submits to the tax commissioner of the county proof that all state and county taxes theretofor accruing and payable with respect to such manufactured home or mobile home have been paid; and if the manufactured home or mobile home to be relocated is then located within any portion of the county that lies within the limits of a municipality therein, such person shall likewise submit proof that all applicable municipal taxes have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 4, 11-18-1985) 
Sec. 46-75. - Issuance. 
Any person who has made application for the relocation of a manufactured home or a mobile home and whose application meets the requirements of this article shall be issued a permit and a decal without charge. The decal issued with the permit authorizing the relocation of a manufactured home or a mobile home shall be red in color and shall be affixed to the manufactured home or mobile home at all times such manufactured home or mobile home is being transported within the confines of the county. Such decal shall be designed in such manner and affixed to the manufactured home or mobile home in such manner as to cause it to be easily visible for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 5, 11-18-1985) 
Sec. 46-76. - Notification of tax commissioner. 
Whenever a permit authorizing the relocation of a manufactured home or a mobile home is issued and such manufactured home or mobile home is to be relocated within the confines of another county in this state, the tax commissioner of the county shall notify the tax commissioner of such other county of the date of the issuance of such permit and the location of the manufactured home or mobile home after being moved. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 6, 11-18-1985) 
Sec. 46-77. - Authorization of tax commissioner to prescribe forms. 
The tax commissioner of the county is authorized and empowered, subject to the specific provisions of this article, to prescribe application, permit, and decal forms, and thereafter to alter and change the same, and such tax commissioner is empowered to require that applicants furnish such information in writing as may be reasonably required to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 7, 11-18-1985) 
Sec. 46-78. - List of manufactured homes required. 
Every person owning or operating a manufactured home park in the county or engaged in the business of renting lots upon which to place manufactured homes in the county shall furnish the tax commissioner of the county with a complete list of all manufactured homes which are parked, rented or otherwise located upon the property of the person making the return. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 8, 11-18-1985; Ord. of 12-17-1985) 
Sec. 46-79. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of tax commissioner, the county sheriff and the building official to enforce the provisions of this article. Upon information constituting probable cause made known to any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this article that a violation has occurred, a citation and summons may be issued to the alleged violator requiring him to appear before the chief magistrate of the magistrate court of the county, on a day and time certain, to answer the charge contained therein. 
(b)  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy which requires a separate building permit. 
(c)  Owners of preowned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their compliance permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 9, 11-18-1985; Ord. of 8-9-2011(1)) 
Chapter 50 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals in parks, § 10-51; environment, ch. 34. 
State Constitution reference— County parks and recreational areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 
State Law reference— County recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Hours of use. 
All county public parks located within the unincorporated area of the county shall be open from 6:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. each day. The parks, except as hereinafter set out, shall be closed for use from 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. each day; provided, however, that the hours when public parks are closed to the general public shall not apply to persons using the parks for the purpose of putting in or removing a boat, using the parks for fishing, or camping in designated camping areas within the parks. 
(Res. of 2-3-1981, § 1) 
ARTICLE II. - POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL 

Sec. 50-2. - Use and possession of alcohol prohibited. 
No person shall use or possess alcoholic beverages within any public park located in the unincorporated area of the county. Alcoholic beverages shall include malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits as the same are defined in O.C.G.A. title 3. 
(Res. of 2-3-1981, § 2) 
ARTICLE III. - RECREATION COMPLEX PET ORDINANCE 

Sec. 50-3. - Recreation complex pet ordinance. 
No pet belonging to or in the control of any person, including, but not limited to, any visitor, invitee, employee, participant or spectator in any sporting event or other event, or any other person on the premises shall be allowed in or on any portion of the Stephens County Recreation Complex located at 199 Roselane Park Drive, Toccoa, Georgia 30577, unless the pet is on a leash. This article shall not apply to specially trained animals assisting persons with disabilities. This article shall not apply to any county-approved or sponsored event in which pets are the main purpose of the activity or event, such as a pet show or contest. 
(Res. of 3-27-2012; Ord. of 8-14-2012) 
Chapter 54 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 5-26-2009 amended ch. 54 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former ch. 54 derived from Res. of 3-5-1996. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance, consistent with this Code, prescribing regulations, compensation, positions, classification, retirement and other matters pertaining to county officers or employees saved from repeal, § 1-10(9); administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Group health benefits program, O.C.G.A. § 36-21-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES 

Sec. 54-1. - Personnel policy actions. 
(a)  Adoption of personnel policies. The Stephens County Personnel Policies and Procedures were established by a resolution adopted by the Board of Commissioners on March 5, 1996, superseding any previous rules, policies, or other issuances relevant to personnel administration. 
(b)  Purpose of personnel policies. The purpose of these policies and procedures includes the following: 
(1)  To establish uniform benefits and procedures; 
(2)  To ensure equal employment opportunity; and 
(3)  To comply with all mandatory state and federal laws related to employment. 
(c)  Establishment of personnel policies. The personnel policies and procedures contained in this handbook have been voluntarily established by the board of commissioners and constitutional officers of the county. They are intended to standardize the personnel practices in the various departments where standardization is possible, and to extend certain privileges to the employees of some departments headed by Constitutional officers. 
In establishing these policies and procedures, the constitutional officers are not relinquishing their constitutional authority as appointing authorities, nor are they or the board of commissioners creating a property interest for employees in any county department that leads to the expectancy of continued employment at any time, in any position, pay grade, or pay step. The policies and procedures are considered good personnel practices and are consistent with the above-stated goals. 
(d)  Personnel policy coverage. The personnel polices contained in this handbook apply to all employees in the departments under the authority of the board of commissioners and to certain employees of constitutional officers who voluntarily agree to participate in the Stephens County personnel management system. 
Participating constitutional officers will accept by signature the policies and procedures as desirable standard practice. Federal law recognizes that neither elected officials nor members of their personal staffs should be covered by rules or regulations which imply specific employment practices. Therefore, the elected officials will determine which positions in their departments are policy-making or personal staff and will exclude those positions from the classification plan. By including certain positions, the elected officials are not redefining the relationship between themselves and their employees as defined by the Constitution of the State of Georgia; they are merely voluntarily extending the personnel policies and procedures to as many employees as possible. 
(e)  Personnel policy administration. In general, department heads are responsible for administering the policies and procedures within this handbook within their respective departments. The county commissioners will provide administrative support to departments under constitutional officers, and will directly administer policies and procedures for departments under the board of commissioners. The county commissioners will become directly involved in administering policies in all departments when budget and funding are concerned, and when discipline and hearings are involved. 
It is the responsibility of each employee to cooperate with the policies and practices described in this handbook. Any employee or applicant who believes that they have not been accorded treatment conforming to these policies is urged to discuss the matter with his/her supervisor or department head, or with the county management personnel. 
(f)  Qualification of personnel policies. Under article IX of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the General Assembly may, by general law, authorize the establishment by county governing authorities of civil service systems covering county employees. The General Assembly has passed such an Act, but there is not intention of establishing a civil service system with the policies contained within this handbook. Stephens County is an "at-will" employer, and reserves the rights, powers, privileges, responsibilities, duties, and circumstances unique to and associated with an "at-will" employer. 
(g)  Printing and distribution of policies. The personnel polices and procedures contained in the Stephens County Employment Handbook will be printed and distributed to each county employee who is covered by these policies. Each department head will be responsible for reviewing policies and procedures with each covered employee in that department. Each covered employee will be required to acknowledge by signature that they have received and reviewed a copy of the policies and procedures. That signed acknowledgment will be maintained in the employee's personnel file. 
(h)  Policy changes. The policies, procedures, and provisions of this handbook have been developed at the discretion of the county commissioners and constitutional officers and, except for its policy of employment at will, may be amended or cancelled at any time, at management's sole discretion. These provisions supersede all existing policies and practices and may not be amended or added to without the express written approval of the county commissioners and constitutional officers. These polices shall reflect, and be superseded by, any changes mandated by state and federal legislation. 
Stephens County benefit plans are defined in legal documents such as insurance contracts, official plan documents, and trust agreements. If questions should arise about the nature and/or extent of plan benefits, or if there is conflicting language, the formal language of the plan documents will govern, not the informal wording of this policy handbook. Plan documents are available for inspection in the human resource office. 
All County programs, policies, and procedures are dependent on economic, political, and legal considerations and may be changed from time to time by the County at its discretion and without prior notice to employees. The County retains all of its rights to change, modify, revise, or alter policies, benefits, or other conditions of employment at any time and for any reason, and to hire, transfer, discipline, separate, and otherwise manage its employees as it feels appropriate. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § A-1) 
Sec. 54-2. - Chain of command (channel of communication). 
For all matters to be presented before the county commissioners from any employee, the following chain of command (or channel of communication) will be followed: 
(1)  The employee will pass the matter/communication to be considered to his/her immediate supervisor; 
(2)  The supervisor will pass the matter/communication to the department head; 
(3)  The department head will pass the matter/communication to the county administrator; 
(4)  The county administrator will pass the matter/communication to the commissioners for their information and appropriate action. 
However, no such matter for communication may be stopped by a supervisor, department head, or the county administrator without the knowledge and consent of the employee. If any employee feels that this chain of command is not sufficient, they may send a copy of such matter/communication directly to the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
Exceptions to the normal chain of command may include complaints of sexual harassment, unlawful discrimination, or other unlawful acts by a supervisor, department head, or county administrator; in such situation, the employee may communicate the complaint directly to the board of commissioners for appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § A-2) 
Sec. 54-3. - "At-will" nature of employment. 
All employees of Stephens County government are "at-will" employees. Employment with Stephens County is entered into on a voluntary basis, and all employees are employed for an indefinite time period. Either the employer or the employee is free to terminate the employment relationship at any time without notice, for any reason or for no reason at all. 
Policies and guidelines set forth in this employment handbook are not intended to create a contract, nor are they to be construed to constitute contractual obligations of any kind or a contract of employment between the county and any of its employees. In no case should any provisions of this handbook be interpreted as an act of conveying the expectation of continued employment to an employee or any other relaxation of the employment "at will" doctrine of Stephens County. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § A-3) 
Sec. 54-4. - Equal employment opportunity. 
It is the policy of Stephens County government to provide equal employment opportunities to all applicants and employees of the county. Stephens County government does not unlawfully discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national or ethnic origin, age, gender, sexual orientation, marital status, veteran status, disability, political affiliation, or any other characteristic protected by law. All employment decisions by the county will be based on merit, qualifications, and abilities, and will be made in a fair, equitable, and nondiscriminatory manner. This policy relates to all phases of employment, including recruitment, placement, transfer, promotion, demotion, termination, compensation, benefits, county-sponsored training, layoff, recall from layoff, participation in county-sponsored employee activities, and all other aspects of personnel administration. 
The county does not and will not permit its employees to engage in unlawful discriminatory practices. Any county employee found to be engaging in any type of unlawful discrimination will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
Any applicant or employee with questions or concerns about any type of discrimination in the workplace is encouraged to bring these issues to the attention of the immediate supervisor or to appropriate county management personnel. A thorough investigation of the complaint will be conducted. If any employee is not satisfied with the outcome of the investigation, the employee should follow the grievance procedures described in this handbook. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § A-4) 
Sec. 54-5. - Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliance. 
Stephens County government is committed to complying fully with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and ensuring equal opportunity in employment for qualified persons with disabilities. The ADA required that individuals with disabilities be given the same employment opportunities and services available to people without disabilities. Qualified individuals with disabilities are entitled to equal pay and other forms of compensation (or changes in compensation). 
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) describes an individual with a disability as one who has either a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a person's ability to perform "life activities" such as eating, sleeping, walking, talking, hearing, breathing, learning, working, or taking care of oneself. A qualified individual is anyone who has the skills, experience, and education required for the job and can perform the job's essential functions, with or without reasonable accommodation. 
It is Stephens County government's policy that all employment actions be conducted on a nondiscriminatory basis. All employment decisions are based on the merits of the situation in accordance with defined criteria, not the disability of the individual. This policy governs all aspects of employment, including selection, job assignment, compensation, discipline, termination, and access to benefits and training. 
If a person with a disability is unable to perform an essential function of the job because of the disability, the county will then consider whether there is reasonable accommodation that would enable the person to perform the job (such as restructuring the job, changing the work schedule, or acquiring/modifying equipment). Reasonable accommodation is available to all disabled employees, in cases where their disability affects the performance of job functions, unless doing so would result in an undue hardship. 
Employees with life-threatening illnesses such as cancer, heart disease, and AIDS often wish to continue their normal pursuits, including work, to the extent allowed by their condition. The county supports these endeavors as long as employees are able to meet acceptable performance standards. As in the case of other disabilities, the county will make reasonable accommodations, in accordance with all legal requirements, to allow qualified employees with life-threatening illness to perform the essential functions of their jobs. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § A-5) 
Sec. 54-6. - Harassment. 
Stephens County is committed to maintaining a work environment that is free of discrimination and unlawful harassment, including general harassment, sexual harassment, or harassment on the basis of an individual's race, religion, color, national or ethnic origin, age, gender, sexual orientation, marital status, veteran status, disability, political affiliation, or any other characteristic protected by law. In keeping with this commitment, the county will not tolerate harassment of employees by anyone, including any manager, supervisor, employee, coworker, vendor, client, or customer of the county. The county condemns and prohibits any form of harassment by managers, supervisors, fellow employees, and outside contractors or vendors. Harassment may take many forms, as described below. 
(1)  General harassment. General harassment may include any conduct that creates a hostile work environment for an employee, whether verbal, physical, or visual. Comments, jokes, practical jokes, pictorial representations, or gestures that are negative or derisive of the categories mentioned above may constitute harassment. Any such conduct which interferes with an employee's ability to perform his/her job or which creates a hostile, offensive, or intimidating work environment will not be tolerated and will subject the employee displaying such conduct to disciplinary action. 
(2)  Sexual harassment. Sexual harassment may include unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, promises of benefits in exchange for sexual favors, threats of reprisal for refusal to engage in social or sexual relations, sexually suggestive and offensive language, and other verbal and physical contact of a sexual nature. Sexual harassment occurs when submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of the individual's employment, submission to or rejection of such conduct is used as a basis for employment decisions affecting the individual, or such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with the individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment. A sexually offensive environment can be created by behavior which includes sexually oriented jokes, kidding, or teasing; display of sexual objects or of nude or partially nude photographs; unwelcome touching, brushing, or "feeling" of a fellow employee; unwelcome flirtation, requests for dates, or requests for after-hours meetings; or any other conduct which makes an employee feel uncomfortable while at work. 
(3)  Complaint procedures. Any employee who believes that they have been the victim of general harassment or sexual harassment or who has knowledge of that kind of behavior is urged to report such conduct immediately to his/her supervisor, any other member of management, or directly to the county administrator. The county will initiate a prompt, thorough, and confidential investigation. All complaints or reports of harassment will be treated confidentially, and no employee will be penalized in any way for making a complaint of harassment or for reporting knowledge of harassment (unless investigation shows a report or complaint to be false and made with malicious intent). If an investigation confirms that harassment has occurred, the offender will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
(4)  Retaliation prohibited. Stephens County prohibits retaliation against any individual who reports discrimination or harassment or participates in an investigation of such reports. Retaliation against an individual for reporting harassment or discrimination or for participating in an investigation of a claim of harassment or discrimination is a serious violation of this policy and, like harassment or discrimination itself, will be subject to disciplinary action. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § A-6) 
Sec. 54-7. - Immigration law compliance. 
Stephens County government is committed to full compliance with federal immigration laws, and will hire only United States citizens and aliens who are authorized to work in the United States. These laws require that all individuals pass an employment verification procedure before they are permitted to work. 
In compliance with the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, each new (and rehired) employee, as a condition of employment, must complete the Employment Eligibility Verification Form I-9 and present documentation establishing identity and employment eligibility. This proof of legal authority to work in the United States must be presented within no later than three business days of the first day of employment. Failure to provide such identification as outlined on the Form I-9 will result in an immediate termination of employment. 
Former employees who are rehired must also complete the form if they have not completed an I-9 with Stephens County within the past three years, or if their previous Form I-9 is no longer retained or valid. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § A-7) 
Sec. 54-8. - Safety in the workplace. 
Stephens County government strives to provide a safe and healthy work environment for all employees. To do this, all employees have a responsibility to learn and practice safe methods of performing their jobs, and to report any potentially hazardous condition observed in the workplace. 
(1)  Injury/accident reporting. All injuries and accidents must be reported to the immediate supervisor and/or department head, no matter how minor the injury may appear to be. This ensures prompt and appropriate medical treatment, allows for timely completion of required reports in accordance with law, and enables eligible employees to qualify for coverage as quickly as possible. If medical attention by a physician is needed, the employee must use one of the physicians specifically listed on the worker's compensation notice posted by the county on the official bulletin board (or other designated location). Failure to report an injury or to receive medical treatment will jeopardize payment of medical bills or other benefits under workers compensation insurance. 
(2)  Safety guidelines for all employees. All employees should be trained in the correct way to perform their jobs. Any questions or suggestions about better or safer methods of performing tasks should be discussed with the supervisor or manager. Employees should always be conscious of the safety of others, as well as themselves. Employees should always observe the following guidelines: 
a.  Observe all safety practices and procedures relating to the work performed. 
b.  Only operate machinery assigned to them and for which they have received full training. 
c.  Use proper safety clothing, equipment, and personal protective gear whenever provided, assigned, or required, as designated for the work performed. 
d.  Use appropriate, safe methods to lift heavy objects, and use back braces, handcarts, or other devices to assist with lifting or moving activities. 
e.  Never endanger themselves or another individual through inappropriate actions or by taking unnecessary chances. 
f.  Be prepared for fire or other emergency situations. Know what to do; what actions to take; where to go; and the location of exits, firefighting equipment, and alarm pulls within the work environment. 
g.  Notify supervisors or managers of any unsafe conditions, accidents, damaged or malfunctioning vehicles or equipment, any employee who is performing his/her job in an unsafe manner, or any other type of hazardous situation. 
h.  Observe proper maintenance practices to keep work area, vehicles, tools, or other equipment in clean, safe, and operable condition. 
i.  In compliance with state law, no employee under the age of 18 is allowed to operate heavy motor-driven equipment. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § A-8) 
Sec. 54-9. - Security in the workplace. 
(a)  [Personal property.] Stephens County government cannot be responsible for any loss or damage to personal property or valuables of employees or others using the premises. However, it is the county's intent to take the necessary actions to safeguard employees while on the job, as well as to protect county property. Packages, handbags, briefcases, or other personal items brought onto or taken off of county property are subject to inspection by supervisors or other authorized personnel. All county property including, but not limited to, desks, file cabinets, and vehicles, is subject to being searched and the contents held by county management at any time. Employees are encouraged to report to supervisors any suspicious individuals or happenings on or near County property. 
(b)  Security clearance. In certain employment areas, such as accounting, finance, public safety, or other areas where the public has a compelling interest in the security of property or life, applicants for employment, promotion, or transfer may be required to provide additional personal information that would no be needed in other areas of employment. Such applicants/employees may also be subject to additional background screening, which may include driver's history records, criminal history reports, credit reports, or other review. County employees may also be required to meet requirements to be bonded under a blanket policy at the county's expense, to satisfy the requirements of state and federal agencies. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § A-9) 
Secs. 54-10—54-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS ETHICS 

Sec. 54-16. - Policy overview. 
The proper operation of county government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial, and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made through proper channels of the government structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. 
County employees are in a unique category. Not only are they employed by the County, more importantly, they serve the citizens of Stephens County. Employees have an obligation not only to their supervisors, department heads, county commissioners, and other elected officials, but also to the public. County employees are highly visible to the community, and must adhere to high moral and ethical standards in their work activities and personal conduct. Each employee has an obligation to conduct county business within guidelines that prevent actual or potential conflicts of interest. 
The purpose of these guidelines is to provide general direction and clarification on issues involving acceptable standards of operation. While it is not possible to outline specific rules to govern each employee's conduct in all aspects of the job, this section [article] of the handbook sets forth some common or frequent situations which may arise, and provides guidelines to assist employees in carrying out duties in a professional manner. Also, it is not the county's intent to dictate the nonworking time of county employees; however, when off-duty conduct has an impact on county operations or brings discredit on county government, such conduct does legitimately become a concern and can result in disciplinary action against the employee concerned. Contact the county administrator for specific information or questions about issues involving business ethics. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § B-1) 
Se. 54-17. - Conflicts of interest. 
No employee may have ownership of greater than one percent in a company holding a contract with Stephens County government or its affiliated agencies. No employee may acquire an interest in any contract at a time when they have reason to believe that such interest will be affected either by his/her own official actions of by the official actions of the county. No employee may hold investments in real property or business in the immediate vicinity of a county project that might appear to be speculative. 
If any employee has a financial interest in a business or activity that they have reason to believe may be affected by his/her official actions or by the actions of the county, the employee must disclose the exact nature and value of the interest in writing to the appropriate persons. Any employee who has a financial interest as described above must disqualify himself/herself from participating in any official action directly affecting this interest. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § B-2) 
Sec. 54-18. - Civic and political activities. 
Employees are encouraged to engage in outside community activities, including civic organizations and political activities. However, unless officially authorized by the county commissioners or other elected officials, such activities should occur during nonworking time. 
(1)  Civic activities. Employees should use good judgment to ensure their civic activities do not conflict with the interests of the county. When participating in civic activities, employees should not disclose information that is not available to the public, unless disclosure of such information has been authorized. Further, employees' civic activities should not affect their ability to perform the essential functions of their jobs, and off-duty conduct of the employees should not have a negative impact on county operations or bring discredit on county government. 
(2)  Political activities. No employee covered under these policies may engage in political activities at the work place or during business hours. No employee may make use of county time, county equipment, or other county assets to aid a political candidate, political party, or political cause; nor may any employee use his/her county position to persuade, coerce, or intimidate any person in the interest of a political candidate, party, or cause. All employees of Stephens County have a right to be free of any and all political persuasion or coercion in relationship to their employment, and should report any such job-related activity to the county administrator. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § B-3) 
Sec. 54-19. - Use of influence. 
An actual of [or] potential conflict of interest occurs when an employee is in a position to influence a decision that may result in a personal gain for that employee or for a relative as a result of the county's business dealings. For the purposes of this policy, a relative is any person who is related by blood or marriage, or whose relationship with the employee is similar to that of persons who are related by blood or marriage. 
No employee may use his/her position and influence in Stephens County government to promote personal gain, or to benefit friends, relatives, or associates. Personal gain may result not only in cases where an employee or relative has a significant ownership in a firm with which the county does business, but also when an employee or relative receives any kickback, bribe, substantial gift, or special consideration as a result of any transaction or business dealings involving the county. 
No "presumption of guilt" is created by the mere existence of a relationship with outside firms. However; if an employee has any influence on transactions involving purchases, contracts, or leases, it is imperative that they disclose to the county administrator (or other appropriate county representative) the existence of any actual or potential conflict of interest as soon as possible, so that safeguards can be established to protect all parties. All purchasing transactions should be conducted in accordance with the county's established purchasing policies and procedures. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § B-4) 
Sec. 54-20. - Gifts, gratuities, and favors. 
No employee may request or receive a gift, gratuity, favor, or loan for himself/herself or another person if it tends to, or appears to, influence his/her opinion or judgments in the performance of official duties. No employee may accept any gift, gratuity, or loan from any organization, business concern, or individual with whom the employee has official relationships on business of Stephens County government. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § B-5) 
Sec. 54-21. - Confidential information. 
During the course of employment, employees often learn confidential and restricted information regarding county operations, activities, or personnel; about business associates and their operations; about county citizens and their personal business; or other information acquired through their job. It is county policy that such information should be discussed with any unauthorized person, either inside or outside the workplace. 
Information regarding employee compensation and benefits is considered strictly confidential, and employees should not discuss such issues with other employees or individuals other than the immediate supervisor, manager, or county administrator. 
Employee medical information is also required to be treated confidentially. All employees are responsible for respecting and maintaining the confidentiality of employee medical information, and to take reasonable precautions to protect such information from inappropriate disclosure. 
Further, no employee may make use of or reveal any confidential information acquired through employment with the county for private gain or for the private gain of any other persons or groups. Revealing confidential information may be considered grounds for dismissal. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § B-6) 
Sec. 54-22. - Outside employment or business activity. 
Outside employment by full-time employees of Stephens County government is discouraged because it is likely to interfere with the employee's regular work with the county. No employee may engage in any paid employment or private business in addition to his/her employment with the county if the outside employment or private business may interfere with efficient performance of work with the county. No employee may use county equipment, materials, supplies, or property to engage in any outside business activity or employment. No employee may engage in outside business activity or employment which is performed during hours for which they are being compensated by the county, or which conflicts with or limits the county's demands on the individual with respect to the employee's availability for overtime work. 
Further, outside business activity or employment is strictly prohibited whenever the outside activity conflicts with the business interest or other interests of the county, would reflect adversely on the county, or would raise the appearance, of, or potential for, a conflict of interest. 
Any county employee must receive advance approval from the department hear and/or the county administrator or department head before accepting or engaging in any outside business activity or employment. If such activity should create a conflict of interest situation between the employee and the county, the employee will be expected to resign on of the positions, or termination of employment with the county may result. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § B-7) 
Sec. 54-23. - Nepotism/employment of relatives. 
It is the policy of Stephens County government to avoid hiring individuals who are relatives of (or who have personal relationships with) any county employee or official for positions that may involve or lead to conflicts of interest, complaints of favoritism, lack of objectivity, or morale/dissension problems in the workplace. For purposes of this policy: 
• A "direct line of supervision" is defined as a situation in which the employee or official would be in a position to affect the terms and conditions of another's employment, to include making decisions about work assignments, compensation, grievances, advancement, or performance evaluation. 
• A "relative" is defined as a spouse, parent, son, daughter, brother/sister, grandparent, parent-in-law, step-parent, brother-/sister-in-law, step-brother/sister, stepchild, step-grandchild, or any person whose relationship to the employee is that of a dependent, or any two persons who have established a cohabitated relationship and share the same household. This policy is not limited to relatives, and applies to other relationships between employees in which actual or potential conflicts of interest in the workplace may exist. 
No county employee, or elected/appointed county official, may serve in or be appointed to a position involving direct line supervision with a relative of the county employee or official. This policy applies to new employees, promotions, demotions, transfers, and reinstatements. Employment of relatives is not prohibited by the county as long as none of the related persons are employed in a supervisory role in which they might have an effect on a relative's progress, performance, or welfare as an employee. 
No employee will be penalized as a result of a departmental reorganization which places the employee in violation of this policy. However, if, by reason of marriage or cohabitation, county employees come to be in violation of this policy, one or the other must accept a job reassignment of equal or lesser pay, if available, or must elect to resign their position within 60 days of said marriage or cohabitation. If that decision is not made within 60 days by the individuals involved, county management will initiate appropriate action. Exclusion—This section does not apply to any situations which constitute a violation of this policy at the time of the policy's adoption. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § B-8) 
Sec. 54-24. - Standards of conduct. 
As a representative of Stephens County government, each employee is expected to observe the highest standards of professional conduct and to act responsibly, both on duty and off duty. The county expects that each employee will respect, support, and comply with ethical standards and rules of conduct established by the county for its employees and officials. 
All employees should comply with county policies, and with all rules and regulations of federal, state, and local governments and of applicable regulatory agencies. Employees should show respect, courtesy, honesty, and integrity in all personal and professional interactions, and should act responsibly, in good faith, and with due care, without knowingly misrepresenting material facts. 
Certain actions or forms of behavior are considered unacceptable in the workplace, and will not be tolerated. While it is not possible to list all of the actions considered unacceptable, the following are examples of misconduct which may result in disciplinary action, up to and including immediate termination of employment: 
• Theft, destruction, unauthorized use, or inappropriate removal or possession of property, including property of the county, other employees, customers, or others doing business with the county. 
• Possession of dangerous or unauthorized materials (such as weapons, firearms, or explosives) in the workplace. 
• Disorderly conduct or violence in the workplace, including fighting, threatening, abusing, or intimidating other individuals; using physical force against another individual except in self-defense; provoking a fight; causing a disturbance; engaging in horseplay or boisterous, disruptive activity; engaging in lewd, obscene, or otherwise inappropriate conduct. 
• Use of obscene, profane, hostile, threatening, abusive, or disruptive language on county property. 
• Insubordination; refusal or failure to follow instructions or perform duties as assigned; or other disrespectful conduct. 
• Sexual or other unlawful harassment or discrimination. 
• Reporting to work under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs. 
• Possession, distribution, sale, transfer, or use of illegal drugs on county property; or unauthorized use of alcohol in the workplace, while on duty, or while operating county vehicles or equipment. 
• Negligence or improper conduct leading to damage of property (such as county or customer property). 
• Unauthorized use of county communication systems (such as computers, e-mail, internet, telephones, voice mail, pagers, regular mail, etc.); unauthorized use of county equipment or vehicles (or of property of customers). 
• Excessive absenteeism or tardiness, failure to notify employer of absence or tardiness in a timely manner, any absence without notice, or leaving a scheduled work shift without authorization. 
• Dishonesty; falsification of county documents or records, including timekeeping records, personnel records, employment applications, or expense reports. 
• Violation of county policies. 
• Unsatisfactory performance or conduct; conduct or behavior that negatively reflects on the county. 
• Unauthorized disclosure of confidential information. 
• Mishandling of county funds; failure to follow county procedures governing reporting or use of funds. 
• Any other action which the county reasonable believes presents a negative impact to or negative reflection on the county. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § B-9) 
Sec. 54-25. - Cooperation in internal investigations. 
All county employees are expected to cooperate to the fullest extent possible in any internal investigation conducted by the county. Such cooperation may involve the use of a polygraph test. Failure to cooperate will be considered grounds for adverse disciplinary action, including dismissal. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § B-10 
Secs. 54-26—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE 

Sec. 54-31. - Drug-free workplace policy. 
Employees who abuse drugs and alcohol are not only a danger to themselves, but to fellow employees and the community served. In addition, medical costs incurred by employees with drug or alcohol problems are much higher than those of other employees, and the decreased productivity of these individuals due to absenteeism and turnover can adversely affect the County's ability to perform necessary services for its citizens. 
It is the policy of Stephens County that its workplace shall be drug-free, in compliance with the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-690, title V, subtitle D). All employees are notified, and sign statements acknowledging such notification that the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of controlled substance (defined in schedules I through V of section 202 of the Controlled Substances Act 21 U.S.C. 812, and further defined in regulation 21 CFR 1308.15) is prohibited in the workplace. As a condition of employees, employees will: 
(1)  Abide by the terms of this statement; and 
(2)  Notify the county administrator of any criminal drug statute conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace no later than five days after such conviction. 
Penalties for drug abuse violations occurring in the workplace will include: 
(1)  Taking appropriate personnel action, up to and including termination; and 
(2)  Requiring the employee to participate satisfactorily in an appropriate drug abuse assistance or rehabilitation program. 
The county will provide a drug-free awareness program which is intended to inform employees about: 
(1)  The dangers of drug abuse in the workplace; 
(2)  The county's intent to maintain a drug-free workplace; 
(3)  Any available drug counseling, rehabilitation, and employee assistance programs (the county is not required by law to pay for these services); and 
(4)  The penalties that may be imposed upon employees for drug abuse violations occurring in the workplace. 
Copies of the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 are available from the human resources office. 
Stephens County's policy concerning the use of illegal drugs and abuse of alcohol applies to all employees on Stephens County's payroll, and is intended to protect the health and safety of county employees and the public. All employees and managers are required to join the County in implementation of this policy. 
No part of this policy, nor any of the procedures hereunder, is intended to affect the county's right to manage its workplace or to discipline its employees; not [nor] is it a guarantee of employment, continued employment, or of any terms or conditions or employment. The county reserves the rights to interpret, change, modify, amend, or rescind this policy in whole or in part. 
It is recognized that early treatment is the key to rehabilitation for substance abusers. Our policy is to assist employees with problems associated with abuse of drugs and alcohol, and to encourage rehabilitation. Employees are encouraged to voluntarily request help. No employee will have job security jeopardized by such a good faith request. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-1) 
Sec. 54-32. - Drug-free workplace definitions. 
For purposes of this policy, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Substance abuse is defined as: 
a.  Reporting to work or working with drugs present in the body or while affected by alcohol; 
b.  Chemical dependency on alcohol or other drugs where job performance or safety of employees is adversely affected; or 
c.  The use of illegal drugs. 
(2)  The term drugs present in the body means that the level of a drug found in an employee's blood, urine, or other body fluid exceeds those levels determined by the county and its testing laboratory as a cutoff level for a positive test. 
(3)  The term affected is not limited to obvious impairment of physical or mental ability, such as slurred speech or difficulty in maintaining balance, but may be established by a professional opinion, a scientifically valid test, or by a layperson's observation. 
(4)  The term illegal drugs as used in this policy includes, but is not limited to, marijuana, cocaine, heroin, or similar drugs whose possession or use is prohibited under state or federal law in this country, as well as prescription drugs unless validly prescribed by the employee's physician. So-called synthetic drugs, designer drugs, look-alike drugs, and similar substances are also considered illegal drugs for purposes of this policy, even if they are not specifically prohibited by state or federal law. This policy also applies to other substances which may be abused, whether available legally over the counter, such as cough syrup or drugs obtained with a valid prescription, or substances which were not intended for human consumption, such as glue. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-2) 
Sec. 54-33. - Drug and alcohol testing of applicants. 
Any offer of employment is contingent upon the applicant successfully completing the drug-screening test. No individual will be permitted to begin work until test results have been obtained. The county will not hire any applicant who: 
(1)  Refuses to submit to a drug test; 
(2)  Tests positive for use of illegal or unauthorized substances; and/or 
(3)  Tests positive for the presence of prescription drugs that could impair their physical, mental, emotional, or other faculties (such as barbiturates, amphetamines, opiates, etc.) unless the applicant has a current prescription and a valid medical reason for the use of such drugs. 
An applicant who is rejected under this policy may be considered for future vacancies if the applicant can demonstrate that they no longer use any such substances (for example, the applicant may successfully complete a drug abuse treatment program and pass a more thorough drug test, conducted at the applicant's expense). 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-3) 
Sec. 54-34. - Drug and alcohol testing of commercial drivers. 
Stephens County maintains a policy to comply with the department of transportation (DOT) requirements governing alcohol and drug testing of all drivers (and driver applicants) who operate a commercial vehicle in excess of 26,000 pounds. All county drivers who operate such a commercial vehicle, regardless of how often are subject to DOT alcohol and drug testing under this policy. All DOT-mandated tests are separate from and in addition to any drug tests which may be required by Stephens County in other instances. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-4) 
Sec. 54-35. - Prohibited activities. 
The following actions are prohibited for all employees: 
(1)  The possession, use, transfer, manufacturer, or sale of alcohol, illegal drugs, or legal drugs without a valid prescription from a licensed medical or dental practitioner during working time, on county property, or while operating or riding in a county-provided vehicle, or any vehicle being used for county business, is prohibited. Obviously, this does not prevent county employees from possessing or transporting alcohol or illegal drugs as part of their job duties (such as a law enforcement officer who transports seized cocaine). 
(2)  The possession or consumption of alcohol on county property or on county time, or while operating or riding in a county-provided vehicle, or any vehicle being used for county business, is prohibited. 
(3)  Reporting for duty or working with drugs present in the body or while affected by alcohol will be handled through disciplinary procedures or referral for counseling or rehabilitation, as determined by management. This prohibition includes prescription drugs, unless the employee has a current legal prescription and a valid medical reason for using such prescription drug. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-5) 
Sec. 54-56. - Notification procedure for authorized use of prescription drugs. 
In order to assure that employees can safely perform their jobs, employees using prescription drugs according to a physician's instructions or using over-the-counter drugs for medicinal purposes should notify their supervisor or department head immediately upon reporting for work, in the event that such drugs could impair their physical, mental, emotional, or other faculties. Failure to do so may be considered a violation of this policy and is cause for disciplinary action. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-6) 
Sec. 54-37. - Violations of drug-free workplace policy. 
[Disciplinary action.] Employees who violate these prohibitions are subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment, depending on considerations such as nature of the offense, employee's current job assignment, employee's record with the county, and possible adverse consequence to the county. Any circumstances indicating a violation of federal, state, or local laws may be reported to appropriate law enforcement officials, and the county will cooperate in any criminal prosecutions. 
Special provisions for employees operating county-provided vehicles, or personal vehicles on county business. Substance abuse by employees who operate county-provided vehicles or their personal vehicles on county business can create a very serious risk for both themselves and members of the public. The county believes employee behavior off the job can influence behavior on the job. Therefore, the following rules and disciplinary action will apply to those employees: 
(1)  Employees who operate county-provided vehicles will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment, for a conviction of driving that vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. This provision applies regardless of whether the vehicle is being operated for personal or business use. 
(2)  Employees who operate their personal vehicle on county business will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment, for a conviction of driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs when the employee is operating that vehicle on county business. For purposes of this paragraph, "operating on county business" means that the employee would be entitled to reimbursement by the county for that specific trip. 
(3)  Employees who operate a vehicle as an integral part of their job, such as county truck drivers, are subject to disciplinary action for a conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, even if such offense occurred in the employee's personal vehicle and not while on county business. The first such conviction subjects an employee to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. The second such conviction in a 12-month period will result in termination of employment. 
(4)  Any employees covered under the above provisions must report to their supervisor any citation alleging that they were driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, regardless of whether they offense occurred in the employee's personal vehicle, in a county-provided vehicle, or other vehicle, while on personal business or on county business. Failure to report any such citation may result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. The report must be made within five days of the citation, unless the employee is unable to make such report due to extenuating circumstances, in which case the notification must occur as soon as possible. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-7) 
Sec. 54-38. - Searches. 
Normal search practices that are part of a general security program, such as locker inspections, are not affected by this policy and may be continued or implemented as provided by such program. 
When there is reason to believe that a specific employee or group of employees may be in possession of substances which are prohibited under the county's policy, the employee(s) may be required, as a condition of employment, to submit to a reasonable search of their clothing, personal lockers, desks, personal vehicles, purses, lunch boxes or other containers while on county property. Except in unusual circumstances, searches will not be conducted unless approved by the county administrator. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-8) 
Sec. 54-39. - Drug and alcohol testing of employees. 
The county may required an employee to undergo a medical examination and/or a drug/alcohol screening test under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Accident or incident. An employee will be tested if: 
a.  The employee is involved in an accident or incident which caused or could have caused personal injury to that employee or any other person; 
b.  The injury was or could have been so serious as to result in lost time, the need for medical care by a physician, or serious property damage; and 
c.  Action or inaction by the employee contributed to the accident or injury. 
(2)  Reasonable suspicion or evidence of substance abuse. The county may determine to test an employee on the basis of reasonable cause or suspicion that the employee may be a substance abuser or in violation of the county's substance abuse policy. 
(3)  Other instances. While it is not possible to list every factor which might lead to a decision to test, those listed below are representative of typical factors which may be considered: 
a.  Excessive absenteeism or tardiness; 
b.  Unexplained significant deterioration in job performance; 
c.  Significant change in personality (repeated abusive behavior, insolence, misconduct, insubordination); 
d.  Information from a credible source indicating possible substance abuse; 
e.  Unexplained absences from normal work site; 
f.  Patterns of work violations; unusual behavior which cannot be readily explained; changes in appearance or demeanor; excessive cravings for water or sweets; 
g.  Reddened eyes or dilated pupils; 
h.  Odor of alcohol or drugs; 
i.  Slurred speech; 
j.  Difficulty in motor coordination. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-9) 
Sec. 54-40. - Drug testing procedures. 
Except in unusual circumstances, before employees are requested to submit to a medical examination or drug/alcohol screening test, concurrence of the county administer [administrator] . 
(1)  A testing request form will be completed. 
(2)  The employee will be met with in private by his/her department head and the county administrator. 
(3)  The employee will be asked to consent to any search, medical examination, and/or drug/alcohol screening test; will be asked to cooperate; and will be informed that submission to the search, examination, and/or screening test is a condition of employment. Failure to cooperate should result in immediate suspension without pay, and is grounds for termination of employment. 
(4)  If the employee agrees to the examination and/or screening test, they will sign a release of liability form. 
(5)  The department head, with concurrence of the county administrator, will make the decision concerning whether the employee will remain on the job until results of the examination and/or drug screening test are received. This decision will be based on their sole judgment as to whether the employee poses any danger to fellow employees or to the public, and based on the following categories: 
a.  Employees tested for reasons associated with (a) safety-sensitive jobs, such as drivers of county vehicles, (b) voluntary requests for assistance, or (c) referral by the county for counseling or rehabilitation, may remain on the job pending receipt of the results of a drug screening test. 
b.  Employees tested for reasons associated with (a) evidence of substance abuse, or (b) accident or injury, may remain on the job or may be suspended without pay pending receipt of the results of a drug screening test. 
(6)  If an employee refuses to cooperate or to agree to the search, examination, and/or drug-screening test, the employee will be suspended without pay pending final decision regarding termination of employment. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-10) 
Sec. 54-41. - Test results and subsequent actions. 
(a)  [Procedures.] The following procedures pertain to conducting of tests, handling of test results, and actions to be taken after tests. 
(1)  Collection of fluids. Procedures established by the county's designated testing laboratory and the county administrator will be followed for collection of sample body fluids. In situations where drug screen tests are administered pursuant to state/federal regulations, any procedure specified therein will be followed. 
(2)  Negative test results. Negative test results will be communicated confidentially to the employee by the appropriate member of management. 
(3)  Adulterated or unreadable samples. Adulterated or unreadable samples that are clearly not authentic will be considered as evidence of an employee's failure to cooperate with county policy. The employee will be given an opportunity to provide an explanation. If a satisfactory explanation is not provided, the employee is subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. 
(4)  Positive test results. Positive test results may be confirmed by a second test of the original sample. The employee will be provided with the results of the test and given an opportunity to explain the result. If a satisfactory explanation is not provided, the employee will be disciplined and/or referred for appropriate counseling and rehabilitation, or employment will be terminated, as determined by the county. For positive test results, the employee may be offered an additional confirmatory drug test on the original sample, at the employee's expense. Arrangements for the confirmatory test should be made with the county administrator. A confirmatory test should be a second gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) test performed on the original sample. 
(5)  [Counseling.] In the case of positive test results, if the employee agrees to referral for counseling or rehabilitation, they should be advised that this counseling represents the final chance for assistance. If the employee refuses referral for counseling or rehabilitation, they will be suspended pending final actions or termination. 
(b)  Failure of an employee to cooperate. Employee compliance with the county's program is a condition of employment. Failure or refusal of any employee to fully cooperate and participate in the program, to sign any required document, or to submit to a drug/alcohol test will be grounds for termination of employment, unless a compelling, satisfactory reason is provided. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-11) 
Sec. 54-42. - Counseling or rehabilitation procedures. 
Employees who continue employment while undergoing counseling or rehabilitation will be required to meet all established standards of conduct and job performance. Employees who have been referred for counseling or rehabilitation under this policy will be required to participate in and fully cooperate with their rehabilitation and with the recommendations of the program administrators. This may include the requirement for regular attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous or similar therapy sessions. Employee may be required to undergo drug/alcohol screening tests at any time during the course of the counseling or rehabilitation program, and thereafter for up to five years. If the county determines that an employee has failed to cooperate with rehabilitation under the terms of the county's policy, the employee will be suspended without pay, pending further investigation and final decision on disciplinary action. 
(1)  Time off for counseling/rehabilitation. Work time lost will be paid according to eligibility for vacation leave. 
(2)  Effect of a positive test after referral. After an employee has been referred for counseling or rehabilitation under the county's substance abuse program, the employee must promise to remain drug-free and/or alcohol-free as a condition of continued employment. A subsequent positive test will result in termination of employment. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-12) 
Sec. 54-43. - Notification of convictions for drug-related crimes and sanctions. 
The Federal Drug-Free Workplace Act imposes special requirements upon the county and its employees at facilities where work is performed under one or more federal government grants. Any employee at such a facility who is convicted of any criminal drug offense committed on county property or while on county business must notify the county of the conviction within five days of the conviction. Within ten days of being so informed by the employee, the county will, as required by the above federal laws, notify each federal government agency with which it holds an applicable grant and advise that the conviction has occurred. With 30 days of being so informed by the employee, the county is required to take appropriate disciplinary action against the employee, up to and including termination. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § C-12) 
Secs. 54-44—54-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HIRING AND CLASSIFICATION ISSUES 

Sec. 54-51. - Job postings. 
In general, notices of job openings are posted in a designated location, although the county reserves its discretionary right to not post a particular opening. Posting notices will typically include job title, department, location, job summary, essential duties, qualifications (required skills and abilities), and procedure to apply for the position. To be eligible to apply for a posted position, employees must have performed competently in their current position. Every reasonable effort will be made to attract qualified applicants for available jobs, to include posting announcements in public places as well as publishing announcements in local newspapers or other media as needed. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § D-1) 
Sec. 54-52. - Application and hiring procedures. 
Applicants for positions with Stephens County will be subject to a variety of processes associated with the hiring process. These will include an accurate, thorough completion of the county's employment application form, with applicant's signature. Employment screening activities such as interviews, job skills testing, personality assessments, background investigations, character references, or other methods may be utilized to assist in determining an applicant's qualifications for the position. 
Stephens County relies upon accuracy of information contained in the employment application, as well as accuracy of other data provided throughout the hiring process and employment. Any misrepresentations, falsifications, or material omissions in any of this information or data may result in the county's exclusion of the individual from further consideration for employment or, if the person has been hired, termination of employment. 
All applicants for employment will be required to undergo a physical examination and drug screening test. These tests are paid for by Stephens County. Any offer of employment is contingent upon the applicant successfully completing both the physical exam and drug screening test. The county will not hire any applicant tentatively selected for employment who refuses to submit to a physical exam or drug test, or who tests positive for use of illegal or unauthorized substances (as described in section 54-33). No individual will be permitted to begin work until test results have been obtained. 
Should any employee voluntarily leave employment with the county before the end of their probation period, the county reserves the right to deduct the expenses for the physical exam and drug screen test from the employee's final paycheck. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § D-2) 
Sec. 54-53. - Appointments. 
The county recognizes two types of appointments that apply to both original appointments and promotions: Competitive appointments and noncompetitive appointments. 
(1)  Competitive appointments. Competitive appointments are the normal practice of the county. When a vacancy occurs, all applicants certified as eligible are considered for the position and, in general, the best qualified applicant will be employed. 
(2)  Noncompetitive appointments. It shall be the policy of the county to promote employees from positions in lower classes whenever possible. These noncompetitive promotions shall be consistent with fair employment practices. If no eligible applicants are available at such time as a vacancy occurs, or if a new position is created within an operating division, the county commissioners or other elected official may make a temporary or emergency appointment of an individual to fill the position until such time as they become eligible for regular appointment or until a suitable, fully-qualified applicant becomes available. Noncompetitive appointments may also be made to fill temporary or part-time positions not covered by these policies and procedures. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § D-3) 
Sec. 54-54. - Position classification and pay plan. 
The Board of Commissioners of Stephens County has adopted an employee position classification and pay plan for all positions under the county's personnel system. The nature and content of such plan will be at the discretion of the board of commissioners, and is subject to change or discontinuation at any time without prior notice to employees. 
The position classification section has been developed so that positions which are substantially similar with respect to difficulty, level of responsibility, degree of supervision required and exercised and required training and experience will be allocated to the same grade. The pay plan provides a schedule of salary ranges for all positions, with the salary consistent with the functions outlined in the pay plan. In establishing such salary ranges, consideration is given to rates of pay for comparable services in other public and private employment, living costs, other benefits received by employees, the county's financial condition and policies, and other relevant facts. Upon adoption: 
• The pay plan shall constitute the official compensation schedule for positions under the county's personnel system. Salary adjustments shall not be automatic, but shall be based on current cost of living, work performance, length of service, availability of funds, and other appropriate considerations. 
• The county may revise the position and pay plan, revise any job description, add new job descriptions, or eliminate job descriptions in order to reflect new or changed conditions of work requirements. 
The board of commissioners may, at least once each year, request that the county administrator and department heads review the pay plan and recommend necessary changes. Consideration shall be given to such factors as rises in costs of living, the competitive wage situation in government and industry, and such other factors as may be considered relevant. 
Entrance salary. The entry salary of any employee will normally be at the minimum of the salary range for the position to which they are appointed. An employee may be hired at a salary above the minimum of the range, as authorized by the County, under the following circumstances: 
• It is not possible to recruit qualified employees at the entry level; 
• An employee is being considered for employment who possesses qualifications in excess of the minimum required for appointment to the position, and when those advanced qualifications will serve to make them a more valuable and productive employee, or 
• Such other circumstances exist that, in the opinion of County management, warrant payment of a salary in excess of the minimum for the position. 
Salary adjustments. Salary adjustments may be made in the following situations: 
•  Adoption of new salary scale. When a new or different scale of salaries is made applicable to a class of positions, employees in position of that class at the effective date of the adjustment may be placed at the salary level of the new scale corresponding to the level the employee had reached under the former salary scale. 
•  Reclassification of employee. Upon position reclassification, an employee's salary will be adjusted to the pay grade assigned to the new position. 
•  Demotion. The salary of an employee who is demoted to a position in a lower classification will be reduced to the level of the new range which corresponds to the level attained by the employee in the previous class. The county administrator or department head may request approval from the board for an employee to retain the same salary after a demotion, provided the amount is not in excess of the maximum salary for positions in the new class. 
•  Transfer. The salary of an employee transferring to a new position may be placed at any level of the range applicable to the new position, provided it is not a higher level than the level at which they were paid at the time of the transfer. 
•  Reappointment. The salary of a reappointed employee may be placed at any level of the range applicable to the position to which they are reappointed, provided it is not a higher level than the level at which the employee was paid at the time or his/her termination. 
•  Special circumstances. In special or unusual circumstances, the county administrator or department head may request the board to authorize adjustment of an employee's salary up to one level higher than the employee could have earned under the provision of the "Salary increases" section (below), subject to the availability of funds. 
Salary increases. Salary increases may be made in the following situations: 
•  Cost-of-living increases. The county commissioners may approve a percentage cost-of-living increase for each employee. Such increases would be effective on the first day of the county's fiscal year and contingent on funds available to be budgeted for such increases. 
•  Other increases. All other increases will be based upon quality and quantity of work and upon other performance measures. Due consideration will be given to length of service, will correspond with the salary range, and will be limited to employees holding regular status in the position which currently employed. 
•  Increase following probation period. An employee successfully completing a probation period may be given a salary increase. 
•  Limit on increases. No employee may have his/her salary increased to a point above the maximum of the salary range applicable to the employee's position class. 
Salary reductions. All salary reductions shall correspond with the levels of the approved salary range, and no employee will have his/her salary reduced to a point below the minimum of the salary range applicable to the employee's position class. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § D-4) 
Sec. 54-55. - Job descriptions. 
Job descriptions may be included in the county's position classification and pay plan. Such job descriptions are descriptive and not restrictive. They are intended to indicate the general kinds of duties, responsibilities, and job requirements normally associated with the position, but are not intended to be exhaustive. The job descriptions include "minimum qualifications" (statements of the minimum background determined to be required as evidence of ability to properly perform the work"). Employees may be assigned other duties not included in the descriptions, and may also be required to work across departmental lines. 
Each employee will be provided with a copy of his/her job description, and each department head and other supervisors will be provided with job descriptions for all positions under their supervision. An employee affected by a revision in a job description, and the employee's immediate supervisor and department head, will be provided copies of the revised job description. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § D-5) 
Sec. 54-56. - Employment categories. 
It is Stephens County's intent to clarify the categories and classifications of employment so employees may understand their employment status and eligibility for benefits. 
(1)  FLSA categories. Each position is designated as either non-exempt or exempt from federal and state wage and hour laws. These designations are determined based upon the position's responsibilities and according to guidelines of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). A change in the exempt or non-exempt status of a position may only occur as a result of changes in position responsibilities, and only upon written notification by County management. Employees in non-exempt positions are entitled to overtime pay under the specific provisions of federal and state laws. Employees in exempt positions are excluded from specific provisions of federal and state wage and hour laws. 
(2)  Position classifications. In addition to the above categories, each position in the county's position classification and pay plan will be designated to one of the classes listed below: 
• Regular full-time employees are those who: 
a.  Have completed the probation period of employment; 
b.  Are regularly scheduled to work the county's full-time schedule, usually a minimum of 40 hours per week; and, 
c.  Are not assigned to a temporary status. 
Regular full-time employees are eligible for the county's benefit package, subject to the terms, conditions, and limitations of each benefit program. 
• Regular part-time employees are those who: 
a.  Have completed the probation period of employment; 
b.  Are regularly scheduled to work less than the full-time work schedule, usually between 20 and 40 hours per week; and, 
c.  Are not assigned to a temporary status. 
A regular, part-time employee who regularly works a minimum of 32 [hours] per week will be considered full-time for purposes of eligibility for the county's benefit package. While regular part-time employees working less than 32 hours per week receive all legally-managed benefits (such as workers' compensation insurance and Social Security), they are ineligible for the county's other benefit programs. Part-time employees will be expected to sign a contract agreement with the county. 
• Employees in the probation period are those: 
a.  Who have not completed their probation period of employment (usually six months in the position); and 
b.  Whose performance is being evaluated to determine whether further employment in a specific position or with the county is appropriate. 
Upon completion of the probation period, and after a successful performance review and recommendation by the department head, this employee will typically attain regular status. Eligibility for benefits during the probation period will generally depend on the full-time or part-time nature of the position, and will be subject to the terms, conditions, and limitations of each benefit program. 
• Temporary employees are those who: 
a.  Are hired for assignments of limited duration (usually no more than six months); 
b.  Are hired as interim replacements; or, 
c.  Are hired to temporarily supplement the work force or assist in completion of a specific project. 
Employment beyond any initially stated period does not in any way imply a change in employment status. Temporary employees retain the temporary status unless and until notified of a change. While temporary employees receive all legally-mandated benefits (such as workers' compensation insurance and Social Security), they are ineligible for the county's other benefit programs. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § D-6) 
Sec. 54-57. - Probation period. 
Am employee's first six months of employment in a position of original appointment, promotion, or transfer to a position with different qualifications will generally be considered a "probation" period. This probation period is for training, evaluation, and observation to obtain the most effective adjustment of the new or promoted employee and to monitor the employee's performance. 
At no time during the probation period should the employee have expectation of continued employment. The county is an at-will employer. An employee may be discharged from their position at any time during the probation period with or without reason and without the right of appeal or hearing. 
During the probation period, the department head will typically discuss the employee's performance at least once per month with the employee. At the end of the probation period, the department head will prepare a performance evaluation indicating satisfactory or unsatisfactory performance, and will recommend that employment be continued or terminated. The employee will be notified no later than the last day of the probation period whether their employment will be terminated or continued. Upon successful completion of the probation period, the employee will be considered capable of performing satisfactorily in that position and will be offered continued employment. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § D-7) 
Secs. 54-58—54-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CHANGES IN EMPLOYMENT STATUS 

Sec. 54-71. - Transfers. 
A transfer is the movement of an employee from one position to another position with the same job classification, with the same salary range and a similar level of responsibility. The county may initiate a transfer, or an employee may request a transfer. If a position is open at an equivalent pay grade, an employee may request transfer to that position. If the knowledge, skills, and abilities required for that job are not the same as for the present job, the employee will be tested and interviewed for the new position. The county may transfer an employee to any position, at any pay grade, if the employee meets the minimum qualifications of the new position and the salary is not changed. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § E-1) 
Sec. 54-72. - Promotions. 
A promotion is the movement of an employee from one position to another position with a higher job classification, a higher salary range, and a higher level of responsibility. The county encourages the training, development, and promotion of its employees. As standard practice, every attempt will be made to fill promotional vacancies from within the county's work force, if qualified applicants are employed by the county and such action would not conflict with the county's anti-discrimination or fair employment practices. However, promotional vacancies may be filled with external applicants at the discretion of county management. 
No employee may be promoted unless the employee has completed their probation period. To be considered for a promotion, an employee should submit application in response to a posted or published job vacancy notice. Promotion is contingent upon meeting the minimum qualifications of training and experience for the higher position. The employee will undergo interviewing and any testing required for the position. Department managers may also consider any applicants from outside the county's work force. 
When an employee is promoted to a position in a higher pay grade, the employee's pay rate will increase in accordance with the county's position classification and pay plan; if no formal pay plan is currently in effect, the employee will be paid a salary determined appropriate by the county. The promoted employee will be required to serve a probation period in the new position. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § E-2) 
Sec. 54-73. - Demotions. 
A demotion is the movement of an employee from one position to another position with a lower job classification, a lower salary range and a lesser degree of responsibility. A demotion may be made as a disciplinary action or on a voluntary or involuntary basis, provided the employee meets the qualifications for the position to which the employee is being demoted. 
An employee serving an initial probation period may be demoted for any reason or without reason. An employee serving a promotional probation period may be demoted to their previous position for any reason or without reason. 
A regular or probation period employee may request a demotion for personal or other reasons; such action will constitute a voluntary demotion. 
In the event of an involuntary demotion or a disciplinary demotion of a regular employee, the employee has the right to appeal the action. The county administrator will notify the employee in writing of the right to appeal as provided in this handbook [chapter]. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § E-3) 
Sec. 54-74. - Resignation. 
A resignation is the voluntary separation of an employee from Stephens County through submittal of a notice that they wish to resign the position. 
To resign in good standing, an employee should submit notice of resignation at least two weeks in advance of the date of resignation (or 30 days in advance, for management personnel). This notice should be submitted in writing to the department head, and the department head will notify the county commissioners of the resignation. Failure to comply with this guideline will be entered as such in the personnel records, and may negatively impact the employee's eligibility for re-employment. The county administrator of county commissioners may exempt an employee who has given less than required notice if, in their judgment, exceptional circumstances warrant such exemption. Also, under certain circumstances, the county administrator or county commissioners may choose not to accept an employee's resignation, and may instead choose to dismiss the employee. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § E-4) 
Sec. 54-75. - Dismissal. 
A dismissal is a termination of employment for cause. An employee may be dismissed for committing any act contrary to county policies or for failure to demonstrate competent and consistent performance of duties. Although progressive discipline procedures will generally be followed, progressive discipline will not be applied for situations which justify immediate termination of employment. The county reserves the right to omit one or more progressive steps depending on the situation and the facts involved, and to exercise appropriate actions on a case-by-case basis. Employees who are dismissed, or terminated for just cause, are not eligible for rehire. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § E-5) 
Sec. 54-76. - Job abandonment. 
An employee who is absent from work for three consecutive days without having received leave approval or without having called in to report the absence will be considered as having voluntarily abandoned/terminated their job without proper notice. Such a separation will be recorded as "not in good standing", and may affect the receipt of accrued benefits. The effective date of termination of an employee due to job abandonment will be the last day the employee worked. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § E-6) 
Sec. 54-77. - Layoff or reduction in force. 
A layoff or reduction in force may be necessary when a position or group of positions must be closed due to circumstances beyond control of the employer or the employee. Typical reasons for layoff include lack of work, shortage of funds, organizational changes, material changes in duties, or other reasons not related to the employee's conduct and not reflecting dissatisfaction with the employee's service. The order in which employees are laid off will be determined by county needs and priorities, and the department heads will file a written listing of employees to be laid off with the county administrator prior to taking any action. The duties previously performed by a laid-off employee may be reassigned to other employees holding positions in appropriate classes. 
Employees released due to a reduction in force will have no right to grieve their release. When a regular status employee is scheduled to be laid off, the employee may be offered a transfer to a job of equal or lower grade, if the job is available and the employee is qualified. 
At the county's discretion, employees separated due to reduction in force may receive preference in rehiring if a position for which they are qualified should open within that year. Such employees will retain the right to consideration for reinstatement to their prior position or another position at the same level and for which they are qualified, if such a position becomes available, for a period of one year from the separation date. Offers of reemployment of previously released employees will be based on past job performance and seniority. Refusal by a released employee to accept a position offered for reinstatement nullifies that employee's right to further consideration for employment. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § E-1) 
Sec. 54-78. - Other separations. 
Other actions resulting in termination of employment include the following: 
(1)  Separation during probation period. At any time during a probation period, an employee may be separated from their position by the county, without notice, and without the right of appeal or hearing. 
(2)  Retirement. An employee may voluntarily leave employment with the county when they have met the requirements governing retirement. Employees leaving due to retirement are typically considered to have separated employment in good standing. 
(3)  Disability. An employee may be dismissed if they cannot perform the essential duties of the job with reasonable accommodation, and there is no available vacancy for which the employee is qualified and with duties, which the employee can perform with reasonable accommodation. Separation action will only be taken after all accrued leaves with pay have been extended, and will be always taken by the end of one year from the date the employee last reported for work. 
(4)  Death. In the event of the death of an employee, separation will be considered effective as of the date of death. Compensation and benefits due as of that date will be paid to the designated beneficiary, except as otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § E-8) 
Secs. 54-79—54-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PERFORMANCE ISSUES AND GRIEVANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Unless specified, all timeframes listed in this section are intended to represent working days (not calendar days). 

Sec. 54-89. - Performance evaluations. 
Stephens County government utilizes a performance appraisal system to evaluate performance of individual employees. The type of system utilized is at the discretion of the County, and is subject to change without prior notice. 
(1)  Objective. The purpose of the employee performance evaluation is primarily to inform employees of how well they are performing their work and how they can improve work performance. The evaluation may also be used in determining merit raises or bonuses; as a basis for training, promotion, demotion, transfer, or dismissal; or other purposes described in these policies. In no case should employees view performance evaluations as a right of the employee, or as an obligation of the county; rather, they are a management tool to be used at the county's discretion. 
Wage increases are not automatic. Employees are hired at a rate that is competitive with what other employers would pay for similar skills. An employee may receive a wage increase based upon the tasks performed and the manner in which they perform these tasks. Budgetary considerations or marginal performance by an employee may result in little or no salary increase. 
(2)  Period of evaluation. It is the county's policy to evaluate employee performance (except temporary workers) on a continuing basis, and more formally at periodic intervals. The first such evaluation may normally occur at the end of the employee's probation period. Thereafter, at regular intervals (normally on an annual basis), the supervisor or department head will meet with each employee in a formal performance evaluation session. An evaluation may be conducted for an employee recommended for promotion or special salary increase if no evaluation has been conducted within the past three months. 
(3)  The evaluation process. Written performance evaluation forms are usually completed with input by the immediate supervisor, department head, and county administrator. After managerial approval, the written form is presented to the employee as part of a formal evaluation session. This session provides an opportunity for the supervisor and employee to discuss job tasks, comment on performance (both positively and negatively), identify and correct weaknesses, and recognize and encourage strengths. The session is also used to establish standards for the next review process, and discuss approaches for meeting goals. Employees are not eligible for a merit pay raise until the performance evaluation form has been completely processed. Completed forms are maintained in the employee personnel files. Employees are entitled to receive a copy of the performance evaluation upon request. 
The employee is requested to sign the evaluation form. This signature verifies only that the evaluation has been discussed with the employee, and does not indicate the employee's agreement or disagreement with the performance rating. If an employee refuses to acknowledge by signature their receipt of the evaluation form, a note by the department head or county administrator describing the refusal will be placed in the employee's personnel file. 
If an employee disagrees with any statement in an evaluation, they may submit a written statement to the department head and/or county administrator with ten days following the evaluation. The written statement will become part of the employee's permanent file. This action does not constitute a grievance or appeal; it is merely an administrative procedure requiring no action or response by county management or any of its designees. 
(4)  Confidentiality of performance evaluations. Evaluations are confidential, and will be made available only to the employee evaluated, the employee's supervisor, department head, the county administrator, or other designee or the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § F-1) 
Sec. 54-90. - Disciplinary actions. 
Stephens County government seeks to resolve performance and conduct problems in the most positive and constructive manner possible. In order for the county to function effectively toward accomplishment of its objectives, it is essential that all employees conduct themselves in a manner that promotes attainment of these objectives. Accordingly, the county has established this policy to identify unacceptable behaviors, and appropriate measures to correct those behaviors, in order to provide employees with the opportunity to continue productive employment with the county. When situations arise which warrant disciplinary action, the guidelines described below will assist in ensuring fair and consistent treatment to all employees. 
Progressive discipline is a process in which disciplinary action is taken in degrees of increasing severity. The county advocates progressive discipline when appropriate and applicable. Actions taken will depend on degree and circumstances of violations. Employees who fail to satisfactorily perform assigned duties or who violate established procedures will be disciplined. 
The county recognizes five degrees of progressive disciplinary actions, falling into two general categories: 
(1)  Reprimand. A reprimand is a formal means of communicating a warning to the employee that a problem exists and must be corrected. It provides evidence that the county has observed a progressive sequence if a more severe form of discipline is applied after a subsequent violation. There are two degrees of formality: an oral and a written reprimand. 
a.  Oral. In an oral reprimand, the supervisor verbally explains to the employee that they are being reprimanded, and describes the problem and what must be done to correct the problem. 
b.  Written. In a written reprimand, the employee receives a written statement describing the problem, what must be done to correct the problem, and probably consequences of not correcting the problem. 
(2)  Adverse action. More serious than a reprimand, an adverse action is taken for any reason by the county or their designee that results in a suspension without pay, demotion, or dismissal. 
a.  Suspension without pay. An employee may be suspended without pay by the county. Suspension without pay will not typically exceed 15 days, unless the outcome is partially dependent on a court decision or law enforcement investigation (in which case the suspension is indefinite pending resolution). A regular employee suspended in accordance with the provisions of this policy will be provided with a written notice of suspension. A probation period employee may be suspended without pay or without reason. 
b.  Demotion. An employee may be demoted from one pay grade to a lower pay grade for disciplinary reasons if a lower position is open and if the employee is qualified to perform the work at the lower position. A demotion includes a decrease in salary. 
c.  Dismissal. An employee may be dismissed for disciplinary reasons when all other alternatives have failed to solve the problem or, in the county's judgment, dismissal is the only appropriate action. 
Exceptions to discipline procedures. Occasions may occur when an employee must be immediately removed from the job. This may include a situation where it is likely the employee has committed a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude, or when the employee's continued presence on the job might be dangerous for him or others or be unduly disruptive to operations. In such an instance, the employee should be immediately removed from the job by the department head or county administrator, and the county commissioners contacted for appropriate action. 
Causes for disciplinary actions. As an "at-will" employer, Stephens County is not required to give causes of disciplinary action either in these policies nor at the time of an adverse personnel action, nor is the county required to dismiss only for any so-called "just cause". However, county officials feel that effective communications can enhance the efficiency and morale of the organization. 
The following list of possible causes for disciplinary actions is intended to represent general reasons that are universally accepted as causes in public sector employers. These reasons are neither mutually exclusive nor collectively exhaustive. The county may discipline for any combination of reasons, for reasons not listed below, or for reasons not specified, at any time, as long as the employee's constitutional protected liberty interests are not violated. These possible causes for disciplinary action include: 
(1)  Chronic tardiness or absenteeism; 
(2)  Negligence or inefficiency in performing assigned duties; 
(3)  Inability or unfitness to perform assigned duties; 
(4)  Insubordination; 
(5)  Misconduct, or violation of county standards of conduct; 
(6)  Commission of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(7)  Conduct reflecting discredit on the county of [or] the department to which assigned; 
(8)  Failure to report to work without justifiable cause; 
(9)  Political activity which is prohibited by these policies; 
(10)  Violation of or refusal to comply with federal, state, or local laws or regulations; 
(11)  Violation of any other provision of these policies or any other justifiable reason for discipline. 
Although progressive discipline procedures will generally be followed, progressive discipline will not be applied for situations that justify immediate termination of employment. The county reserves the right to omit one or more progressive steps depending on the situation and the facts involved, and to exercise appropriate actions on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § F-2) 
Sec. 54-91. - Employee response to disciplinary actions. 
Although not required by law to provide employees with reasons or causes for an adverse action, the county may, at its discretion, give the employee a notification of the proposed adverse action five days prior to the effective date of the action. Such notification may contain the following: 
(1)  The effective date of the proposed action. 
(2)  The specific charges or reasons for the action. 
(3)  A statement informing the employee that they may respond to a named official both orally and in writing with three days of receiving the notice of proposed adverse action. 
(4)  A warning that failure to respond to the named official will result in waiver of all further appeal rights. 
The employee's response must be in person or in writing to the named official with three working days of receiving the notice of proposed adverse action. Failure to respond to the notice within three working days will result in a waiver of all appeals. 
After considering the employee's response, the named official may give a written notice of their decision on action to be taken with two days of the effective date of the proposed action. The notice will include a statement outlining any appeal options open to the employee. (The official may postpone the deadline for their response by a specific number of days to conduct further investigation. If the deadline for response is postponed, the effective date of the proposed action as contained in the notice of proposed action should be postponed by as many days.) 
The employee response procedure is created to protect the employee from erroneous or arbitrary disciplinary action, as well as to afford the department an opportunity to re-evaluate its position on proposed disciplinary actions and to affirm or correct if necessary. The procedure does not require a full hearing prior to the disciplinary action; if requires only that the employee be given an opportunity to respond to the charges in writing. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § F-3) 
Sec. 54-92. - Grievances and appeals.[3] 
The purpose of the employee grievance procedure is to provide an orderly process for hearing the grievable claims of employees. The object of the process is to reach a fair and equitable decision in a timely manner. The employee and supervisor should make an effort to resolve any grievance informally before initiating a formal grievance. 
(1)  Definition. A grievance is defined as a claim initiated by an employee alleging that the county has: 
a.  Unfairly or unlawfully disciplined them in an adverse action which includes suspension without pay, demotion, or dismissal; or 
b.  Unlawfully discriminated against them in any other manner; or 
c.  Unlawfully deprived them of their liberty interest under the Constitution in a manner other than through an adverse action; or 
d.  Applied unlawful or unjust coercion or reprisal to the employee; or 
e.  Applied county or departmental policies to the employee in an arbitrary or capricious manner; or 
f.  Provided unsafe or unhealthy working conditions; or 
g.  Applied other unlawful or unjust practices that adversely affect the employee. 
(2)  Nongrievable areas. The following issues are not grievable: 
a.  Issues which are pending or have been concluded by other administrative or judicial procedures; 
b.  Work assignments which do not result in a demotion or a salary reduction; 
c.  Budget allocations and expenditures, and organizational structure, including the persons or number of persons assigned to particular jobs or units, including a layoff which results from a reduction in force; 
d.  The content or rating of a performance appraisal, except when the employee can show that he or she has been adversely affected by the appraisal; 
e.  The selection of an individual by the county administrator of [or] board of commissioners to fill a position through appointment, promotion, or transfer, except when the employee can show that he or she has been adversely affected because of unlawful discrimination; 
f.  Any matter which is not within the jurisdiction or control of the board of commissioners; 
g.  Internal security practices established by the board of commissioners; 
h.  Decisions, policies, practices, resolution, or ordinances made or passed by the board of commissioners which are not job-related and do not contradict these policies. 
(3)  Grievance procedures. Employees must notify the county in a timely fashion of any grievance considered appropriate for handling under this policy. The grievance procedure is the exclusive remedy for employees to challenge adverse employment action. As used in this policy, the terms "timely fashion", "reasonable time", and "promptly" will mean within five working days of the date of the action or event complained of, i.e., within five business days of the adverse actions, discrimination, or other action complained of. For example, with regard to a notice of termination of employment, the grievance must be filed within five business days of the date on which the employee receives notice of the impending termination. 
Employees shall not be penalized for proper use of the grievance procedure. However, it is not proper to abuse the procedure by submitting grievances in bad faith or solely for the purposes of delay or harassment, or by repeatedly submitting grievances that a reasonable person would judge to have no merit. Initiation of the grievance procedure by an employee does not limit the right of the county to proceed with any disciplinary action that is not in retaliation for the use of the grievance procedures. 
Grievances are to be fully processed until the employee is satisfied, does not file a timely appeal, or exhausts the right of appeal. A decision becomes binding on all parties whenever any employee does not file a timely appeal or when a decision is made in the final step and the right of appeal no longer exists. 
Employees who feel they have an appropriate grievance should proceed as follows: 
a.  Step one. Within five business days of the action or event which causes the employee to file the grievance, the employee should bring the grievance to the attention of the division head if applicable or directly to the department head. The grievance must be presented in writing on a form which shall be available to all employees at the commission office. If the grievance involves the division head, the grievance is submitted to the department head; if the grievance involves the department head, the aggrieved employee may present their grievance directly to the county administrator. 
b.  Step two. Within five business days of the employee's receipt of notice of the decision of the division or department head (or county administrator), the employee may appeal to the county administrator; or initiate the grievance procedure if step one was bypassed. The county administrator may confer with the employee and any other members of management considered appropriate, investigate the issues, and communicate a written decision to all parties involved. The county administrator may extend the time required to investigate and make a decision regarding the matter to a date certain not to exceed 30 days from the date of appeal when deemed necessary to ensure a thorough investigation by notifying all parties in writing. If the employee making the grievance has as their direct supervisor the county administrator, or in the event that the county administrator's conduct or action is the subject of the grievance, the chairman of the board of commissioners shall hear the grievance. 
c.  Step three. Within five business days of the employee's receipt of the county administrator's decision, the employee may appeal an adverse decision from step two to the appeal board, consisting of the board of commissioners and two additional responsible individuals appointed. The board of commissioners shall appoint two additional members for each appeal filed. If one or more commissioners abstain from service, the remaining commissioner(s) shall appoint one or more additional persons to complete the five-person panel. Such an appeal must be made in timely fashion using a written format provided for this purpose. The summary of the grievance and decisions made in steps one and two will also be submitted. The appeal board will take the necessary steps to review and investigate the grievance and will issue a written final and binding decision within 15 working days. The appeal board may extend the time required to investigate and make a decision regarding the matter when deemed necessary to ensure a thorough investigation by notifying all parties in writing with 15 working days from when the appeal was submitted. The appeal board shall be authorized (but not required) to hold an evidentiary hearing on the grievance prior to issuing their decision. 
Final decisions on grievances will not be precedent-setting or binding on future grievances unless they are officially stated as county policy. When appropriate, decisions will be retroactive to the date of the employee's original grievance. 
(4)  Confidentiality. Information concerning any employee grievance is to be held in strict confidence. Employees, supervisors, and any members of management involved in grievance investigations are to discuss details only with those individuals who have a need to know or who are needed to supply necessary background information. The appeals board hearings shall be open to the public, unless the county and the employee mutually agree otherwise. 
(5)  Compensation. Time spent by employees in grievance discussions with management during their normal working hours will be considered as time worked for pay purposes. 
(6)  Employment pending procedure. Nothing contained herein shall in any way require the county to delay any disciplinary action, demotion, or termination pending final resolution of a grievance. The filing of a grievance or appeal shall not delay the effective date of an employee's demotion, termination, or other adverse action and the county shall have no obligation to place an employee who faces a grievance or appeal on leave (with or without pay). The county administrator may, at his/her sole discretion, delay adverse action pending the grievance or may make such other interim provision as they deem appropriate. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § F-4) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— A memorandum dated May 14, 2007, stated the following: 
"At the Stephens County Board of Commissioners meeting on January 9, 2007, the Stephens County Employment Handbook was amended as follows: 
"Section F-4 (codified here as § 54-92) will now state that Department Heads, as well as probationary and temporary employees, have no property right to their positions and therefore are not subject to this section. ... Please be advised that the grievance and appeal procedures et forth in Section F-4 (§ 54-92) no longer apply to Department Heads and probationary and temporary employees." 

Secs. 54-93—54-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ATTENDANCE AND PAYROLL ISSUES 

Sec. 54-101. - Changes in personal information. 
Each employee is responsible for promptly notifying their department head of any changes in their personal data, including changes in name, address, telephone number, marital status, dependent data, emergency contacts, education accomplishments, or other information pertinent to their employment, benefits, or payroll actions. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § G-1) 
Sec. 54-102. - Hours of work, overtime, and compensatory time 
(a)  Hours of work. Hours of work and shift assignments vary for each department, based on services provided by the department and staffing requirements to provide those services. Each department manager will establish employee work schedules in accordance with the needs of the county and of the employees concerned (subject to approval of the county commissioners). Employees are required to work the hours assigned. The actual work schedule is dependent on specific job functions, and operational needs may require deviations from the normal schedule. If an assigned schedule is changed, the change will be communicated to all affected employees. 
(b)  Work week. The minimum work week for full-time, covered employees will be 40 hours per week. Due to the difference in job requirements in various departments, the required work period may vary from job to job, and from department to department. 
(c)  Overtime. Overtime work may be necessary from time to time, depending on departmental workload. All overtime must be authorized in advance by the supervisor or department manager, and all efforts should be made by department heads to minimize overtime through efficient scheduling. 
(1)  Non-exempt (hourly) employees. Overtime compensation is paid to non-exempt employees in accordance with federal and state wage and hour restrictions. Overtime pay is based on actual hours worked; time off for holidays, sick leave, vacation, or other nonworked time will not be considered hours worked for purposes of calculating overtime payments. Actual hours of training time (approved in advance by the county administrator) can be included in worked time for calculation of overtime. 
Non-exempt employees whose work period is one week will be paid at the rate of one and one-half the normal rate for hours actually worked over 40 per week. Different work periods may apply to public safety departments, with employees paid overtime for hours worked above the designated number of hours in the work period. All overtime must be reported in the pay period in which it is worked. 
(2)  Exempt (salaried) employees. Exempt employees are not eligible for overtime, and will receive their normal salary, regardless of hours worked. It is expected however, that such employees will work a regular schedule of at least 40 hours per week. 
(d)  Compensatory time. 
(1)  Exempt employees. Exempt employees are not eligible for compensatory time off. 
(2)  Non-exempt employees. A non-exempt employee may be granted compensatory time off by a department head in lieu of overtime pay if: 
a.  The employee agrees in writing, and 
b.  The employee is granted compensatory time at one and one-half hour for each extra hour worked. 
c.  Compensatory time accrued must be used within the next pay period following the pay period in which the compensatory time was accrued or the hours will be paid on the payroll check for the next period. 
In all cases, the employee must report all worked time, and the supervisor/department head is responsible for accurately maintaining records of accrued time and use of compensatory time. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § G-2) 
Sec. 54-103. - Attendance and tardiness. 
(a)  Attendance. The county is responsible for providing dependable services to the community. This places an obligation on all employees to be on the job and performing their duties every scheduled workday. When employees are absent, their workload falls behind schedule or other employees must assume heavier workloads. For this reason, perfect attendance is desired. 
The county recognizes, however, that there are instances when absences are unavoidable. An absence is considered acceptable if it is reported promptly and if the reason for the absence is appropriate. An absence is considered unacceptable whenever proper notification of the absence is not give, or where the reason for the absence is, itself, unacceptable. 
Following are procedures for proper notification of absence: 
• If an employee will be unable to report to work as assigned, the employee must personally notify his/her supervisor immediately. This notice must be given as far in advance of the time assigned for reporting to work as possible. 
• In circumstances where it is impossible for the employee to personally talk to the supervisor, the employee should (a) have someone else make the notification as soon as possible, and (b) personally call and discuss the situation with the supervisor just as soon as circumstances permit. 
• An employee absent due to illness should advise his/her supervisor on a daily basis of the employee's status and estimated date of return. 
(b)  Tardiness. It is important to arrive to work on time, to promptly return from breaks, and to leave work on schedule. Tardiness is unacceptable and will be dealt with appropriately. 
Frequent or excessive absences or tardiness for any reason cannot be tolerated, and may result in disciplinary action, which could result in termination of employment. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § G-3) 
Sec. 54-104. - Breaks. 
Breaks are designed to provide a periodic rest period for the employee during the work shift, independent of the longer meal breaks. A break schedule will be developed within each department, taking into consideration the department's operational and coverage needs. Breaks are contingent upon workload and coverage, and may not be provided in times of heavy workload or insufficient coverage at the discretion of the supervisor. Breaks may not be "saved" or lumped together. If an employee misses a scheduled break, the break is considered lost. 
The schedule of most full-time employees provides a meal break that is on the employee's time and is not compensated by the county. Meal breaks should be taken on a staggered schedule in order to provide appropriate coverage. A meal break schedule will be developed within each department, subject to change based on the department's workload and coverage. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § G-4) 
Sec. 54-105. - Payroll information. 
(a)  Paychecks. Paychecks are issued each pay period on a regularly scheduled basis. There are no advances in pay. The payroll office will deduct from employee earnings only those deductions required by law (such as withholding taxes or Social Security taxes) plus any employee-authorized contributions (such as premiums for insurance benefits or retirement contributions). Court-ordered deductions such as wage garnishments or child support payments will be deducted in accordance with the appropriate court order. Other voluntary deductions are prohibited. 
The county takes all reasonable steps to ensure that employees are paid promptly on the scheduled payday, and that employees receive the correct amount of pay in each paycheck. In the unlikely event that an error in amount of pay should occur, the employee should promptly bring the discrepancy to the attention of his/her supervisor or manager for the error to be researched and corrected. 
(b)  Time cards/time sheets. Employees are required to maintain accurate time reporting, using equipment and/or forms provided by Stephens County in accordance with requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act. When using a time clock to record hours worked, employees may not clock in ahead of the time they are expected to commence work, nor may they delay their clock-out time when work hours are completed. 
Supervisors must ensure that time records are properly maintained and are accurate upon submission for payment. All wage and hour records are subject to audit by the U.S. Department of Labor. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § G-5) 
Sec. 54-106. - Personnel records. 
Stephens County maintains personnel files on each employee. These files include information such as the employee's job application, resume, training records, performance evaluations, documentation of personnel actions (e.g., salary changes, transfers, promotions, or terminations), benefit enrollment forms, and other employment-related records. Personnel files will not include records relating to investigation of a possible criminal offense, or of documents which are being developed or prepared for use in civil, criminal, or grievance procedures. A separate personnel file is maintained for physical examination records, insurance claim forms, or other records of employee illnesses and injuries; access to such files is restricted to protect the employee's medical information. All personnel records will be maintained in accordance with applicable legal requirements and regulatory guidelines. 
(1)  Public inspection. Personnel files are the property of Stephens County government, and access to the information they contain is restricted. Generally, only management and supervisory personnel who have a legitimate reason to review information in a file are allowed to do so. However, information relating to employees and former employees may be available for public inspection at reasonable times and in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 50, chapter 18. Employees who wish to review their personnel file should contact the personnel office; with reasonable advance notice, employees may review their own personnel file in county offices and in the presence of an individual appointed by the county. 
(2)  Confidentiality of records. Any disclosure of personnel record information to unauthorized persons will require the written authorization of the employee. However, the county will have the right to disclose any such information in the course of an appeal of a disciplinary action initiated by the employee. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § G-6) 
Sec. 54-107. - Requests for references. 
The human resources office is responsible for responding to any inquiries regarding personnel records, employment verification, or employment/credit references on present or previous employees. As a matter of policy, any response to requests for references must be limited to factual information that be substantiated by county records. Any county employee receiving such a request should forward the request to the human resources office for response. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § G-6) 
Secs. 54-108—54-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 

Sec. 54-121. - General benefits information. 
Eligible employees of Stephens County government are provided a wide range of benefits. Eligibility for benefits is dependent upon a variety of factors, including employee classification. The hiring and classification issues section [article IV] of this handbook contains a description of each category and the associated benefits eligibility. Some benefit programs require contributions from employees, and some are fully or partially paid by the county. A number of programs (such as Social Security, worker's compensation, and unemployment insurance) cover all employees in the manner prescribed by law. 
Benefits represent a significant portion of each employee's overall compensation package. Employees are encouraged to become familiar with the benefit programs for which they are eligible, and take advantage of these valuable benefits. Contact the human resources office for additional information and answers to specific questions about benefits issues. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § H-1) 
Sec. 54-122. - Holidays. 
For the purpose of establishing uniformity in administration of paid holidays, all county offices (except those which must remain open on a holiday because of work requirements) will be closed on the designated holidays described in this section. 
(1)  Designated holidays. The following days are designated as official paid holidays for eligible County employees: 

 
(2)  Holiday schedule. The county will publish the approved holiday schedule at the beginning of each calendar year. Changes to the designated list of holidays may be made at the county's discretion. When a holiday falls on a Saturday, it will generally be observed on the preceding Friday. When a holiday falls on a Sunday, it will generally be observed on the following Monday. 
(3)  Eligibility. All regular full-time employees of Stephens County will be eligible for holiday leave for the days listed above. Employees in their probation period are also eligible to receive holiday pay, but only if scheduled to work on the holiday. Holiday pay is calculated based on the employee's regular hourly rate as of the day of the holiday. 
(4)  Compensation for holidays. 
a.  Overtime. Holiday hours do not count as hours worked for purpose of determining overtime. 
b.  Working on holidays. Some employees may be required to work on a designated holiday, due to work schedule or emergencies. Such an employee will receive an equivalent amount of time off at another time, as determined by the employee and department head; or the employee may be paid for the extra hours; or the employee may be credited with a day of vacation leave. 
c.  Sick time in conjunction with a holiday. No employee may use sick time the day before or the day after a holiday without a doctor's notice. 
d.  Holidays while on authorized/unauthorized leave. An employee who is not on approved leave and fails to report on his or her scheduled work day before and after a holiday will not be paid for the holiday. Holidays that occur during approved vacation or sick leave will not be charged against the employee's vacation or sick leave accruals. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § H-2) 
Sec. 54-123. - Vacation leave. 
(a)  General. Stephens County recognizes that employees need time away from work for rest and recreation and to manage personal business. The county provides paid vacation leave benefits to eligible employees within the guidelines presented in this policy. 
(b)  Eligibility. All regular full-time employees will be eligible to earn and accrue vacation leave benefits, according to the schedule listed below. 
Table H. 3-1 Vacation Leave Accruals 

 
(c)  Calculation and accrual of vacation leave. 
(1)  Eligible employees will begin to accrue vacation benefits as of the day of employment in the eligible position. However, accrued benefits are not available to be used or paid until the employee completes the probation period. 
(2)  For the purpose of calculating vacation leave, those employees employed after the first day of the month, but before the 15th day of the month, will earn leave from the first of the month. Those employees employed after the 15th day of the month will not earn leave for that month. 
(3)  Vacation leave may not be taken until it is earned. 
(4)  Overtime is not included in computation of vacation leave accrual. 
(5)  If an employee takes extended leave without pay (more than two weeks), there is no accrual of vacation leave benefits during that time. 
(6)  If an employee is terminated and rehired, the date of last employment is used to compute vacation leave. 
(d)  Status of vacation leave during probation period. Employees accrue, but may not take, vacation leave during the probation period. If the employee should separate from service during the probation period, or if the employee is not offered continued employment at the end of the probation period, they will not be paid for the leave accrued during the probation period. 
(e)  Approval. Taking leave is a privilege that must be approved by the department head before the leave is taken, or within eight hours after returning to work in the case of an emergency. Taking more than five consecutive days of leave must be approved two weeks in advance. Employees on vacation leave are subject to recall to duty in cases of emergency. 
(f)  Payment of vacation benefits. Vacation benefits are paid at the employee's base hourly rate of pay at the time of the vacation. The vacation pay rate does not include overtime or any special form of compensation such as shift differentials, incentives, commissions, or bonuses. Employees may not receive pay in lieu of taking vacation leave. 
(g)  Maximum allowable accumulation. Stephens County's policies are designed to encourage employees to use their vacation leave each year. Employees are urged to take advantage of their annual vacation benefits for rest, relaxation, and personal pursuits. With this goal in mind, the county has established a maximum accrual of one and one-half times the employee's annual accrual rate of vacation leave (see Table H.3-1 in this section). In the event that an employee's accrued vacation is not used by the end of the benefit year: 
(1)  Any unused amount not exceeding the maximum allowed accrual may be carried over to the next year. 
(2)  Any unused exceeding the maximum allowed accrual will be forfeited. 
(h)  Procedure to request vacation leave time. Requests for vacation leave should be submitted to the employee's immediate supervisor or department head. Vacation leave time may be granted, with approval of the appropriate department head, based on issues including: the department's staffing needs, the timeliness of request for leave time, and the employee's seniority. In case of inclement weather, employees who cannot get to work will be allowed to use vacation leave time. 
(i)  Payment of vacation leave at termination of employment. After completion of the probation period, eligible employees will be eligible for compensation of accrued but unused vacation leave upon termination of employment (in the cast of death, accrued vacation will be paid to the employee's estate). Employees who have not completed their probation period will not be eligible to receive payment for unused vacation leave accruals. 
The county commissioners will have the discretion of granting exceptions to the vacation policy (such as allowing additional vacation leave time to a new employee upon hiring, allowing carryover of vacation leave in excess of the maximum allowed accrual, or other exceptions). 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § H-3) 
Sec. 54-124. - Sick leave. 
Sick leave is accumulated to be taken for legitimate illness or injury, or other medical-related situations such as physician appointments, medical examinations, or dental appointments. Sick leave is available for the employee's personal health care as well as for care of members of the employee's immediate family. Employees are encouraged to accumulate and maintain sufficient balances of sick leave time to be prepared for unexpected illness, emergencies, or other personal needs. 
(1)  Eligibility. All regular full-time employees are eligible to earn sick leave benefits, with accrual beginning as of the date of employment in the eligible position. Employees are not allowed to take accrued sick leave during the first six months of employment. 
(2)  Rate of leave accrual. Eligible employees begin to accrue sick leave immediately upon employment in an eligible position. Employees working a normal full-time schedule of 40 yours per week accrue sick leave at the rate of four hours per month (or 48 hours annually). Employees working a nonstandard schedule will accrue sick hours on a prorated basis according to their scheduled hours. 
(3)  Maximum accumulation. A maximum of 36 days (or 288 hours) of sick leave may be accumulated. Accrued sick leave benefits may be carried from year to year, up to the maximum. Any sick leave accumulated in excess of the 36-day (288-hour) maximum will be forfeited. 
Table H.4-1. Sick Leave Accruals 

 
(4)  Reporting sick leave absence. 
a.  To be eligible for sick pay, the employee must contact their immediate supervisor or department head directly, each day of their absence, as far in advance as possible, but no later than one hour before their scheduled arrival time. If the employee is unable to make the call personally, a family member or a friend should contact the supervisor. 
b.  If the supervisor or department head is not available, the human resources department should be contacted. 
c.  In addition, the employee must contact the immediate supervisor, department head, or human resources on a daily basis to discuss their medical status and anticipated date of return to work. 
d.  An employee who fails to contact the supervisor, department head, or human resources may be considered as having voluntarily resigned. 
e.  This policy must be followed unless an exception has been made for a particular absence, and a written memo to this effect has been sent to the human resources department. 
(5)  Approval of sick leave. Sick leave requires the approval of the immediate supervisor or department head. 
(6)  Physician's statement. A medical statement signed by a licensed physician may be required to substantiate sick leave for the following: 
a.  Absences of three or more consecutive work days; 
b.  To support a request for sick leave during vacation leave; 
c.  At any time when absence recurs frequently or habitually, or when it is suspected that an employee is abusing sick leave, provided the employee is forewarned. 
(7)  Payment of sick leave benefits. Sick leave benefits are paid at the employee's base hourly rate of pay at the time of the absence. The sick leave pay rate does not include overtime or any special form of compensation such as shift differentials, incentives, or bonuses. Sick leave compensation will not be advanced to any employee. 
(8)  Status of sick leave at termination of employment. Accrued sick leave benefits are forfeited on termination of employment (or death). There will be no payment of any accumulated sick leave. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § H-4) 
Sec. 54-125. - Funeral leave. 
Up to three days of funeral leave per occurrence may be available to eligible employees absent from work due to the death of an immediate family member. 
(1)  Immediate family member. "Immediate family" includes the employee's spouse, parent, child, stepchild, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, or similar member of spouse's immediate family or other relative who lives in the employee's household. Special consideration may be given to a relative who is domiciled in the employee's household or any other person whose association with the employee was similar to any of the above relationships. 
(2)  Eligibility. Regular full-time employees are eligible to receive up to three working days of funeral leave benefits per occurrence or as otherwise approved by the county administrator. 
(3)  Procedure to request funeral leave. To request time off due to the death of an immediate family member, the eligible employee should immediately notify his/her supervisor who will forward it to the county administrator for approval. Approval of funeral leave will normally be granted, unless there are unusual business needs or staffing requirements. Employees may, with supervisory approval, use available vacation leave for additional time off as necessary. 
(4)  Payment of funeral leave benefits. Funeral leave benefits are paid at the employee's base hourly rate of pay at the time of the absence. The funeral leave pay rate does not include overtime or any special form of compensation such as incentives, bonuses, or shift differentials. Funeral leave compensation will not be advanced to any employee. Funeral leave benefits are available only at the time or a death in the family, and only once during a calendar year; and may never accrue, carry over to another year, or be payable at termination of employment. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § H-5) 
Sec. 54-126. - Group insurance plans. 
Stephens County offers a variety of options for medical, life, or other insurance coverage for eligible employees. Types of insurance plans available and various options within each plan may vary from year to year. The county typically pays for all (or the majority of) the employee's insurance premiums in a given plan and employees may have the option of purchasing additional individual or family coverage at group rates. 
Insurance programs available to eligible employees may include: health insurance, dental insurance, life insurance, vision insurance, short-term disability insurance, and/or long-term disability insurance. Information regarding insurance options and enrollment procedures is provided to new employees during the initial hire period. Eligible employees must complete appropriate enrollment forms within the designated time frame. 
Annual enrollment sessions are typically conducted at a designated time each year, and employees may elect to change coverage only at that time (unless an employee should experience a qualifying life status event or family status change, as defined by plan documents during the plan year; in which case the employee may only change enrollment within 30 days of the qualifying event). Any employee who wishes to enter a plan after their new-hire enrollment period, or who wishes to upgrade any coverage, may be required to show evidence of insurability, which must be approved by the insurance carrier. 
(1)  Insurance benefits during unpaid leave of absence. A participating employee who is placed on unpaid leave of absence status is required to pay for both the employee's share and the county's share of his/her insurance premiums, or coverage will be terminated. The employee should make advance arrangements to pay premiums directly to the county, to avoid loss of important benefits. 
(2)  Continuation of insurance benefits. Groups insurance benefits will terminate when an employee terminates employment. However, the Federal Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) gives employees and their qualified dependents the opportunity to continue medical insurance coverage under the county's health plan when a "qualifying event" would normally result in the loss of eligibility. Typical qualifying events include resignation, termination or employment, death of an employee, change in eligibility status, leave of absence, divorce or legal separation, or a dependent child no longer meeting eligibility requirements. Under COBRA, the employee or dependent pays the full cost of coverage at the county's group rates, plus an administration fee. Employees should notify the human resources office of any change in personal status which might affect their benefits. The county will provide a written notice describing rights granted under COBRA when the employee becomes eligible for coverage under the county's health plan. Contact the human resources office for questions or additional information about COBRA or any other benefits issues. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § H-6) 
Sec. 54-127. - Worker's compensation insurance. 
Stephens County operates under Georgia workers' compensation law. An employee who is temporarily disabled because of an injury or illness sustained directly in the performance of his or her work may be covered by the provisions of the State Workers' Compensation Act. Rules and regulations of the Act will govern all workers' compensation issues. Workers must report all accidents immediately to the employer by personally advising the employer. 
Employee safety at work is important, and safety standards and procedures should be followed at all times. In the event of a compensable injury, workers' compensation provides payment of medical and rehabilitation expenses within the limits of the law. In some cases the county will also pay part of wages lost due to the work-related injury. The amount of benefits payable and duration of payment depend on the nature of injury or illness. In general, however, all eligible medical expenses incurred in connection with a work-related injury or illness is paid in full and appropriate salary payments are provided in accordance with workers' compensation laws. 
(1)  Reporting an accident or injury. Any employee who is injured on the job must immediately report such injury to the immediate supervisor and/or department head, regardless of how minor the injury may appear to be. This ensures prompt and appropriate medical treatment, allows for timely completion of required reports in accordance with law, and enables an eligible employee to qualify for coverage as quickly as possible. The worker may lose the right to receive compensation if an accident is not reported with 30 days. Work injuries and occupation diseases should be reported in writing whenever possible. The county will supply free of charge, upon request, a form for reporting accidents; and will also furnish, free of charge information about workers' compensation. 
(2)  Use of designated physicians. A worker injured on the job must select a doctor from the panel of physicians, which is posted in each department. If an employee chooses to visit a physician who is not on the panel of physicians, the employee will be liable for any medical expenses incurred. The panel physician may arrange for appropriate consultations, referrals, and other specialized services as the nature of the injury requires. If the employee is dissatisfied with the physician selected, he or she may make one change without permission of the employer/insurer, self-insurer claims office, or the State Board of Workers' Compensation. 
(3)  Postaccident drug testing for accidents or injuries. All employees involved in work-related accidents or injuries are subject to postaccident drug screening testing (as described in article III, Drug-Free Workplace). 
(4)  Return to work. All employees who have lost time due to work-related injury or illness must obtain a doctor's statement for the time missed and a "release statement" to return to work. Doctor's notes that specify "light duty" restrictions must be adhered to by both the employee and the supervisor. Employees who are in a nonpay status due to an injury will not accrue vacation or sick leave, and are not eligible for holiday pay. 
(5)  Off-duty activities. Neither the county nor its worker's compensation insurance carrier will be liable for payment of worker's compensation benefits for injuries that occur during an employee's voluntary participation in any off-duty recreational, social, or athletic activity sponsored by the county. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § H-7) 
Sec. 54-128. - Training and development. 
Stephens County government promotes training and development of its employees for the purpose of improving the quality of services provided to the community and to assist employees in preparing themselves for advancement. To that end, the county may: 
(1)  Determine appropriate standards for training programs; 
(2)  Schedule programs that meet such standards as prescribed by law; 
(3)  Ensure that training programs are carried out as approved; 
(4)  Prepare certificates or other forms of recognition for persons who satisfactorily complete approved courses and programs; 
(5)  Develop and utilize techniques for increasing employee efficiency; 
(6)  Develop supervisory and management training and other types of training programs common to all departments; 
(7)  Make available information concerning job requirements and training opportunities; 
(8)  Maintain records of approved training programs and courses, and records of employees who successfully complete such programs and courses. 
The county will advise employees of training programs or opportunities pertinent to their functions as such programs become available. All training must be approved in advance. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § H-8) 
Sec. 54-129. - Tuition reimbursement program. 
At the discretion of the county administrator or his/her designee, the county may agree to grant time off and to pay registration, tuition, and travel costs for employees to attend approved educational programs that directly relate to their jobs and for which a direct benefit can be derived by the county. 
Should any employee voluntarily leave employment with the county within one year of the training, the county reserves the right to deduct the expenses for the physical exam and drug screen test from the employee's final paycheck. This right extends to two years for state-mandated certification and/or licenses relating to positions in public safety. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § H-9) 
Sec. 54-130. - Retirement program. 
The county offers eligible employees the opportunity to participate in the county's retirement/deferred compensation plan after completion of six months of employment, and after reaching 20½ years of age. Employees will be notified when they meet the eligibility requirements, and will receive information regarding retirement plan features, options, and procedures. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § H-10) 
Sec. 54-131. - Carry-home vehicles. 
Stephens County may provide certain employees with a county vehicle as part of the employee's compensation and benefits package. In such cases where the employee is allowed to use the vehicle for personal use, the value of the personal use is considered a taxable benefit and must be reported to the IRS. 
The employee is required to report to the county the portion of the annual lease value of the vehicle that is used for personal reasons as described under IRS rules. The portion of the annual lease value that is of a personal usage will be reported on the employee's W-2 form to the IRS. In addition, since the county provides operation and maintenance of the vehicle, the employee must maintain a record of mileage related to the personal usage, which must be reported by the county as income at per-mile rate (currently $0.5.5 per mile). The benefit gained by the employee for personal use of a county vehicle during the each calendar year must be reported on the employee's W-2 form for that calendar year. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § H-11) 
Secs. 54-132—54-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - LEAVES OF ABSENCE 

Se. 54-141. - Types of leave. 
Stephens County recognizes several types of leave that are available to employees. The nature of the leave determines whether a leave will be paid or unpaid. Leave options include: 
(1)  Vacation leave (discussed in employee benefits section [article VIII]); 
(2)  Sick leave (discussed in employee benefits section [article VIII]); 
(3)  Funeral leave (discussed in employee benefits section [article VIII]); 
(4)  Military leave; 
(5)  Civil leave; 
(6)  Family and medical leave; 
(7)  Leave of absence without pay; 
(8)  Educational leave. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § I-1) 
Sec. 54-142. - General guidelines governing leave. 
(a)  Employee responsibilities during leave. Any employee applying for leave under a specific leave provision must comply with the following: 
(1)  Must follow appropriate procedures to request a leave and to return from a leave; 
(2)  Must communicate regularly with the supervisor/manager regarding the status of their leave; 
(3)  Must submit any required documentation related to their return to work; 
(4)  Must maintain required payments for any insurance benefits to be continued during the leave. 
(b)  Benefits during leave. A leave of absence prevents a break in service, but no benefits (such as sick leave, vacation leave, or holidays) will accrue during a leave of absence (except for military leave). Benefits such as medical insurance and retirement contributions will be suspended after 30 days unless the employee chooses to pay the required contribution. Eligibility for these benefits will be reinstated if the employee returns to work during or at the end of the approved leave period. 
(c)  Duplicate use of benefits. Employees are not allowed to use two different types of paid leave benefits for the same day off. For example, if a holiday occurs while an employee is on vacation leave, the employee cannot receive both vacation leave pay and holiday pay for the day in question (in this example, the employee would receive holiday pay for the holiday, and his/her vacation leave benefits would not be reduced by the number of holiday hours occurring during the vacation). This rule applies to all types of leaves or benefits. 
(d)  Anniversary date. In calculating accrual of benefits, accrual begins on the day of original appointment to an eligible position. If an employee takes a leave of absence, the anniversary date will be adjusted by as many calendar weeks as the employee is absent on leave of absence. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § I-2) 
Sec. 54-143. - Military leave. 
Military leave will be granted to eligible employees (excluding temporary employees) in accordance with federal and state laws governing such leave. 
(1)  Eligibility. Any regular employee who leaves county service to join the military forces of the United States during time of war or other national emergency, or is inducted by Selective Service, may, upon written request, prior to induction into the military, be placed on military leave without pay, such leave to extend through a date 90 days after which such service terminates. 
Employees who are members of the National Guard or a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States and who are ordered to military duty or to military training may request and be granted military leave for the amount of time required to meet military obligations. 
(2)  Procedure to request military leave. Employees should submit a written request for military leave as soon in advance as is reasonably practical. The request should include the reason for leave, requested date to commence leave, and date leave will end (or estimated return date, if length of military leave cannot be determined). Employees who are ordered by appropriate military authority to serve during an emergency and who provide the required documentation will be granted leave without pay for the duration of their obligated military duty. 
(3)  Military training or reserve duty. Any regular employee who is a member of the National Guard or an organized military reserve of the United States will be allowed leave of absence with pay, not to exceed 18 calendar days (or in compliance with state law) during any calendar year to attend training camps, upon presentation of orders concerning such training. Such leave will not be charged to vacation leave. 
(4)  Compensation during military leave. Military leave is an unpaid leave of absence. However, employees on military leave may choose to use available vacation leave during the absence. 
(5)  Benefits during unpaid military leave. During unpaid military leave, the county continues to provide health insurance benefits for the full term of the military leave, subject to the terms, conditions, and limitations of applicable benefit plans. However, benefit accruals such as vacation leave, sick leave, or holiday benefits are suspended, and will resume upon return to active employment. Employees who return to work at the end of a military leave are considered continuously employed for purposes of determining benefits based on length of service. 
(6)  Return from military leave. The employee is entitled to return to the vacated position or a comparable position, provided the employee makes application to the county within 90 days of date of discharge under honorable conditions, and is physically and mentally capable of performing the essential functions of the position with or without reasonable accommodation. Failure to apply for reinstatement within the allotted time period constitutes waiver of these rights. 
The returning employee is entitled to any increases in salary (including cost-of-living increases) or any advancement in grade which would normally be accorded to the incumbent of the position, with exception of any increases or advancement in grade which would normally be dependent on meritorious performance of position duties. 
In the event a position vacated by a person entering the military service as stated above no longer exists at the time he or she qualifies to return to work, the person will be entitled to be re-employed in another position of the same status, class, and pay, provided such re-employment does not necessitate the laying off of another employee. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § I-3) 
Sec. 54-144. - Civil leave. 
Stephens [County] Government encourages employees to fulfill their civic responsibilities, such as jury duty, court appearances, or voting. Regular employees may be eligible for leave time with pay or without pay to perform required civic duties. 
(1)  Jury duty. Upon receiving a summons to serve on jury duty, the employee should present a copy of the jury summons to his/her supervisor as soon as possible. When the jury is not meeting, the employee must report for work. The employee also is required to report to work before and/or after the daily tour of jury duty, as time and circumstances warrant. Employees will be paid their regular wages while serving jury duty, less any jury duty compensation paid by the court; employees will be required to submit to payroll a copy of the check stub received as payment for jury duty. In all cases, the employee must continually keep his/her supervisor informed of the employee's status. 
(2)  Voting. Stephens County encourages employees to exercise their individual right to vote by participating in elections. Most employees should be able to vote either before or after their regular work schedule. Employees who are unable to vote in election during their nonworking hours will be allowed up to two hours of time off without pay. Time off for voting should be taken at the beginning or end of the regular workday, or as an extension of the employee's lunch/meal break. In addition, no employee will be given or refused employment, suspended, or discharged because of his/her vote or failure to vote in any election. 
(3)  Court appearances. County employees who are subpoenaed or ordered to appear in court as a witness, or to testify in an official capacity on behalf of federal, state, or local government, may be granted leave with pay for such period as required by the court. However, this policy does not apply to litigation unrelated to the employee's position with the county. Any absence from work by an employee to appear in any capacity in private litigation not associated with his/her position with the county should be charged to vacation leave, or taken off without pay (with supervisory approval). 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § I-4) 
Sec. 54-145. - Family and medical leave. 
Under the provisions of the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), an employee may be granted up to 12 weeks of family and/or medical leave during any 12-month period. This leave is not intended to replace other authorized leaves. 
To be eligible for family and medical leave under FMLA, an employee must be employed for at least 12 months and have worked at least 1,250 hours during the 12-month period immediately preceding commencement of the leave. After satisfying this criteria, an employee may take up to 12 weeks of family and medical leave per year as long as they work at least 1,250 hours in a rolling 12-month period (a rolling 12-month period is defined as a 12-month period measured backwards from the date an employee uses any family and medical leave). Family and medical leave may be taken intermittently in increments of two hours. 
Leave is allowable under FMLA for the following events: 
(1)  The birth, adoption, or foster care of a child (entitlement to leave for birth of a child, placement of a child for adoption, or foster care expires at the end of the 12-month period that began on the date of birth/placement of the child); 
(2)  Care for an employee's child, spouse, or parent with a serious health condition; or, 
(3)  The serious health condition of an employee where the employee is unable to perform the essential function of his/her position. 
Family leave may be paid or unpaid. Leave is paid when an employee uses sick or vacation leave for a condition that qualifies for this type of leave. For example, an employee can use sick and/or vacation leave for birth of a child, and the time taken will be counted toward the 12 weeks per year of family and medical leave. Once an employee exhausts available paid leave, any additional leave taken for family purposes will be without pay. During periods of unpaid leave, no sick or vacation leave benefits will accrue, nor will holiday pay provisions apply. The employee is required to pay his/her contribution for insurance premiums while on family and medical leave without pay. 
Part-time employees are eligible for a pro-rata amount of family and medical leave, since this leave is based on a standard 40-hour workweek. The amount available for a part-time employee is calculated individually based on the amount of time worked during the year. 
Spouses who are both employed by the county are entitled to a combined total of 12 weeks of family & medical leave within the 12-month period to care for a new child or sick parent. Each spouse may be entitled to additional FMLA leave for other FMLA qualifying reason (for example, if each spouse took six weeks of leave to care for a newborn child, each could later use an additional six weeks due to his/her own serious health condition or to care for a child with a serious health condition). 
Procedures to request family and medical leave are as follows: 
(1)  An employee must request family and medical leave at least 30 days before leave is to begin when the leave is foreseeable (such as an expected birth, placement of a child for adoption or foster care, or planned medical treatment of the employee or family member). 
(2)  If 30 days' notice to request leave is not feasible due to medical emergency or change in circumstances, leave must be requested as soon as possible. 
(3)  An employee must submit written request for leave by completing the designated form to request family and medical leave. In emergency situations where written notification is not possible, verbal notice will be accepted, to be followed by written request. 
(4)  The written leave request must be signed by the employee's immediate supervisor and department manager, and then approved by the county administrator. 
(5)  If the leave is due to the employee's own serious health condition or to care for a family member, the employee must obtain medical certification from a physician. This certification must be submitted with the written leave request within two business days of submitting the leave request, and must contain the following information: 
a.  Name of the health care physician; 
b.  The physician's type of medical practice or specialty; 
c.  Medical facts that support the certification; 
d.  Explanation of how the condition qualifies as a serious health condition under the family and medical leave provision; 
e.  Date the serious condition began; and 
f.  Duration of serious health condition and estimate of length of incapacitation. 
(6)  The county may contact the physician to clarify any information given in the medical certification, but may not request information beyond that described above. 
(7)  The county will notify the employee within two business days regarding approval of leave or requirement for additional information. 
(8)  If there is any doubt as to validity of original certification, the county may require the employee to submit to 2nd certification by another physician (at county expense). The county may designate the physician, but not a physician regularly employed by the county. In the event of differing opinions given by the employee's physician and the county's physician, the county may require medical certification from a third physician (again at county expense). The third physician must be jointly approved by the employee and the county, and this third opinion will be final and binding. 
(9)  The county may request recertification every 30 days for serious illness, or when the employee is under supervision of a health care provider. 
(10)  The county may require an employee on family and medical leave to report periodically on his/her status and intent to return to work. 
(11)  Failure of an employee to return to work on the agreed-upon date may result in termination of employment. 
Procedures for an employee to return to work under family & medical leave are as follows: 
(1)  The employee may be required to obtain and present certification from the health care provider confirming that the employee is able to resume working. 
(2)  The employee will be returned to the former position or to a position of equal status, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment. 
(3)  Exceptions to restoration to an equivalent position when an employee returns are: 
a.  The employee is no longer able to perform essential functions of the job. 
b.  The employee is considered a "key employee" where denial of job restoration is necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic injury to the operation of the county. 
Contact the human resources office for more detailed information on the Family and Medical Leave Act. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § I-5) 
Sec. 54-146. - Leave of absence without pay. 
A personal leave of absence without pay may be granted to regular full-time employees who have at least six months of continuous service for situations that, in management's view, require such a leave. A regular full-time employee may be granted a leave of absence without pay for up to 12 months in accordance with terms of the respective type of leave, under the following conditions: 
(1)  The employee must submit written request for leave of absence without pay to the immediate supervisor or department head, as early as possible before commencement of proposed leave. 
(2)  Leave without pay may only be granted after the employee's accrued vacation leave has been exhausted. 
(3)  The leave must be for a justifiable reason. 
The supervisor and department head will make recommendation regarding the request, and will forward the request for leave without pay to the county administrator. The county administrator will forward the request along with a recommendation to the board of commissioners for approval. 
Approval will be at the discretion of the board of commissioners. The leave must not cause undue hardship on the county, and must not impair the proper functioning of the county or its programs or services. Approval may be granted based on the circumstances surrounding the request, including the reasons for leave, the requested duration, anticipated workload during the requested leave time, and staffing considerations. 
If approved, a leave of absence without pay may not exceed 12 months, unless extended by the board of commissioners. Failure to report for duty promptly at the end of the leave may be cause for termination of employment. 
Benefit accruals such as vacation leave, sick leave, or holidays will be suspended during a leave of absence without pay. 
Employees are responsible for paying the full costs of applicable insurance premiums while on leave without pay (this includes both the employee's share and the county's share of benefits). 
While on leave of absence from Stephens County, no employee will be allowed to accept other employment. If an employee on a leave of absence accepts employment with another employer, the leave of absence is cancelled and employment with Stephens County will be terminated (except for employees working for a government agency during military leave). 
If necessary for effective operation of Stephens County government, an employee granted leave without pay may be required to return to work before expiration of their leave. An employee who does not return at the required time is considered to have resigned and may be terminated. 
When the leave of absence expires, every effort will be made to reinstate the employee to the position, pay grade, and benefit status held at the time leave was granted. If such position has been filled, the employee may be offered an available comparable position for which the employee is qualified. If no such comparable position is available, the employee will be given preference in the event of an appropriate opening. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § I-6) 
Sec. 54-147. - Educational leave of absence. 
An Educational leave of absence without pay may be granted to regular full-time employees in accordance with the provisions set forth for leave of absence without pay. The request must be submitted in writing to the supervisor or department head, and forwarded to the county administrator. The county administrator will forward the request along with a recommendation to the board of commissioners for approval. (Refer to the "Leave of Absence Without Pay" section above for details). 
An employee returning from approved educational leave of absence will be entitled to all rights and benefits they might have received had their service not been interrupted. Also the returning employee may be appointed or promoted to a higher level position at the discretion of the department head, provided the employee meets the qualifications of the new position. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § I-7) 
Secs. 54-148—54-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - OTHER EMPLOYMENT ISSUES 

Sec. 54-161. - Dress code. 
Dress, grooming, and personal cleanliness standards contribute to employee morale and affect the business image the county presents to citizens and visitors. All county employees are required to maintain a neat appearance that is appropriate for their work and reflects positively on the county. Department managers will describe requirements for attire and personal appearance for each position. 
Uniforms. Stephens County government will furnish uniforms for those employees in positions requiring uniforms. Nonuniform-type clothing will not be furnished unless specifically authorized by the board of commissioners. Employees are expected to maintain uniforms in a neat, clean manner. Upon termination of employment, each employee is expected to return all county-provided uniforms to their supervisor. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § J-1) 
Sec. 54-162. - Use, misuse, and monitoring of county property and work areas. 
(a)  Overview. Stephens County provides work areas, desks, computers, vehicles, equipment, tools, supplies, and other county property for use by employees in association with their employment with the county. These items are property of the county, and employees are entrusted with use of this county property in order to perform their jobs. The county retains the right to inspect or monitor such property as a matter of routine. Under no circumstances should county property be utilized for the personal use of any employee, not may county property be used in an in appropriate or illicit manner. The misuse, abuse, or misappropriation of county equipment, supplies, or funds can lead to appropriate disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. 
(b)  No right to privacy. Employees should not expect privacy with respect to their use of county property. The county can make no assurances about privacy or security of any office, desk, file cabinet, locker, computer, or other county facility, and discourages storage of valuables, perishables, or other personal items. Employees should keep any personal records or personal business at home. No items of an inappropriate or illicit nature may be contained in or on county property. 
(c)  Care of property. All employees are expected to follow operating instructions and safety guidelines, perform required maintenance, and exercise care in using equipment. Supervisors can provide guidance about each employee's responsibility to care for and maintain equipment used on the job. Employees should notify supervisors if any equipment or tools appear to be damaged, defective, or in need or repair. 
(d)  Property inspections. Since work areas, desks, computers, telephones, vehicles, equipment, tools, supplies, and other property provided for use by employees in their jobs are county property, they are subject to monitoring and inspection by county management at any time. The county reserves the right to open and inspect any vehicles or items of any kind on county property, and the contents of same, at any time, with or without reason, notice, or consent. Employees on county property, and the contents of any item carried by employees on county property, may be subject to search. 
(e)  Workplace monitoring. Workplace monitoring may be conducted by the county to ensure quality control, employee safety, security, and customer satisfaction. Employees who regularly communicate with customers may have their telephone conversations monitored or recorded. Telephone monitoring is used to identify and correct performance problems through targeted training. The county may conduct video surveillance of nonprivate workplace areas. Video monitoring is used to identify safety concerns, maintain quality control, detect theft and misconduct, and discourage or prevent acts of harassment or violence. However, the county is sensitive to the legitimate privacy rights of employees, and every effort will be made to ensure that workplace monitoring is done in an ethical and respectful manner. 
(f)  Monitoring of communication systems. Computers and communications systems furnished for the use of employees are county property and, as such, may be monitored. The county reserves the right to access and search all directories, indices, diskettes, files, databases, faxes, e-mail, messages, voice mail messages, or other electronic transmissions contained in or used in conjunction with county systems, including the county's computer, voice mail, e-mail, telephone, or other communication systems, with no prior notice. This right applies both during an employee's employment with the county and after cessation of employment for any reason, including whether the cessation is voluntary or involuntary, for any reason or no reason, or by death of disability. 
(g)  Business telephone use. Employees are expected to maintain a professional, courteous demeanor in telephone communications, and to incorporate proper telephone etiquette and customer service skills into all telephone conversations. To maintain consistency and effectiveness in county operations, employees should always use county-approved greetings when answering telephone calls. 
(h)  Personal telephone use. Personal telephone calls during work time must be kept to a minimum. It is understood that certain personal calls are necessary; however, personal calls should be local and should be brief, as they disrupt normal work process. In the event it becomes necessary for an employee to make a personal long-distance call during the workday, the employee should take an uncompensated break and the call may not be charged to the county. 
(i)  Mail systems. The use of county-paid postage for personal correspondence is not permitted. This includes stamps, machine-applied postage, downloaded postage, shipping/mailing services, delivery services, or any other type of mail system funded by the county. 
(j)  Use of county vehicles for personal use. Employees who are "on call" or otherwise authorized to take an assigned county vehicle to/from their residences may, with permission from their department head, use their county vehicle for incidental personal purposes, but should refrain from extended personal use. It is absolutely prohibited for any employee to allow an unauthorized non-employee to operate a county vehicle. 
(k)  Return of county equipment. Each employee is responsible for all county property issued to the employee, in the employee's possession, or in the employee's control. Such items may include vehicles, radios, equipment, tools, keys, pagers, cell phones, software, manuals, files, written materials, county funds or checks, credit cards, or other items. Employees must return all county property immediately upon request or upon termination of employment (on or before the last day of employment), and to provide Stephens County with a signed, written statement certifying that all county property has been returned. Employees may not retain any copies of such property. The county may withhold final paychecks or take other action as appropriate to recover or protect property not returned upon request. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § J-2) 
Sec. 54-163. - Internet policy. 
Stephens County government provides internet service as a tool to assist authorized employees in performing their work efficiently. This tool, and the work product it contains, is the property of Stephens County and should be used for business purposes only. Employees who do not require access to the internet as part of their official duties may not access the internet using county equipment under any circumstances. 
(1)  De minimis use. The county will allow "de minimis" personal use of the internet, meaning that a limited amount of personal communications, while not sanctioned, is not prohibited by this policy. Generally, de minimis personal use includes such uses as adding a personal comment to an official e-mail, sending a short personal note to a colleague, or other personal interactions that are a routine part of day-to-day business interaction. Reasonable judgment should be applied to individual circumstances. The county retains sole discretion to determine what use is considered de minimis and to discipline for all other use. 
(2)  Personal internet accounts. No personal internet accounts (paid for by the employee) may be accessed using county equipment during regular work hours at any time. 
(3)  Inappropriate use. Use of the internet is a privilege, not a right, and inappropriate use will result in disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. 
a.  "Inappropriate use" is defined as a violation of the intended use or purpose of the internet authorization, such as use of recreation games or chain letters, attempts to gain unauthorized access, harassment, threats, racial slurs or epithets directed to any racial group, advocacy of the supremacy of any racial group, or any other actions that are disruptive to the internet or internet users. 
b.  Inappropriate use includes obscene activities or violations of generally accepted social standards for the use of a publicly owned and operated communication system. Obscene activities include, but are not limited to, the receipt, storage, or distribution of profanity or other offensive language and sexually explicit materials, including nudity and other graphic or textual depictions of sexually explicit activities. 
c.  Inappropriate use also includes illegal activities, or any violations of federal, state, or local law. 
d.  Inappropriate use also applies to copyright violations. Most information on the internet is copyrighted, or protected under the law. It is illegal to reproduce or distribute copyrighted information regardless of the source. Violation of copyright laws can also involve heavy fines. 
(4)  No right to privacy. An employee's rights while accessing the internet by use of county property do not include the right to privacy. The county reserves the right to monitor in any way the activities of employees while accessing the internet. All internet activity is subject to log-in and monitoring to provide a chronological history of events and to maintain audit trails of usage. The county may automatically monitor internet activity via software. 
(5)  Authorization. County management will determine which employees will require authorization for internet access in association with their job. Each internet account will be issued to one authorized user only. Each user is responsible for all activity in the assigned account, and for maintaining confidentiality of the password. 
(6)  Precautionary measures. Individual users must be aware of, and at all times attempt to prevent, potential county liability in their use of the internet. All outgoing messages which do not reflect the official position of the county must include the following disclaimer. "The opinions expressed here are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Stephens County government." Internet users are advised not to use the Internet for any purpose that would reflect negatively on the county or its employees. 
Employees may find some information on the internet offensive or otherwise objectionable. Individuals should be aware that the county has no control over and, therefore, cannot be responsible for the content of information available on the internet. 
Files are not to be downloaded from the internet without express consent by the department head. All files expressly approved for downloading must first be scanned by virus detection software. Resources of any kind that require a fee must not be accessed or downloaded without prior approval of the department head. Resources that are not used for a clear county purpose may not be accessed or downloaded. Websites or other electronic communication databases may not be created or implemented without prior approval of the department head and review by the county administrator. 
Violations of county policy regarding internet use may result in disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § J-3) 
Sec. 54-164. - E-mail policy. 
(a)  The county uses electronic communications as a tool to facilitate communications, promote increased efficiency, and reduce costs. Any form of an e-mail system installed on county equipment is for county business purposes only. Employees are accountable for their use of electronic communications just as they are for other conduct and communications in the workplace. 
(b)  The county reserves the right to monitor e-mail messages in any way. The county may enter the e-mail system to review, copy, or delete any messages, to disclose such messages to others, and to use the messages to support disciplinary or other action. 
(c)  Employees should not assume that messages are confidential, even if a password is used. For private communications, employees should not use the e-mail system. All e-mail messages are considered to be public records, and the public has a right to examine public records. E-mail should not be used as a communication tool if one is concerned about public disclosure or internal disclosure. The county will view the appropriateness of any communication on the basis of how it would have been perceived and dealt with had it been conducted by telephone, in person, or in writing. 
(d)  Employees should know the source of e-mail before attempting to open messages. Computer viruses are commonly spread by embedding the virus within e-mail attachments. Virus scanning software is installed on personal computers with e-mail capabilities. Each employee is responsible to ensure that virus-scanning software has been installed on his/her computer, and is operative. 
(e)  The following represent prohibited actions: 
(1)  Use of e-mail should be reserved for official county business and not for personal use. 
(2)  Racism, sexism, and other inappropriate behavior are not tolerated by Stephens County, including in the e-mail environment. 
(3)  Confidential and sensitive issues should not be communicated via e-mail. 
(4)  E-mail is not to be used to create, send, or copy any offensive, harassing, or disruptive message. 
(5)  E-mail is not to be used to send, receive, or download copyrighted materials, financial information, or similar materials without prior authorization. 
(6)  Communications that would be inappropriate under other county policies are equally unacceptable if delivered via electronic communication, including harassing or discriminatory comments, breaches of confidentiality, and insubordinate statements. 
(7)  E-mail is not to be used to solicit for commercial ventures, religious or political causes, outside organizations, or other nonjob-related solicitations. 
(8)  Employees are not authorized to retrieve or read any e-mail messages that are not sent to them. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § J-4) 
Sec. 54-165. - County drivers. 
All employees who are required to drive a Stephens County vehicle in the performance of their jobs, or who drive a personal vehicle while conducting county business, must adhere to the county driving policy as described in this handbook. Any employee who violates any of the requirements described herein will lose his/her right to operate a county vehicle, and will be subject to possible termination for failure to meet the minimum requirements of his/her job. 
(1)  Requirements for all drivers. Any employee who operates a vehicle while acting within the scope of his/her duties as a county employee must meet the following requirements: 
a.  Must meet all current state driver's licensing requirements including, but not limited to, having a valid and current driver's license and/or commercial driver's license, if applicable. 
b.  Must immediately report any change in the status of the driver's license to their supervisor. 
c.  Must immediately report any accident or incident (a) involving a county vehicle, or (b) occurring when the employee is operating a personal vehicle while conducting county business. 
d.  Must immediately report all traffic citations received from any source for any driving offense. 
e.  Must maintain a driving record as described below: 
1.  No major violations in the last three years, which includes, but is not limited to, eluding a police officer, driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, reckless driving, license suspension and/or revocation, vehicular homicide, or leaving the scene of an accident. 
2.  No more than two speeding violations in the last three years. 
3.  No more than one at-fault accident in the last three years. 
4.  No more than two accidents in the last three years. 
5.  No convictions of a drug-related offense of any kind. 
6.  No felony convictions involving a vehicle. 
f.  Must submit to a drug and alcohol screening immediately following any accident while operating a county vehicle. 
(2)  Process to approve drivers. An individual may be designated to drive a county vehicle, or to drive a personal vehicle while acting within the scope of his/her duties, through employment, transfer, promotion, or volunteer work. The appropriate department head must verify that the employee possesses a valid, current state driver's license with endorsements appropriate for the vehicle(s) to be driven. The department head may also request a driver's history report. After evaluating the driving background of the proposed driver, the department head will submit a recommendation regarding approval to the county administrator. If both the department head and the county administrator approve the submission, the employee will be eligible to drive county vehicles or to drive personal vehicles while acting in the scope of their duties. If the proposed driver has not met the criteria, the department head must take action to ensure the rejected applicant does not drive any vehicles while acting within the scope of his/her duties. 
Stephens County will periodically check the driving record of each employee required to drive a vehicle to verify that the employee is in compliance with county policy. In addition, any supervisory personnel who become aware of an employee who has violated any of the requirements listed above must immediately report the violation to the county administrator. Supervisors who intentionally withhold information of violations will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including possible termination. 
(3)  Driver responsibilities. All individuals who operate a vehicle while acting within the scope of their duties as a county employee are responsible for the following: 
a.  Knowing and obeying all traffic laws of the state and/or the jurisdiction in which the vehicle is being operated. 
b.  Obtaining and/or maintaining a current and valid state driver's license. 
c.  Operating county vehicles in a safe manner at all times. 
d.  Wearing safety belts when the vehicle is being driven, and ensuring that all passengers are wearing safety belts when the vehicle is being driven. Vehicles include all pickup trucks effective July 1, 2010. 
e.  The use of seatbelts is required on all mobile equipment that is equipped with seatbelts and a rollover protection device. 
f.  Using county vehicle only for the purpose of conducting Stephens County business, except as authorized by appropriate county officials, and as otherwise allowed by IRS regulations regarding de minimis use, and with prior approval (such as a stop for a personal errand between a business delivery and the employee's home, or an on-call employee commuting to/from residence); or if personal use of a county vehicle is established as a condition of the employee's compensation agreement. Noncounty employees are not allowed to operate the county vehicle. 
g.  Immediately reporting any change in the status of their driver's license. 
h.  Immediately reporting traffic citations received from any source for any violation. 
i.  Immediately reporting any accident involving a county vehicle, or occurring during the course of county business, to appropriate personnel. 
j.  Conducting pretrip safety inspections: 
1.  Examine assigned vehicle using vehicle guidelines; ensure vehicle is in safe operating condition; 
2.  Keep vehicle interior and exterior clean and neat; 
3.  Report any damage or operating problem immediately; and report anything out of ordinary to supervisor. 
k.  Never pick up hitchhikers. Only county-affiliated passengers are allowed in the vehicle. 
l.  Leaving county vehicles on site at assigned county facilities (unless waived by supervisor). Transportation to/from site is the responsibility of the employee. 
m.  Not driving county vehicles outside the state without prior approval of the employee's immediate supervisor. 
n.  Ensuring no alterations to the county vehicles are made (i.e., additional audio equipment, disabling of alarm systems, bumper stickers, cutting seatbelts, etc.). 
Every employee in charge of any vehicle owned by the county must exercise care in the operation of that vehicle and avoid accidents; disregard of this obligation will be grounds for discharge. 
Driving a county vehicle while intoxicated or under the influence of a controlled or illegal substance will result in immediate termination. If an employee is cited for driving while intoxicated or under the influence of a controlled or illegal substance while on other than county business, the employee must take a defensive driving test with 30 calendar days of the citation. Evidence of registration and completion of the defensive driving class must be provided to the employee's supervisor. In the event that the employee's driver's license is suspended, the employee will not be allowed to drive the assigned county vehicle, will result in inability to perform the assigned job. At its discretion, the county may elect to provide work which does not require driving until the driver's license is reinstated or final disposition is obtained. A second offense will result in employee dismissal. 
Incurring an avoidable vehicle accident in any 12-month period will result in a written reprimand. A second avoidable accident in this period will result in a written reprimand and the requirement that the employee complete an approved driver training course at the employee's expense. Refusal to take this course, or to complete the course, will result in termination of employment. A third preventable accident will result in termination of employment. 
Failure to report an accident involving a county vehicle, failure to report a change in driver's license status, or failure to report a traffic citation may result in immediate revocation of the employee's approval to drive a county vehicle, and may result in suspension without pay pending a review of the employee's motor vehicle record and driving qualifications. If at that time the employee is not qualified for approval to drive a county vehicle, and the employee's position is such that driving is a required duty, the employee may be dismissed. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § J-5; Ord. of 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 54-166. - Security clearances. 
In certain employment areas, such as accounting, finance, public safety, or other areas where the public has a compelling interest in the security of property or life, all applicants for employment, promotion, or transfer may be required to provide additional personal information that would not be needed in other areas of employment. Such applicants/employees may also be subject to additional background screening, which may include driver's history reports, criminal history reports, credit reports, or other review. County employees may also be required to meet the requirements to be bonded under a blanket policy at the County's expense, to satisfy the requirements of state and federal agencies. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § J-6) 
Sec. 54-167. - Smoke-free workplace policy. 
Stephens County is dedicated to providing a healthy, safe, and comfortable environment for all employees and visitors. In keeping with this goal, smoking and/or the use of tobacco of any kind is not permitted throughout county facilities. This includes, but is not limited to, smoking of cigarettes, cigars, and pipes. This policy applies to all employees, visitors, contractors, and customers. 
(1)  Prohibited areas. Use of tobacco is prohibited in any enclosed county facility, including offices, common work areas, conference rooms, lobbies, break rooms, rest rooms, hallways, stairs, elevators, or any other enclosed areas. In addition, employees are prohibited from smoking while performing their job duties, regardless of whether they work indoors or outdoors. In all cases, smoking is prohibited in any area in which a fire hazard exists, and in any area in which smoking is prohibited by state or federal law. 
(2)  Permitted areas. County management will identify designated smoking areas with "Smoking Permitted" signs. Such locations may only occur outside buildings, and away from any public entrances to ensure that secondhand smoke does not enter the enclosed area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or any other means. 
Employees are expected to exercise common courtesy with regard to the county's smoke-free workplace policy, and to respect the needs and sensitivities of coworkers. Smokers have a special obligation to keep smoking areas litter-free, and are not to abuse break of work rules. 
(3)  Assistance for smokers. Stephens County promotes employee health, and urges smokers to contact the Lung Association, the county health department, local medical center, or other resources for information about smoking-cessation programs. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § J-7) 
Sec. 54-168. - Solicitation policy. 
Stephens County prohibits the solicitation, distribution and posting of materials on or at county property by any employee or non-employee, except as may be permitted by this policy. To avoid disruption of county operations, the following rules apply to solicitation or distribution of literature on county property: 
(1)  Non-employees. Persons not employed by the county may not solicit or distribute literature on county property at any time, for any purpose. 
(2)  Employees. County employees may not solicit or distribute literature for any purpose during working time or in working areas. Working time includes the working time of both the employee doing the soliciting/distributing and the employee to whom the soliciting/distributing is being directed. Working time includes all time when an employee's duties require that they be engaged in work tasks, but does not include meal breaks or scheduled breaks. Working areas include all areas of county property. 
The sole exceptions to this policy are charitable and community activities supported by county management and county-sponsored programs related to county services. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § J-8) 
Sec. 54-169. - Inclement weather and emergency situations. 
In the event of inclement weather the following will apply: 
(1)  The county administrator and any one commissioner will make the decision to open county offices late or not to open the offices because of inclement weather. If the administrator is not available, the county finance director or public works director will assist in the decision to open county offices late or not to open. 
(2)  If the individuals set forth above determines to open late, employees who report for work at the specified time will not be required to take leave or leave without pay. If the employee does not feel comfortable or safe in thief [their] effort to go to or from work they do not have to report; however, they will either have to take a leave or leave without pay for the day. 
(3)  If the decision is made to close for the day as a result of weather or weather-related shutdowns, employees will not be required to report, will not be charged leave and will be compensated for the day. 
(4)  When inclement weather makes roads hazardous, employees should find a safe means of transportation to work. However, employees are not required to take unreasonable risks. 
* Note: Does not include staff specifically requested to report or who have been designated in advance as essential in dealing with such emergencies. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § J-9) 
Sec. 54-170. - Posting of management information. 
The county maintains a centralized bulletin board or other central location for posting/conveying official county information from management to employees, such as notices from federal or state agencies, safety information, legal notices, benefit information, job announcements, or information of special interest. Employees are responsible for reading all information posted. No personal announcements may be posted in this location. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § J-10) 
Sec. 54-171. - Travel expense reimbursement. 
Stephens County will bear the cost of all reasonable and authorized expenses incurred by employees or county officials while traveling on official county business. All travel at the expense of the county must be approved by the department manager and/or county administrator prior to the time such expenses are incurred. 
(1)  Travel requisitions and approval. Employees should complete appropriate forms and follow established procedures to request and receive approval for travel prior to incurring any expenses. Requests should include all available information concerning purpose, location, dates, and costs of the event, and should be submitted as far in advance as possible. Departmental needs and budgetary constraints will be considered to determine if the requested travel event is appropriate. 
(2)  Travel advances. If the travel event is approved, the employee may submit a travel advance request no less than one week prior to departure. Travel advances will be limited to maximum allowable amounts multiplied by the number of days. 
(3)  Reimbursable expenses. Employees are expected to show good judgment and proper regard for economy in the matter of travel expense. Typical expenses that may be reimbursed by the county include transportation, lodging, meals, telephone, parking, and registration fees. Other expenses require specific consideration and approval. The county may establish limitations for reimbursement of certain expenses, and employees should review current reimbursement guidelines prior to incurring travel expenses. 
(4)  Submittal of expense reports. After completion of travel, the employee must complete the county's designated expense report form and submit with original receipts to the department head for approval. Any travel funds advanced to the employee must be reflected on the expense report. Expense reports are considered due on the first working day after completion of travel. If an employee should fail to return a completed expense report, any amount disbursed as a travel advance will be considered income to the employee and will be reported to the Internal Revenue Service as such. 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § J-11) 
Sec. 54-172. - Housekeeping. 
Each employee is responsible for assisting to uphold a level of professionalism in the workplace and is requested to assist in maintaining work areas. Employees' desks, offices, and immediate work areas should be kept neat and free from clutter. Employees are asked to assist in keeping common areas (such as lobbies, conference rooms, break rooms, supply rooms, etc.) clean and orderly. Any food or beverage containers should be removed from desks at the end of each workday, and accidental spills should be cleaned immediately. 
Kitchen/break room facilities are provided as a benefit and convenience to all employees. Each employee is responsible for cleaning any dishware, silverware, or other items used. All employees who use kitchen or break room areas are expected to help with cleaning of coffee machines, countertops, refrigerators, microwaves, or other facilities. Any food stored in kitchen cabinets or refrigerator must be in an appropriate covered container, and food must be removed or discarded within a reasonable period of time. Employees should be aware that food or personal items left in the kitchens for any length of time may be thrown away (including containers). 
(Ord. of 5-26-2009, § J-12) 
Chapter 58 - PLANNING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance pertaining to zoning saved from repeal, § 1-10(7); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning and service delivery by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

Sec. 58-1. - Comprehensive plan. 
The comprehensive plan, as now or hereafter amended, is approved and adopted, along with the accompanying maps, goals, policies, objectives and programs, as a general guide for the future growth, change, development and progress of the county. 
(Res. of 9-6-1994) 
Chapter 59 - LAND USE REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the land use regulations for the county, which derive from an ordinance adopted March 11, 2014. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the 1983 Georgia State Constitution, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV, and for the purpose of promoting health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Stephens County, including among other purposes: 
(1)  Promoting (a) classification of land uses, (b) distribution of land uses, and (c) land development and land utilization, as will tend to protect and promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; 
(2)  Preventing incompatible uses; 
(3)  Conserving and protecting the county's precious natural resources, while encouraging the efficient management of their uses; 
(4)  Preserving buildings, structures and uses in areas having national, regional, state or local historic or environmental significance; 
(5)  Protecting rural character, farm land and open space; 
(6)  The lessening of congestion on the streets; 
(7)  Protecting property against blight and depreciation; 
(8)  Maintaining the value of buildings; 
(9)  Facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage service, schools, parks, and other public requirements; 
(10)  Improving the aesthetic appearance of the county; 
(11)  Securing safety from flood, fire, panic and other dangers; 
(12)  Promoting health and general welfare; 
(13)  Providing plentiful light and clean air; 
(14)  Securing economy in governmental expenditures; and 
(15)  Encouraging the most appropriate use of land and structures throughout Stephens County. 
All in accordance with [the] official zoning map of the comprehensive plan for the development and conservation of Stephens County, the county commission does hereby ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections. Any reference herein to maps or zoning maps shall mean the official zoning map. 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 59-200. - Short title. 
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Stephens County Land Use Regulation Ordinance." 
Sec. 59-201. - Definitions. 
(a)  Words given customary meanings. For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, certain words or terms are herein defined. All other words used in this chapter shall carry their customary meaning. 
(b)  Interpretation of certain terms and words. 
(1)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(2)  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(3)  The word "person" includes a firm, copartnership or corporation. 
(4)  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel" and "tract." 
(5)  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
(6)  The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. 
(7)  The words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building. A building that is used for another purpose other than the purpose of the principal building on a lot. 
Antique shop. Any business that sells, at retail, merchandise which is at least 50 years old where such merchandise reflects the architectural, design, or construction aesthetic of a particular historical period, person, or geographical area as distinguished from used retail merchandise, used automobiles, junk or other articles that would otherwise be sold at specialty shops, flea markets, bazaars or variety shops as defined herein. In any antique shop as defined herein, new or reproduction goods, which have been made to resemble antiques, shall not make up more than 25 percent of the business's inventory. 
Basement. A story partly underground but having at least one-half of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. 
Bazaars. Any meeting place, either temporary or permanent, where retail or wholesale business is conducted in junk as defined herein, used merchandise, used merchandise or junk sold on consignment, and/or new merchandise. 
Board of commissioners. The duly elected Governing Authority of Stephens County, Georgia also known as county commissioners. 
Boundary line. A line that indicates or delineates a boundary between properties, districts or other land areas. The term boundary line is synonymous herein with lot line and property line. 
Boardinghouse. Any dwelling in which more than two persons are lodged on a continuous basis and served meals for compensation. 
Building. Any structure having a roof and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
Building, accessory. A building subordinate in nature, extent or purposes to the principal building on a lot, and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal building. 
Building, alteration of. Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members (such as bearing walls, beams, columns or girders) of a building, any addition to a building, or movement of a building from one location to another. 
Building, front line of. A line parallel to the street, intersecting the foremost point of the building, excluding steps. 
Building, principal. A building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which the building is located. 
Cellar. A story partly underground and having more than one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. 
Clinic. A building used by a group of doctors or dentists for the medical examination or treatment of persons on an outpatient, or nonboarding basis only. 
Club. A building owned, leased or hired by a nonprofit association of persons, who are bona fide members paying dues, the use of which is restricted to those members and their guests. The serving and selling of food and alcoholic beverages may be permitted, providing that adequate kitchen facilities are available and that any sales are in accordance with federal, state and municipal laws. 
Collector street. A collector street is a street that functions as a feeder from a region of limited traffic to a major highway or street. These streets are designed to give access to residential areas. Collector streets can either be major streets or minor streets. 
Commercial nursery. A place where young trees or other plants are raised for transplanting, for sale, or for experimental study or for other purposes and done, or acting with the chief emphasis on salability or profit. 
Condominium. A type of joint ownership applying to buildings (usually apartment buildings) in which dwelling units or enclosed spaces are individually owned, each owner receiving a recordable deed enabling him to sell, mortgage, exchange, etc., his enclosed area or apartment independently of owners of other areas or apartments; and further applying to an undivided interest in common areas and facilities. 
Crematorium. A furnace or establishment for the incineration of corpses and where cremations are done. 
Curb break. Any interruption, or break, in the line of a street curb in order to connect a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
Dwelling. A building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used mainly for residential occupancy, but not including trailers, mobile homes or recreation vehicles. 
Dwelling, one-family. A building designed, arranged or used exclusively for occupancy by one family. 
Dwelling, one-family attached. Any dwelling in a structure which consists entirely of dwellings each of which is attached to one or more other dwellings, has its own separate entrance from the exterior of the building, and has an adjacent ground level outdoor area for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Dwelling, multifamily. A residential building designed, arranged or used for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling, two-family. A building designed, arranged or used for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling unit. A dwelling, or portion thereof, providing complete living facilities for one family. 
Family. One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, living and cooking together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, exclusive of household servants. A number of persons but not exceeding three living and cooking together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit though not related by blood, adoption, or marriage shall be deemed to constitute a family. 
Farm animal. Any animals kept for use or profit, including but not limited to, cattle, horses, swine/pigs, poultry, llamas, rabbits, mink, alpaca, goats, sheep, donkeys, ducks, bison, buffalo, emu, geese, honey bees, turkey, yak, mules. 
Flea market. Any retail or wholesale business which buys, sells, exchanges, or accepts for sale on consignment junk, as defined herein, or used merchandise less than 50 years old. 
Floodplain. An area identified by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other surveying agencies as subject to flooding once every 100 years and necessary for the flow of floodwaters. 
Floor area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a dwelling unit, exclusive of porches and balconies, garages, basements and cellars, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls or partitions separating dwelling units. For uses other than residential, the floor area shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls or partitions separating those uses, and shall include all floors, lofts, balconies, mezzanines, cellars, basements and similar areas devoted to those uses. 
Frontage. The length of the front lot line. 
Garage. An accessory building or portion of a principal building used for vehicular storage only, and having a capacity adequate to accommodate the automobiles or light trucks owned and registered in the name of the occupants of the principal building. 
Gasoline service station. Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used or designed to be used for the supply of gasoline or oil or other fuel for the propulsion of motor vehicles and which may include facilities used or designed to be used for polishing, greasing, washing, dry cleaning or otherwise serving motor vehicles. However, major mechanical or body repair, customarily known as a repair garage, shall not be included in this definition. 
Home occupation. Any accessory use of a commercial service character customarily conducted within a dwelling by the residents thereof, which is clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not change the character thereof or have any exterior evidence of the secondary use, where there is no group instruction, assembly or activity, where no power other than that used in the home is used, no signs other than a name plate not in excess of one square foot in area is displayed, no merchandise or other articles are stored in the open or in accessory resident buildings or are displayed for advertising purposes, no assistants other than family members and one employee not related by blood or marriage to the property owner(s) are employed. 
Height. The distance between the eaves of a building and the average ground line across the front of the building. 
Junk. Items including, but not limited to, waste, secondhand materials and merchandise less than 50 years old, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rugs, tires, bottles, broken items, and items in disrepair which are unserviceable for their originally intended purpose. 
Junkyard. An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A "junkyard" also includes an auto wrecking yard, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
Kennel. Any building or land used, designed or arranged for the boarding, breeding or care of dogs for a fee. 
Kindergarten school. Any building used routinely for the daytime care or education of preschool age children, and including all accessory and play areas. 
Labor pools. 
(1)  Labor pool means a business entity which operates by: 
a.  Contracting with other entities or persons to supply them with temporary employees for short term assignments of casual labor; 
b.  Hiring persons to fulfill these contracts for short term assignments of casual labor; and 
c.  Employing each individual employee no longer than the time period required to complete the assignment for which that individual employee was hired, although an individual may be eligible for rehire when additional temporary assignments are available. 
(2)  A business entity which fulfills any contracts in accordance with this subsection is a labor pool, even if the entity also conducts other business. 
(3)  Labor pool does not include a temporary help service that requires advanced applications, job interviews and references. 
(4)  Short-term assignment of casual labor means a work assignment for a term of 40 hours or less involving work for which neither the entity nor the person contracting or arranging for temporary employees requires any of the following from any such employees: 
a.  A professional or occupational license which requires for its issuance a demonstration of knowledge or proficiency and which is issued by the state or a political subdivision of the state; 
b.  A high school diploma or its equivalent; 
c.  Education beyond high school; 
d.  Vocational education; 
e.  Demonstrated proficiency with a specified type of machinery; or 
f.  Training before the assignment or on the job which exceeds one hour. 
This subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting or limiting the placement of a skilled employee on a short-term assignment of casual labor as long as such skill or education is not a requirement of the assignment. 
Livestock. Animals, including but not limited to, cattle, sheep, horses, swine, pigs, poultry, goats or other useful animals, raised for home or other use, for profit, for sale, for food or other products, commonly kept or associated with a farm. 
Lodge. See "Club." 
Lot. A portion or parcel of land devoted to a single principal use, or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. 
Lot, corner. A lot fronting on two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot coverage. The total horizontal ground area of a lot covered by all buildings on the lot and which is not open to the sky. 
Lot coverage, maximum. The maximum permitted ratio of lot coverage to usable area of the lot. Usable area shall not include floodplains or slopes in excess of 30 percent grade. 
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured perpendicular to the front lot line. 
Lot, double frontage. An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets not intersecting at a point common with the boundary lines of lot. 
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot line, front. The lot line coincident with a street right-of-way line. 
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the county superior court, or a parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the same offices as of the effective date of this chapter. 
Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the depth. 
Manufactured home. A structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC § 5401 et seq. ("HUD Code"), effective June 15, 1976, which, as of March 19, 1996, means the following: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight feet or more in width or 40 feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the HUD Code. 
Noxious odors. Any odor that would be considered objectionable to the average person. 
Nursery. Any building or lot, or portion thereof, used for the cultivation or growing of plants, and including all accessory buildings. 
Nursing home. Any rest home, personal care home, convalescent home or home for the aged and any place devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for treatment and care of any persons suffering from illness, diseases, deformities or injuries, not requiring extensive or intensive care that is normally provided in a general hospital or other specialized hospital, but who do require care in excess of room and board and who need medical, nursing, convalescent, counseling or chronic care. 
Parkway. A broad thoroughfare with a dividing strip or side strips planted with grass, trees, etc. 
Patio houses. A type of single-family attached dwelling unit which covers the entire lot by combining front, side and rear yards into one "landscaped patio" bordered on two sides by the house, and on the other two sides by ornamental brick or stone walls at least seven feet in height. Windows are located at the front of the house and usually glass walls are adjacent to the patio. Units are built abutting each other, making common use of three of the enclosure walls. 
Personal Wireless Service Facility ("PWSF'"). Any staffed or unstaffed location for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals or other wireless communications, including commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and usually consisting of an antenna or group of antennas, transmission cables, feed lines, equipment cabinets or shelters, and may include a tower. The following developments shall be deemed a PWSF: new, mitigated, or existing towers, public towers, replacement towers, collocation on existing towers, attached concealed and non-concealed antenna, concealed towers, and non- concealed towers (monopoles, lattice and guyed}, and certain towers constructed for OTARD purposes which (a) are not "customer-end" installations designed to permit reception of fixed wireless communications and exceed 70 feet in height, or (b) are "customer-end" installations for reception of fixed wireless communications but exceed 47 feet in height. 
Planned unit development (PUD). A PUD is a land development project which is planned as one entity, grouping dwelling units into clusters providing an appropriate amount of land for open space, mixed housing types and densities. Many development and dimensional requirements are generally waived and land use intensity and design criteria are applied through a site plan review process. 
Principal building. A building or combination of buildings of chief importance or function on a lot. In general, the principal use is carried out in a principal building. 
Restaurants, drive-in. Restaurants oriented to serving the motoring public, where curb service, window pickup or counter service is provided for over ten percent of the customers. 
Right-of-way. The term "right-of-way" as used herein shall include deeded right-of-way and if the road or street in question has no deeded right-of-way then all reference to right-of-way shall constitute the outer edge of the maintained portion of a road or street. 
Setback, front. The distance from the edge of right-of-way lines to the nearest point of a building or structure. 
Setback, rear. The distance from the rear property lines or rear lot lines to the nearest point of a building or structure. 
Setback, side. The distance from the side property lines or side lot lines to the nearest point of a building or structure. 
Single-family attached dwelling. A type of residential development which includes a dwelling unit on a subdivided lot usually individually owned, though attached by a common party wall to another dwelling unit on an adjoining lot. 
Specialty shops. Any business that sells, at retail, merchandise that has been previously used or is sold on consignment and has been previously used that sells junk, sells new or reproduction goods which have been made to resemble antiques that make up at least 25 percent of the business's inventory, operates a flea market or bazaar all as defined in this article, or does not sell antiques as defined in this article. 
Street. A public way for vehicular traffic which affords primary means of access to abutting property. 
Street centerline. A line surveyed at the direction of the Board of Commissioners or lawful designee and designated as an official street centerline, or in the absence of such line, a line drawn parallel to and midway between the right-of-way lines of any mapped street. 
Story. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement shall be counted as a story for height measurement if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is more than five feet. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for height measurement. 
Story, half. A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor of that story. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to, the following: site-built buildings, industrialized buildings, modular homes, manufactured homes, mobile homes, swimming pools, accessory buildings and fallout shelters. The term "structure" as defined herein shall not include fences, signs or billboards. 
Telecommunications facility. See definition of Personal wireless service facility ("PWSF"). 
Tower. A structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment. The term "tower" as defined herein does not include telecommunications towers or facilities or personal wireless service facilities. 
Use, accessory. A use subordinate in nature, extent or purpose to the principal use of a building or lot, and customarily incidental thereto. 
Use, conditional. A use of a building or lot that is permitted only if and when the planning commission, and board of commissioners specifically approve that use, and all plans, specifications, written conditions or written restrictions are complied with on a continuing basis. 
Used car lot. Any lot or tract used for the storage, display or sale of used automobiles, trucks or other motorized vehicular equipment, including the sales and maintenance buildings incidental thereto. 
Use, nonconforming. Any lawful use of a building or lot which does not comply with all of the regulations of this chapter governing the use at that particular location. 
Use, principal. The main use of a building or lot. 
Variety shops. Any business that sells, at retail, new merchandise except that such a business may have up to 25 percent used merchandise other than antiques, as defined in this chapter, as part of the business's inventory. 
Yard. An unoccupied space, open to the sky, on the same lot with a building. 
Yard, front. A yard measured at right angles from the front lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the full width of the lot. 
Yard, rear. A yard measured at right angles from a rear lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the full width of the lot. 
Yard, side. A yard measured at right angles from a side lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Amend. of 6-28-2016; Ord. of 4-25-2017) 
ARTICLE III. - ESTABLISHMENTS OF DISTRICTS AND PROVISIONS FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 

Sec. 59-300. - Land use districts. 
For the purpose of these regulations, Stephens County is divided into the land use districts below: 

 
Sec. 59-301. - Official zoning map. 
The location and boundaries of the above listed districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of Stephens County". Said map, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. 
The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the county commission chairman, attested by the county clerk and bear the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Article III of the Land Use Regulations, Stephens County Georgia," together with the date of the adoption of these regulations. 
If in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and the applicable laws of the State of Georgia, changes are made in boundaries or other matters portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the board of commissioners with appropriate entry or indication of such amendment on the official zoning map. No amendment to these regulations that involves matters portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made. 
No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map or matters shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in these regulations. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person shall be considered a violation of these regulations. 
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map, which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map shall be located in the office of the county clerk and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the county. 
Sec. 59-302. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
(a)  All boundary lines shall be determined by the official zoning map. 
(b)  In the case where exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the planning director, shall upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
Sec. 59-303. - Designation after street abandonment. 
Where a public street, alley or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned public street, alley or right-of-way. 
Sec. 59-304. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AG—AGRICULTURE GENERAL/RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 59-400. - Purpose and intent. 
Located within Stephens County are several areas which contain soils and conditions highly suitable for the cultivation of agricultural crops and livestock production. 
The intent of the general agriculture district is to: 
(1)  Encourage and protect a valuable natural resource, farm land, whose protection is in the public interest. 
(2)  Encourage the general character of openness better suited to agricultural usage. 
(3)  Discourage the residential subdivision of land which is inappropriate for this district. 
(4)  To permit home occupations or home-based businesses which are related to, and/or compatible with, agricultural operations. 
(5)  To encourage general farming areas where some development of low-density estate single-family residential land uses has occurred or is occurring. 
(6)  To provide a compatible buffer between AG/AI agriculture districts and RS low-density residential development. 
(7)  To encourage the use of farms, family estates, pastures and woodlands. 
(8)  To provide the landowner an opportunity to engage in limited hobby-type agricultural activities for personal use, such as growing fresh fruits, flowers or vegetables, which may be sold to the public including allowing the landowner to sell a limited number of animals raised on the farm. 
(9)  To encourage and support the maintenance of the rural character of the county, which requires extremely low-density restrictions. 
Sec. 59-401. - Minimum acreage. 
A minimum of a one acre parcel is required for the maintenance of this district. 
Sec. 59-402. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Agricultural uses, including field crops, fruits, vegetables, nuts, forestry products, commercial greenhouses, plant nurseries, livestock and poultry grazing, feed lots, turkey ranges and livestock and poultry operations provided they meet all district minimum requirements, all minimum requirements of these regulations and subject to the limitations set forth in subparagraph (f) of this section. 
(b)  Farm structures, including barns, grain storage facilities, implement sheds and other structures accessory to agricultural uses. 
(c)  Residences, single family detached, including manufactured homes and modular homes, provided that one such residence is permitted per lot and provided further that such dwelling is farm related subordinate to the principal use of agriculture. 
(d)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate of one or more permitted principal uses. 
(e)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to one or more permitted principal uses. 
(f)  Agricultural uses including gardens and the raising of farm animals for the property owner's use and limited selling. 
(Ord. of 4-25-2017) 
Sec. 59-403. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Home occupations and home-based businesses which: (1) are related to and/or compatible with agricultural uses and (2) meet the requirements of these regulations. 
(b)  Public structures and uses. 
(c)  Secondary residences provided that such dwelling is farm-related and subordinate to the principal use of the property, and that the placement of such residence meets all criteria of these regulations and the Stephens County Subdivision Regulations. 
(d)  Agriculture-related recreation developments, including but not limited to private or public fishing lakes and horse-backing riding, provided a comprehensive plan for the area is submitted. 
(e)  Churches, temples, synagogues, places of worship and cemeteries. 
(f)  Golf courses. 
(g)  Home-based businesses which: (1) are related to and/or compatible with agricultural uses and (2) meet the requirements of these regulations. 
(h)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, tennis courts, swimming pools and other small-scale recreational facilities operated on a non-profit basis. 
(i)  Public, parochial and private schools; and related non-profit educational institutions. 
(j)  Reserved. 
(k)  Reserved. 
(Amend. of 6-28-2016) 
_____
Sec. 59-404. - District requirements. 

 
_____
Sec. 59-405. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AI—AGRICULTURE INTENSIVE DISTRICT 

Sec. 59-500. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent of the agriculture intensive district to establish a means by which individuals and family-farm corporations involved in intensive, large-scale, farming operations can be provided protection. Food crop, fiber crop, poultry and livestock farms are a major component of the agricultural economic base in Stephens County and they are worthy of special protection. The use of land in this district may result in odors, noise, dust or other effects that may not be compatible with residential, commercial and industrial uses. 
It is also the intent of this district to permit home business uses, which are related to, and/or compatible with, agricultural operations. 
Sec. 59-501. - Permitted uses. 
All permitted uses in the AG district are also permitted in the AI district. 
Sec. 59-502. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Home occupations and home-based businesses which: (1) are related to and/or compatible with agricultural uses and (2) meet the requirements of the regulations. 
(b)  Secondary residences provided that such dwelling is farm-related and subordinate to the principal use of the property, and that the placement of such residence meets all criteria of these regulations and the Stephens County Subdivision Regulations. 
(c)  Churches, temples, synagogues, places of worship and cemeteries. 
(d)  Public structures and uses. 
(e)  Golf courses. 
(f)  Livestock and poultry operations provided they meet all district minimum requirements. 
_____
Sec. 59-503. - District requirements. 

 
(Amend. of 6-28-2016; Ord. of 4-25-2017) 
_____
Sec. 59-504. - Special district requirements and protection. 
Agricultural districts include uses of land primarily for active farming operations resulting in odors, noise, dust and other effects, which are not usually compatible with adjacent single family, multi-family and some commercial developments. 
Future abutting development in non-agricultural land use districts shall be provided with a "Notice of Adjacency" affidavit: (1) at the time a rezoning application to a district other than an agricultural district; (2) prior to application for a building or occupancy permit for property adjacent to an AI district. 
Prior to administrative action on either the land use rezoning or the issuance of a building occupancy permit, the applicant shall be required to sign a waiver form, prepared by the planning director, which states that the applicant understands that an agricultural operation is adjacent to their proposed use, and that this operation will produce odors, noise, dust and other effects which may not be compatible with the applicant's development. Nevertheless, understanding the effects of the adjacent AI district use, the applicant agrees by signing the form to waive any objection to those effects and understands that the proposed district rezoning and/or proposed building permits are issued based upon their agreement not to bring any action against local governments and adjoining landowners whose property is located in an AI district, by asserting that the adjacent uses in the AI district constitute a nuisance. 
Following the execution of a "Notice of Adjacency" agreement, said agreement shall be component of the deed of the adjacent property and shall be honored as property ownership is transferred or until the use in the AI district is no longer in existence. Any such notice or acknowledgement provided to or executed by a landowner adjoining a tract in an AI district shall be a public record. 
In order for an existing poultry or livestock operation to receive the "Notice of Adjacency" protection in the agriculture intensive (AI) district, it must first have qualified for the preferential agriculture assessment (or the conservation easement assessment) in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.1). 
Sec. 59-505. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AB—AGRICULTURE BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 59-700. - Purpose and intent. 
The agriculture business district is intended to provide areas solely for small-scale business uses that are of a rural nature and are related to meeting the needs of a rural and agricultural community. These types of establishments are usually located at rural crossroads and on collector roads rather than major arterial roads. 
Sec. 59-701. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Retail gas sales. 
(b)  A general store, convenience-type. 
(c)  Small feed stores, hardware stores and nurseries. 
(d)  Animal hospitals or veterinarian clinics. 
Sec. 59-702. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Campgrounds and commercial fishing ponds. 
(b)  Public uses. 
_____
Sec. 59-703. - Building requirements. 
The minimum area, yard, height and building requirements of the rural business district shall be as follows: 

 
_____
Sec. 59-704. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RS—RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT 

Sec. 59-800. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent of the residential single-family district to provide suitable areas where the development of residential subdivisions has occurred or is occurring. These areas are intended to establish and preserve quiet, stable and affordable single-family neighborhoods at medium-densities, free from other land uses, except those which are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such district. 
It is also the intent of this district to recognize the need for conservation and open space as densities increase and to require that open spaces be set aside for the benefit of the community, the developer and all future generations who live in this district. 
To support conservation designs and encourage open spaces, this district is designed to: 
(1)  Retain and protect open space areas within residential developments; 
(2)  Promote new development, which is compatible with existing uses, architecture, landscapes and community character; 
(3)  Provide standards reflecting the varying circumstances and interest of land owners and the individual characteristics of their properties; 
(4)  Preserve unique and sensitive landscapes and site features by locating new dwelling sites in areas removed from such features; 
(5)  Protect scenic vistas from encroachment by development; 
(6)  Provide an opportunity for flexible lot designs and building arrangements not afforded to with lot-by-lot development, allowing for buildings and improvements to be sited as a response to site conditions, with the locations of lot lines reflecting land management decisions; 
(7)  Provide for a more varied, innovative and efficient development pattern; 
(8)  Provide a means to attain the objectives of the Stephens County Comprehensive Plan providing for orderly growth, enhancement of natural resources and preservation of rural characteristics. 
Sec. 59-801. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Residences, single-family detached, including manufactured homes and modular homes, provided that only one such residence is permitted per lot. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to one or more permitted principal uses. 
Sec. 59-802. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Home occupations and home-based businesses meeting these regulations requirements. 
(b)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, tennis courts, swimming pools and other small-scale recreational facilities operated on a non-profit basis. 
(c)  Public structures and uses. 
(d)  Public, parochial, private schools, and related educational institutions not offered for profit. 
(e)  Churches, temples, synagogues, places of worship and cemeteries. 
(Amend. of 6-28-2016) 
_____
Sec. 59-803. - District requirements. 

 
_____
Sec. 59-804. - Buffer, landscaping and open space requirements. 
All single-family residential developments shall conform to the above open space regulations. These regulations are designed to promote the health, safety, order, aesthetics and general welfare by: (1) protecting against incompatible uses of land, (2) controlling problems of flooding, soil erosion and air pollution, (3) providing for a more attractive environment, (4) assuring adequate open space and (5) reducing noise, night lighting, glare, odor, objectionable view, loss of privacy and other adverse impacts and nuisances through the use of buffers, landscaping and open space. 
Sec. 59-805. - Open space requirements for a residential single-family district. 
(a)  Open space requirement: Not less than 20 percent of the development shall be maintained as permanent open space. Such open space may include common areas, buffers, landscaped yards, water areas and any natural areas. Such open space shall be computed beginning five feet outside the building walls. Parking and other paved surfaces, except patios and courtyards, shall not count toward this open space requirement. Any required open space may be left under individual ownership if it falls on an individual lot, but a property owners' association shall maintain any common area not dedicated to the Stephens County Commission. Restrictive covenants, declarations and restrictions running with the land shall provide for access across and permanent maintenance and protection of the common space within these requirements. 
(b)  The minimum amount of permanent open space shall comprise not less than 20 percent of the gross tract area. 
(c)  Natural areas with development limitations such as floodplains, steep slopes (greater than 25 percent), wetlands, lakes, ponds and streams shall not constitute more than one-half of the total open space. 
(d)  Open space shall include irreplaceable natural features of the site such as streams, lakes, ponds, significant stands of trees, individual trees of significant size, rock-out croppings, ridges and peaks that are themselves, scenic features or from which scenic views are available. 
(e)  Golf courses shall not occupy any of the open space. 
(f)  The overall maximum density for residential developments using open spaces is as follows: 
(1)  One acre per dwelling unit for developments connecting to public utilities that provide public water and public wastewater collection and treatment (sewage). 
(2)  One acre per dwelling unit for developments connecting only to a public water system and providing individual septic tank systems. 
(3)  One acre per dwelling unit for developments providing individual wells and septic tanks. 
In some cases, open space may be used for placement of individual septic tanks and drainfield lines where approved at the discretion of the Stephens County Health Department. 
(g)  Ownership of open space in any subdivision may be owned by a homeowner's association, a land trust, another conservation organization recognized by the county and/or remain in private ownership. 
(h)  The open space land and associated facilities may be held in common ownership by a homeowner's association. The association shall be formed and operated under the following provisions: 
(1)  The developer shall provide a description of the association including its by-laws and methods for maintaining the open space. 
(2)  The association shall be organized by the developer and operating with financial subsidization by the developer, before the sale of any lots within the development. 
(3)  Membership in the association is mandatory for all home purchasers therein and their successors. 
(4)  The conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the developer to homeowners shall be identified. 
(5)  The association shall be responsible for maintenance and insurance on common open space land, enforceable by liens placed by the homeowner's association. 
(6)  Maintenance obligations may be enforced by the county which may place liens to recover costs. 
(7)  Any governmental body with jurisdiction in the area where the development is located may place liens on the owners of the open space to collect unpaid taxes. 
(8)  The members of the association shall share equitably the cost of maintaining such open space. 
(9)  Shares shall be defined within the association by-laws. 
(10)  Association dues shall be structured to provide for annual maintenance costs and property taxes. 
(11)  Prior to the (in the event of) transfer of ownership of open space, the county and all property owners within the development shall be notified. 
(12)  Open space land may be leased to qualified persons or corporations for maintenance or operation with this agreement: 
a.  The residents of the development shall have access at all time to the open space land (except that access to the land that is actively farmed shall be limited to times of the year when the fields are fallow); 
b.  The open space land shall be maintained for the purposes set forth in this chapter; and 
c.  The operation of the open space shall be for the benefit of the residents. 
(13)  At the time of preliminary plan submission, the applicant shall provide a draft of the homeowner's association documentation with sufficient detail to demonstrate feasible compliance with this section. 
Complete homeowner's association documentation demonstrating compliance with the provisions herein shall be filed with the final subdivision and land development plans. 
(i)  The county may, but shall not be required to, accept easements for public use of any portion or portions of open space. 
(j)  Open space may be entered or crossed by utility easements where such easements will involve access by persons or vehicles for periodic maintenance or repair. 
(k)  Open space shall be interconnected with open space areas on abutting parcels wherever possible. Provision for pedestrian pathways for general public use to create lined systems within the county shall be encouraged. 
(l)  Open space shall not be used for the disposal or location of debris from any clearing and construction taking place within the development. 
Sec. 59-806. - Exemption from open space requirements. 
An individual dwelling unit being constructed on a single, individual lot, not in a multi-lot residential development, is exempt from the open space requirements if the individual dwelling unit being constructed meets the same density requirements. 
Sec. 59-807. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RM—RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT 

Sec. 59-900. - Purpose and intent. 
The residential multi-family district is intended to provide suitable areas for the development of a variety of multi-family dwelling types at medium to high densities (up to eight units per acre).The intent of this district is to (1) locate in areas of close proximity to where public water and public sanitary sewer treatment services are available or (2) where alternate systems are approved by (a) the appropriate state agencies and (b) the Stephens County Board of Commissioners. 
Sec. 59-901. - Permitted uses. 
Apartments, condominiums, duplexes, townhouses and manufactured home parks. 
Sec. 59-902. - Development regulations. 
All apartments, condominiums, duplexes, townhouses and manufactured home park developments shall conform to the following regulations: 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 59-903. - Site plan approval required. 
All multi-family developments, including apartments, condominiums, duplexes, townhouses and manufactured home parks shall require site plan approval by the planning commission in accordance with all procedures and requirements established by the county and this chapter. 
Sec. 59-904. - Site plan requirements. 
All site plans required by this section shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
(1)  Title of the proposed development and the name, address and telephone number of the property owner. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the architect, engineer or other designer of the proposed development. 
(3)  Scale, date, north arrow and general location map showing relationship of the site to streets or natural landmarks. 
(4)  Boundaries of the subject property, all existing and proposed, streets, including right-of-way and street pavement widths; buildings; water courses; parking and loading areas, and other physical characteristics of the property and proposed development. 
(5)  Building setbacks, buffers and landscape strips. 
(6)  A study of traffic impacts and proposed improvements. 
Sec. 59-905. - Parking. 
Off-street, paved parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. No off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian routes from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. Parking shall be provided at a rate of two parking spaces for each housing unit in the development. 
Sec. 59-906. - Service buildings. 
(a)  Subordinate accessory structures are hereby permitted for maintenance, storage and other incidental uses supporting the primary use of the property. These types of facilities shall be centrally grouped and conveniently located for complex patrons. All service facilities shall be built and maintained by the complex owner(s) in compliance with all building codes. 
(b)  Community service facilities and related accessory structures are subject to site plan approval for the convenience of the complex patrons. Such structures may include, but are not limited to the following: facility management offices, community laundry facilities and indoor community recreation uses. 
(c)  All multi-family developments shall provide adequate covered school bus stop shelters accessible to an approved school bus route. 
Sec. 59-907. - Reserved. 
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENTS 
Sec. 59-908. - Residential condominium development regulations. 
(a)  Regulations. All condominium developments shall meet all applicable state laws, including the Georgia Condominium Act. 
(b)  By-laws. Proof of the existence of all condominium bylaws shall be submitted to the planning commission and shall comply with the requirements of the Georgia Condominium Act or applicable Georgia State Law. 
(c)  Minimum lot size. Each development for condominiums shall have a minimum lot size of ten acres. 
(d)  Width and frontage. The minimum lot width and frontage for each development shall be 100 feet. Each development shall have frontage on a public street of at least 35 feet. 
(e)  Setbacks. All condominium developments shall have side setbacks minimum of 20 feet and a minimum rear setback of 50 feet. 
(f)  Building height. No condominium building or structure shall exceed the height of 35 feet. 
(g)  Maximum units per building. No more than four condominiums shall be permitted to form any one, single building. 
(h)  Minimum heated floor area. All units have minimum heated floor area of 800 feet. 
(i)  Maximum density. All condominium development shall not exceed a density of eight units per acre. 
(j)  Parking. Insofar as practicable, off-street parking facilities shall be in grouped bays, either adjacent to street or in the interior blocks. No off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. 
APARTMENT/DUPLEX DEVELOPMENTS 
Sec. 59-909. - Apartment and duplex regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot size. Each lot for apartment or duplex developments shall have a minimum lot area of ten acres. 
(b)  Width and frontage. The minimum lot width and frontage for each development shall be 100 feet. Each development shall have frontage on a public street of at least 35 feet. 
(c)  Structure separations. Apartment buildings shall be constructed with a separation of least 20 feet if one or more buildings contain two or more stories. Duplex buildings shall be constructed with a separation of at least 20 feet if more than one or more buildings are constructed. 
(d)  Setbacks. All apartment and duplex developments shall have side setback minimums of 20 feet and a minimum rear setback of 50 feet. 
(e)  Building height. No apartment building or structure shall exceed the height of 35 feet. 
(f)  Minimum heated floor area. All units shall have a minimum heated floor area of 800 square feet. 
(g)  Maximum density. All apartment and duplex developments shall not exceed a density of eight units per acre. 
(h)  Parking. Insofar as practicable, off-street parking facilities shall be in grouped bays, either adjacent to street or in the interior of blocks. No off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian routes from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. 
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK  DEVELOPMENTS 
Sec. 59-910. - Manufactured home park development regulations. 
Development for manufactured home parks in the RM district shall conform to the following regulations. 
Sec. 59-911. - Location and frontage. 
All interior streets within the park shall be graded, drained, based and paved in accordance with the county's requirements for an accepted right-of-way. If a proposed street is to be greater in length than 300 feet, a plan profile for the road system shall be submitted along with the site plan. The board of commissioners shall approve all road construction specifications at the time the final plat is submitted. 
Sec. 59-912. - Lot area and width. 
A manufactured home district development shall have minimum area of five contiguous acres. 
Sec. 59-913. - Density. 
The maximum density of a manufactured home district development is up to three units per acre provided they meet all other requirements of this article. This density does not include acreage contained in: (1) the open space, (2) the perimeter screening or (3) the recreation and other community facilities such as laundry, office, service and storage. 
Sec. 59-914. - Perimeter setback required. 
No manufactured home or other building or structure shall be located closer than 50 feet to any manufactured home perimeter property boundary. 
Sec. 59-915. - Perimeter screening required. 
A landscaped screen consisting of dense evergreen trees and/or shrubs and having a minimum width of ten feet along all property lines shall be required. All perimeter screening must be maintained by park owners. 
Sec. 59-916. - Service buildings. 
All manufactured home park developments shall provide a covered school bus stop shelter accessible to a designated school bus route. 
Sec. 59-917. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  In the event that a swimming pool is developed or planned as part of the manufactured home park, this facility shall be enclosed by a chain link, masonry or wood fence, not less than six feet high. 
(b)  No individual lot in any park may be sold or control of that lot transferred with the intent or effect of a sale unless that lot and the park shall meet all requirements of chapter 66 of the Code of Stephens County, Georgia. 
(c)  Junk vehicles shall not be allowed to be stored or placed at any location within a manufactured home park. This does not include vehicles that are receiving temporary maintenance and/or repair. This shall be enforced by the owner(s) of the manufactured home park. 
(d)  Any covenants required by the owner(s) of all manufactured home parks shall be submitted with the site plan. 
Sec. 59-918. - Setbacks. 
No manufactured home within the park shall be located closer than ten feet to any exterior boundary line, and the front setback for each manufactured home shall be at least 30 feet from the front lot line. 
Sec. 59-919. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CC—COMMERCIAL COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 59-1000. - Purpose and intent. 
The community commercial district is intended to provide neighborhoods with limited, small-scale commercial business of a convenience nature that serves nearby residential communities. 
Sec. 59-1001. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Small retail trade establishments. 
(b)  Restaurants, but not including drive-in or drive-through facilities. Unenclosed seating areas are permitted. 
(c)  Finance, insurance and real estate establishments. 
(d)  Dry cleaning, shoe repair and other similar service establishments. 
(e)  Professional offices. 
(f)  Museums, galleries and instructional studios. 
(g)  Small food catering establishments. 
(h)  Day care and personal care facilities. 
(i)  Business supply and copying centers, not exceeding 2,500 square feet. 
(j)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to permitted principal uses and structures. 
(k)  Convenience stores without gasoline, diesel or kerosene pumps. 
(l)  Small retail, service and office establishments that do not exceed 20,000 square feet in size. 
Sec. 59-1002. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Repair shops (excluding automotive, mechanical, etc.). 
(b)  Convenience stores with gasoline, diesel or kerosene pumps. 
(c)  Outdoor storage facilities. 
Sec. 59-1003. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  Outdoor sales facilities. 
(b)  Automotive and mechanical. 
(c)  Compost production facilities. 
(d)  Waste reclamation or recycling. 
(e)  Any facility that would produce noxious odors. 
Sec. 59-1004. - Building requirements. 
The minimum area, yard, height and building requirements for the community commercial district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: 1.5 acre (65,340 square feet) or greater as may be required by the Health Department, regarding water supply and sewage disposal. 
(2)  Building setbacks—Minimum: 

 
Where the commercial community business district abuts a residential district, an additional 30-foot setback for a landscaped evergreen vegetative buffer shall be required. 
(3)  Building height—Maximum: No structure shall be higher than 35 feet. 
(4)  Corner lot ingress/egress: 75 feet from intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
Sec. 59-1005. - Full disclosure. 
Commercial or industrial businesses shall, as part of their building permit or license application process, provide the planning director with full disclosure of all hazardous or dangerous products used in their commercial or industrial processes together with an explanation of safety measures, disposal measures and emergency medical and evacuation procedures. The planning director shall then forward this information to the emergency management director, the fire department and the sheriff's department. 
Sec. 59-1006. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - CG—COMMERCIAL GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 59-1100. - Purpose and intent. 
The commercial general business district is intended to provide adequate space for various types of general business uses that serve both residents and regional consumers, rather than a smaller neighbor. This includes the retailing of major goods and services on a medium to large scale, and other types of somewhat more intensive commercial activities, such as those establishments that rely on high traffic roadways. 
Sec. 59-1101. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the CC and AB district. 
(b)  Restaurants, including drive-in and drive-through facilities. 
(c)  Retail trade establishments, enclosed and unenclosed. 
(d)  Lodging facilities, hotels, motels and inns. 
(e)  Hospitals, medical clinics and related medical facilities involving professional care and treatment. 
(f)  Institutional uses such as colleges, universities and technical training facilities. 
(g)  Financial institutions with drive-through facilities. 
(h)  Civic auditoriums, assembly halls, amphitheaters and stadiums. 
(i)  Office support, supply and copying establishments. 
(j)  Full-service gas stations and convenience stores. 
(k)  Manufactured home sales and services. 
(l)  Radio and television studios and stations (associated towers must meet requirements of PWSF ordinance (chapter 75 of the Code of Stephens County, Georgia) and/or tower ordinance (chapter 74 of the Code of Stephens County, Georgia). 
(m)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to permitted principal use. 
(n)  Accessory commercial recreational facilities, including health clubs and spas, but not including such businesses as firearm shooting ranges and racetracks. 
(o)  Home and office appliances—Sales, service, rental and repair. 
(p)  Road and home construction. 
(Amend. of 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 59-1102. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Pawn shops. 
(b)  Flea markets. 
(c)  Pet kennels and grooming establishments. 
(d)  Recycling pick-up centers. 
(e)  Truck stops and truck terminals. 
(f)  Small travel terminals. 
(g)  Small printing establishments. 
(h)  Indoor shooting ranges. 
(i)  Churches and cemeteries. 
(j)  Public and private schools. 
(k)  Public uses. 
(l)  Automotive services, sales and repair. 
Sec. 59-1103. - Building requirements. 
The minimum area, yard, height and building requirements for the general business commercial district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot size—Minimum: Minimum lot size shall be 1.5 acres or greater. 
(2)  Building setbacks—Minimum: 

 
Where the commercial community business district abuts a residential district, an additional 30-foot setback for a landscaped evergreen vegetative buffer shall be required. 
(3)  Building height—Maximum: 35 feet. 
(4)  Corner lot ingress/egress: 100 feet from intersection. 
(5)  Acceleration, deceleration and turn lanes as called for by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 59-1104. - Full disclosure. 
Commercial or industrial businesses shall, as part of their building permit or license application process, provide the planning director with full disclosure of all hazardous or dangerous products used in their commercial or industrial processes together with an explanation of safety measurers, disposal measures and emergency medical and evacuation procedures. The planning director shall then forward this information to the emergency management director, the fire department and the sheriff's department. 
Sec. 59-1105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - CI—COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 59-1200. - Purpose and intent. 
The commercial industrial district is established for the purpose of reserving certain areas, with adequate water and sewerage facilities and access to major arterial highways, for industrial operations. This district is not to be placed in close proximity to residential and other districts that may be damaged by the objectionable circumstances such as: the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, radiation, large vehicles, heavy traffic, create fire or explosion hazards or have other objectionable conditions. Certain industries having an open storage characteristic where goods or materials are stored in an open or transportable container, or which are most appropriately located within an industrial area, are also included within this district. 
Sec. 59-1201. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Permanent sawmills, lumber and wood products processing or storage, pulpwood yards. 
(b)  Textile manufacturing, processing, fabrication, assembly. 
(c)  Metals, cement, asphalt, concrete, plastics or wood products manufacturer, fabrication, production or building materials. 
(d)  Truck and cargo transfer terminals, bus and truck garages. 
(e)  Wholesale building supply and material storage or sales and warehousing, including mini-storage and mini-warehousing facilities. 
(f)  Bottling works and ice manufacturing plants. 
(g)  Recycling facilities which recycle non-waste related, non-hazardous materials and materials which will not produce noxious odors. 
(h)  Baking and other food processing plants. 
(i)  Building material or other outdoor storage yards, except junkyards, provided that the goods or building materials stored do not create or cause noxious odors. 
Sec. 59-1202. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Any other industrial use that the planning commission or board of commissioners determines not to be dangerous, offensive, unhealthy, nor detrimental to the community that is not listed as prohibited activities or uses in Stephens County. 
(b)  Airports or airfields, after planning director review and county commission approval. 
(c)  Mining, dredging, sand or gravel removal operations and any other ancillary uses to a quarry, after planning commission determines not to be dangerous, offensive, unhealthy, nor detrimental to the community that is not listed as prohibited activities or uses in Stephens County. 
(d)  Storage of petroleum products, but only after the location of the premises has been approved by the EMA director and, further provided that residential homes shall not be located within 100 yards of the location. 
(e)  Public recreation facilities, such as racetracks and outdoor firing ranges. 
(f)  Public services uses subject to the review, approval and conditions of the planning commission. These uses include, but are not limited to: substations, transformers, telephone exchanges, pump houses, etc. 
(g)  Adult entertainment. 
(h)  Heavy machine and equipment sales, service, rental and repair. 
(i)  Transportation, communication and utility facilities. 
(j)  Waste recycling centers and composting production facilities and operations, if assurances and controls are in place to control any odors emanating from any such facility in addition to meeting the criteria for approval of a conditional use set forth in this chapter. An example of an additional assurance may include but not be limited to, an engineer's certification regarding the lack of odor. 
(Amend. of 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 59-1203. - Prohibited uses. 
Prohibited uses include, but are not limited to crematoriums. 
Sec. 59-1204. - Building requirements. 
The minimum area, yard, setback and building requirements in the CI district are as follows: 
(1)  Lot size—Minimum: The minimum lot size shall be determined by the setbacks called for in this article of these regulations. 
(2)  Building setbacks—Minimum: 

 
Rear and side setbacks when abutting a residential district, an additional 100 feet of landscaped evergreen vegetative buffer shall be required. Where the CI district abuts a residential district, a buffer shall be required as presented in section 59-1416 of these regulations. Additional requirements for access, curb cuts, deceleration and acceleration lanes, traffic signals, water, sewer, etc., will be determined and required by the planning commission on an individual site basis. 
(3)  Maximum building height. Buildings designed for human occupancy shall not be higher than 50 feet. Non-occupied buildings may be permitted if no hazard or other adverse effect is created for adjacent properties as determined by the planning commission after public notice and hearing. 
(4)  Additional requirements. The planning commission and board of commissioners reserve the right to set special requirements for certain industries which may require greater screening and buffer requirements, thereby creating greater lot or area requirements. 
(5)  Corner lot ingress/egress: 100 feet from intersection. 
(6)  Acceleration, deceleration and turn lanes, as called for by the planning commission. The planning commission shall consider recommendations by law enforcement and county fire services and may consult traffic studies and data to determine if such lanes are necessary to protect the safety of the public. 
(7)  Location with access to a major thoroughfare in the county. 
(Amend. of 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 59-1205. - Full disclosure. 
Commercial or industrial businesses shall, as part of their building permit or license application process, provide the planning director with full disclosure of all hazardous or dangerous products used in their commercial or industrial processes together with an explanation of safety measurers, disposal measures and emergency medical and evacuation procedures. The planning director shall then forward this information to the emergency management director, the fire department and the sheriff's department. 
Sec. 59-1206. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 59-1400. - Use occupancy and erection. 
No building, structure, land, open space or water shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure, land open space or water, unless in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 59-1401. - Use prohibited when not specified. 
Any use not specifically permitted in the district shall be prohibited in that district, subject to the procedures herein for conditional use and variance. Regardless of the uses listed in each district, the following uses are prohibited in any district: 
(1)  Construction and demolition (C&D) landfills. 
(2)  Hazardous waste landfills. 
(3)  Inert waste landfills. 
(4)  Municipal solid waste landfills. 
(5)  Medical waste landfills. 
(6)  Explosives manufacturing. 
(7)  Glue manufacturing. 
(8)  Fertilizer manufacturing. 
(9)  Paper mill. 
(10)  Pulp mill. 
(11)  Nuclear waste storage. 
(12)  Waste reclamation/recycling/composting facilities, including but not limited to solid waste, human waste, food waste, animal waste and by products, and septage except as provided herein. 
Sec. 59-1402. - Minimum requirements. 
Within each district, the regulations set forth shall be minimum requirements and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of building, structure or land. 
Sec. 59-1403. - Height limitations. 
If the regulations for each district created herein do not establish a maximum height then no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed or altered, except as otherwise specifically exempted in these regulations, to exceed the height of 35 feet; provided, however, that the board of commissioners may permit buildings and structure to exceed these height limitations upon approval of a conditional use or variance as specified in these regulations. The height limitation herein shall not apply to any district that provides for a maximum height in that district. 
The height limitations established herein shall not apply to chimneys, smoke stacks, church spires and steeples, dome, flag poles, public monuments, electricity transmission towers, utility poles and similar structures. 
(Amend. of 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 59-1404. - Every use must be on a lot of record. 
No building or structure shall be erected or use established unless upon a lot of record as defined by these regulations as otherwise provided herein. 
Sec. 59-1405. - One principal building on a lot of record. 
Only one principal building and its accessory building may hereafter be constructed on any one lot intended for use; provided, however, that more than one multiple dwelling, office, institutional, commercial or industrial building may be located upon a lot subject to setbacks and separation as provided in these regulations. 
Sec. 59-1406. - Separation between principal buildings. 
No principal building shall be located closer than 20 feet to another principal building. 
Sec. 59-1407. - Reduction in lot size prohibited. 
No lot shall be reduced, divided or changed in size so that lot width, size of yards, lot area per dwelling or any other requirement of these regulations is not maintained, unless said reduction is necessary to provide land which is acquired for a public purpose. 
Sec. 59-1408. - Street frontage requirement. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be constructed on a lot that does not abut for at least 30 feet on a public street. 
Sec. 59-1409. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only in side or rear yards, except as otherwise provided by these regulations. An accessory building is a building that is used for another purpose other than the purpose of the principal building. A principal building is a building or combination of buildings for chief importance or function on a lot. In general, the principal use is carried out. Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only if they meet the following: 
(1)  No accessory building shall be constructed on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal to which it is accessory. 
(2)  No more than three accessory buildings shall be permitted on a residential lot. 
(3)  Accessory buildings and uses shall be setback a minimum of five feet from any property line. 
(4)  Where an accessory building is structurally attached to the principal building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations applicable to the principal building. 
(5)  In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both streets. 
(6)  No accessory building on a residential district lot shall exceed a height of 20 feet. 
(7)  Detached buildings shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the principal building on a lot. 
(8)  In no instance, shall an accessory building exceed the gross ground floor area of the principal building measured by square footage. 
Sec. 59-1410. - Regulations for specific structures. 
The following specified structures shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Gasoline pumps: Gasoline pumps and pump islands shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet from public right-of-way and property lines. 
(2)  Canopies: Canopies and other attached or detached structures intended for cover shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from any public right-of-way and property line. 
(3)  Temporary offices in mobile or manufactured homes: Mobile or manufactured homes may be used for a temporary construction office for a licensed contractor in any district, upon issuance of a permit by the planning director. Said permit shall be temporary for a period of one year, but renewable as needed. 
(4)  Temporary structures: Temporary structures shall not be permitted in any district except when they are used in conjunction with construction work or pending completion of a permanent building. Such structure shall be used for a period not to exceed one year and shall be removed when construction of the permanent structure is completed. 
Sec. 59-1411. - Home occupations in a residential district. 
A home occupation as defined by these regulations shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the residential character of the building or lot. 
(2)  Only residents of the dwelling and one person not related by blood or marriage to the resident may be engaged in the home occupation. 
(3)  No storage of products or materials shall be visible from the adjoining street of adjacent properties. 
(4)  No external alterations of the dwelling solely for the accommodation of a home occupation are permitted. 
(5)  Any chemical, electrical or mechanical equipment that is normally a part of domestic or household equipment may be used for a home occupation. Commercial equipment that is required by a home occupation may be used providing that: (1) it does not pose a health, noise or safety hazard and (2) the commercial equipment being used is approved by the planning director for home occupations. 
(6)  An occupation tax certificate shall be obtained, if required by the county, prior to the operation of any home occupation. Said occupation tax certificate shall require approval by the planning director. 
(7)  The following uses are allowable as home occupations in a residential district: 
a.  Tutoring, consultation and instruction in music, dance, arts, crafts and similar subjects, limited to two students at one time; 
b.  Day care center serving six or less persons; 
c.  Professional services (i.e., attorneys, architects, accountants, realtors, insurance and travel agents); 
d.  Secretarial services and answering services; 
e.  Mail order and general offices not involving storage of equipment, materials or vehicles; 
f.  Phone solicitations; 
g.  Beauty salons and barber shops limited to two patrons at one time; 
h.  Food catering; 
i.  Any other home occupation that the planning commission and/or board of commissioners deem to otherwise meets the requirements in this section and any other requirements set forth in this ordinance and are harmonious with the residential character of the district 
(8)  The following uses are specifically prohibited as home occupations in any residential district: cabinet shops or metal cutting; doctors, dentists or other medical professionals; automotive repair or related work. 
The failure of a home occupation licensee to comply with any of the above conditions shall be reasonable grounds for revocation of a home occupation license. 
(Amend. of 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 59-1412. - Visibility at intersections. 
No fence, wall, sign, hedge or planting which obstruct the sight lines at elevation between two and 12 feet above any roadway shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines, or such lines extended, and a line connecting such right-of-way lines at points 25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. (Barbed wire or hog wire fences are exempt). 
Sec. 59-1413. - Personal wireless service facilities ("PWSF"). 
Telecommunications facilities are governed by chapter 75 of the Code of Stephens County, Georgia. Towers other than personal wireless service facilities ("PWSF")/telecommunications Facilities are governed by chapter 74 of the Code of Stephens County, Georgia. 
(Amend. of 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 59-1414. - Conditional uses not otherwise set forth in land use districts. 
In recognition that the conditional uses set forth in the land use districts herein are not exhaustive and that other similar and compatible uses may be appropriately considered for a conditional use in a particular district the planning commission and board of commissioners may consider other uses for conditional use approval if said use(s) meet the criteria for conditional uses in Section 1608, meet any other requirements imposed herein and otherwise are deemed compatible and harmonious with other permitted, conditional and existing uses in that land use district. 
(Amend. of 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 59-1415. - Subdivision plats must meet zoning requirements. 
No proposed plat of a subdivision, nor any plat of re-subdivision, shall hereafter be approved by the board of commissioners or by the planning commission unless the lots within such plat equal or exceed the minimum size and width requirements set forth in the various zoning districts in these regulations and unless such plat fully conforms with the statutes of the State of Georgia and regulations of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 59-1416. - Determination of buffer requirements between districts. 
If two adjoining properties are in dissimilar districts, and the property owner in the more intensive district is acquiring a building permit, then this property owner is required to provide the buffer, unless the buffer was pre-existing. The buffer width/depth between dissimilar districts shall increase as the use intensities between the districts increase. 
If two adjoining vacant properties are in dissimilar districts, and the property owner in the less intensive district is acquiring a building permit, then no buffer is required. 
Sec. 59-1417. - Fences, signs and billboards. 
For the purpose of this article and section, fences shall not be considered structures or buildings. Fences are excluded from the regulations provided herein. Also, for the purpose of this article and section, signs and billboards shall not be considered structures or buildings as defined herein. All regulations and requirements for signs and billboards are set forth in the Stephens County Sign Ordinance and are not governed by this land use regulation ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-25-2017) 
ARTICLE XV. - NONCONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 59-1500. - Purpose and intent. 
Within the districts established by these regulations, there exist certain incompatible lots, building, structures, signs and uses of land which were lawful before these regulations were adopted but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of these regulations or future amendments. 
It is the intention of this article to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed. It is further the intent of these regulations that nonconformities shall not be expanded or enlarged or extended upon beyond the existing lot. Further, nonconformities shall not be basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
Sec. 59-1501. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
In any district, while meeting the limitation imposed by other provisions of these regulations, a permitted structure may be erected on any single lot of record existing at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations, even though such lot fails to meet that district's requirement for area and width. Building setbacks and other requirements of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. 
Except for those lots described above, if two or more lots or combination of lot and portion of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of adoption or amendment of these regulations, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by these regulations, the lands involved shall be considered an undivided parcel for the purpose of these regulations. No portion of said parcel shall be used which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by these regulations and the Stephens County Health Department, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the applicable requirements. 
Sec. 59-1502. - Continuance of nonconforming use. 
The lawful use of any building, structure, sign or land existing at the time of enactment of these regulations may be continued, even though such a use does not conform with the provisions of these regulations, except that the use of a principal building, structure or land containing a nonconforming use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Re-established after discontinuance or abandonment for one year; 
(3)  Expanded, enlarged or extended beyond the existing lot, unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such use is located; 
(4)  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage unless such rebuilding, alteration or repairs completed within two years of such damage; 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building, structure or portion thereof, declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health, upon of such official; and 
(7)  Changes in ownership or tenancy of a nonconforming use are permitted. 
Sec. 59-1503. - Expansion of nonconforming buildings. 
A nonconforming building which contains a conforming use may be expanded, enlarged or extended, provided that any such additions meet the applicable yard and building setbacks, buffer and landscape strip requirements and all other regulations for the district in which it is located. This section shall not, however, be construed as to authorize the expansion of a nonconforming building for a use which is not permitted by the regulations for the district within such building is located. 
Sec. 59-1504. - Buildings under construction. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of these regulations. 
Sec. 59-1505. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - AMENDMENT, APPLICATION AND PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 59-1600. - Authority to amend. 
The board of commissioners may from time to time amend the number, shape, boundary or area of any district, or may amend any regulation pertaining to any district; or may amend any article or section of this chapter. The procedure for amending this chapter shall be as provided in this article. 
Sec. 59-1601. - Initiation of land use amendments. 
A petition to amend the text of these land use protection regulations or the official land use district map may be initiated by the board of commissioners, the planning commission or any person, firm, corporation or agency that owns property involved in a petition for amendment, subject to the provisions established herein. This shall also include the legal representative of the board of commissioners, the planning commission or any person, firm, corporation or agency that owns property involved in a petition for amendment. 
Sec. 59-1602. - Frequency of application. 
The board of commissioners or the planning commission may at any time file, in its own name, an application for amendment to the text of the zoning protection regulations or the official land use district map, except that if a zoning decision of the board of commissioners is for the rezoning of property and the amendment to the land use protection resolution and associated map to accomplish the redistricting is defeated by the board of commissioners, the same property may not again be considered for redistricting until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the redistricting by the board of commissioners. 
A property owner or subsequent property owner shall not initiate action for a map amendment, conditional use permit, certificate of appropriateness or variance affecting the same or any portion of property more often than once every six months from the date of any previous decision rendered by the board of commissioners; provided, however that a property owner may petition for alteration, modification or deletion of conditions of land use protection in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
A property owner or subsequent property owner shall not initiate action for a text amendment affecting the same or any portion of property more often than once every six months from the date of any previous decision rendered by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 59-1603. - Withdrawal of amendment application. 
Any petition for an amendment to these regulations, official land use district map, conditional use approval or variance may be withdrawn, at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such request, at any time prior to final action by the board of commissioners upon written notice to the planning director. Any required fees shall be forfeited. 
Sec. 59-1604. - Application requirements. 
Application materials specified in this section shall be required for the following petitions: 
(1)  Amendments to the official land use district map; 
(2)  Alterations or extensions of conditional use decision; 
(3)  Conditional use permits; and 
(4)  Applications for variances or appeals to the board of commissioners. 
Application materials shall include: 
(1)  An application form furnished by the planning director; and 
(2)  A legal description of the property to be considered in the application. The legal description shall be by metes and bounds unless an alternative legal description which clearly describes the property in question without ambiguity and without conflicting with the description of any other property, is determined to be acceptable by the planning director. Boundary surveys of the property should be submitted with the application whenever available; and 
(3)  A letter of intent which describes general characteristics of the proposed development, such as type and time frame of development, background information in support of such application and any other information deemed pertinent by the applicant. 
a.  For variance applications, the letter shall address the criteria specified in this chapter. 
b.  For land use district map amendment applications, the letter of intent shall address the standards specified in this chapter. 
c.  For conditional use permit applications, the letter of intent shall address the standards specified in section 59-1607 of this chapter. 
(4)  A site plan with all information specified in this chapter. Unless otherwise noted in the approval, the site plan submitted in support of an approved application shall be considered a part of the approval and must be followed. 
(5)  A fee for said application as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(6)  Applications which require action by the board of commissioners shall also require disclosure of any conflicts of interest as specified in O.C.G.A. [Tit. 36,] Ch. 67A, "Conflict of Interest in Land Use District Actions." 
Applicants shall submit three copies of any required site plans or development plans and letters of intent to the planning director for distribution to the applicable bodies and/or review agencies. The planning director may require more or less copies depending on the nature and extent of required review. 
Sec. 59-1605. - Site plan requirements. 
All site plans required by this article shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
(1)  General location map showing scale, date, north arrow and relationship of the site to streets or natural landmarks. 
(2)  Specific schematic map or plat showing (a) boundaries of the subject property (b) all existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way and street pavement widths; (c) buildings; (d) building setbacks, buffer, landscape strips and environmentally sensitive areas; (e) parking and loading areas and other physical characteristics of the property; and 
Each of these two maps must contain: 
(1)  Title of proposed project. 
(2)  Name, address and contact number of property owner. 
(3)  Name, address, contact number of architect, engineer or other designer. 
Sec. 59-1606. - Criteria to consider for map amendments. 
The applicant, staff, planning commission and board of commissioners should review an application for land use district map amendment with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  The existing uses and district designation of nearby property and whether the proposed land use will adversely affect the existing use or usability of nearby property. 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions. 
(3)  The extent to which the destruction of property values promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
(4)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
(5)  The physical suitability of the subject property for development as presently districted land under the proposed land use district. 
(6)  The length of time the property has been vacant, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property and whether there are pre-existing or changed conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the rezoning request. 
(7)  The zoning history of the subject property. 
(8)  The extent to which the proposed zoning will result in a use which will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, parks or other public facilities. 
(9)  Whether the land use proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan or other adopted plans. 
The staff, planning commission and board of commissioners, may consider other factors deemed relevant before formulating recommendations and taking action on a particular request. 
Sec. 59-1607. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Land use districts established herein permit certain uses which are allowable therein provided they meet specified conditions, as set forth therein and here. No such use shall be permitted until a conditional use permit has been issued authorizing such use. The procedures for granting such permits shall be the same as for amendments to the zoning ordinance or zoning map. 
(b)  Those conditions specified in this chapter shall be considered to be the minimum standards which must be met before the conditional use application may be considered by the planning commission for review and recommendation and the board of commissioners for decision. In deciding upon whether or not a conditional use meets the minimum standards and promotes the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the county, the board of commissioners shall utilize the applicable standards of review set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  If the board of commissioners, after applying the evidence to the standards of review and conditions, have been convinced that the allowance of the conditional use will promote the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the county, a conditional use permit may be granted, subject to those provisions that may be imposed by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 59-1608. - Criteria to consider for conditional uses. 
The applicant, staff, planning commission and board of commissioners should review applications for conditional uses with regard to the following criteria, in addition to other standards and criteria set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  Off-street parking and loading facilities are adequate in terms of location, amount and design to serve the use. 
(2)  The number, size and type of signs proposed are compatible with the surrounding area. 
(3)  The amount and location of open space and the provisions of screening is such that buffering of incompatible uses is achieved. 
(4)  Ingress and egress to the property is suitable and safe, and the effects of the proposed activity on traffic flow along adjoining streets is not adverse. 
(5)  The location and intensity of outdoor lighting is such that it does not cast light on adjacent or neighboring properties. 
(6)  Hours and manner of operation of the proposed are not inconsistent with adjacent and nearby uses. 
(7)  Public facilities and utilities are capable of adequately serving the proposed use. 
(8)  The proposed use will not have a significant adverse effect on the level of property values or the general character of adjacent land uses or the general area. 
(9)  The physical conditions of the site, including size, shape, topography and drainage, are suitable for the proposed development. 
(10)  The proposed use is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan of Stephens County and this chapter. The staff, planning commission and board of commissioners may consider other factors deemed relevant before formulating recommendations and taking action on a particular conditional use application. 
Sec. 59-1609. - Public notice and public hearing required. 
This section shall apply to all applications for amendments to (1) the text of the land use protection regulations, (2) amendments to the official zoning district map, (3) petitions for variances and appeals to the board of commissioners, (4) requests for conditional use approval, (5) requests for alteration or extension of conditional redistricting. 
Upon receipt of a completed application, fees and other information required by this article, the planning director shall cause notice of such application to be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the community at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing before the board of commissioners. 
Said published notice shall include, as a minimum, the purpose, location, date and time of the public hearing, before the board of commissioners, the purpose, location, date and time of the public hearing before the planning commission, the location of the property being considered, the present land use classification of the property, and proposed action to be taken, as appropriate, such as proposed land use district, type of conditional use, variance to particular articles and sections, and so forth. The administrative office shall also cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on said property one or more sign(s), each of which shall contain the information specified for published notices. No public hearing shall take place until said sign(s) have been posted for at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
On any application, a public hearing shall be held first by the planning commission who reviews and makes their recommendation. The application along with their recommendation shall be forwarded to the board of commissioners for their review. 
Public hearings regarding variances and appeals shall be held by the board of zoning appeals and no action shall be taken on said applications until a public hearing has been held by the board of commissioners. 
Public hearings may be delayed, rescheduled or continued at another time and date, provided announcement is given at the time and place of the initially scheduled and advertised public hearing, and provided such date, time and location of the public hearing to be delayed, rescheduled or continued is given. If the applicant of a petition before the planning commission or board of commissioners fails to attend the public hearing, then the planning commission or board of commissioners may require re-advertisement of the subject petition at the expense of the applicant or may proceed on the application in the absence of the applicant or the applicant's legal representative. 
Sec. 59-1610. - Recommendation by planning director. 
The planning director may as appropriate customarily submit to the recommending and/or decision making body, prior to a scheduled public hearing, copies of the site plan and letter of intent along with a written recommendation for approval, disapproval, deferral, withdrawal or other recommendation. Said recommendation shall include reasons for said recommendations, considered within the context of the appropriate criteria as specified by this chapter. The recommendations of the planning director shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the board of commissioners. Copies of the planning director's recommendations shall be made available to the applicant and other interested parties upon completion and distribution to the appropriate bodies and at the public hearing. 
The duties of the planning director can be found in appendix 1 which is incorporated herein by reference. 
Note— Appendix 1 has been set out at the end of this chapter. 
Sec. 59-1611. - Planning commission recommendation. 
Prior to the public hearing held by the board of commissioners, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications for amendment to the text of the land use protection regulations, amendments to the official land use district map, conditional use permit applications, petitions for alteration or extension of conditional land uses requests for site plan for manufactured home parks in the residential district and variances. 
After completing its studies of the particular petition, the planning commission shall submit a recommended action in writing to the board of commissioners. The planning commission may submit any additional report it deems appropriate. The recommendations of the planning commission shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the board of commissioners. Copies of the planning commission's recommendations and reports shall be made available to the applicant and other interested parties upon completion and distribution to the board of commissioners and at the public hearing before the board of commissioners. 
The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its recommendations. The board of commissioners shall not take action on any of said applications, until it has received the recommendation of the planning commission within the specified time period. If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation within a 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed application. 
The bylaws of the planning commission can be found in appendix 2 which is incorporated herein by reference. 
Note— Appendix 2 has been set out at the end of this chapter. 
Sec. 59-1612. - Conduct of public hearings. 
All public hearings regarding applications considered by the board of commissioners and planning commission shall be held in accordance with any procedures adopted by said body and, in addition, shall be governed by the following procedure: 
(1)  The presiding officer shall open the hearing by stating the specific application being considered at the public hearing. At this time, the presiding officer may summarize the public hearing procedures. 
(2)  The planning director will present a description of the proposed application, any applicable background material, his/her recommendation regarding action on said application as appropriate, and the recommendations and reports of the planning commission as appropriate. 
(3)  Persons who support the application will be asked to comment first. The petitioner may, upon recognition and upon statement of name and address, present and explain his application. The petitioner, or his designated agent, shall be required to attend the public hearing unless written notice of hardship is received prior to such meeting. Failure of the petitioner or agent to attend the public hearing or meeting, except in cases of hardship, may be due cause for dismissal or denial of such application. A time limitation may be imposed at the discretion of the chairman. 
(4)  Persons who oppose the application will be asked to comment next. All interested parties after being recognized shall be afforded an opportunity to address the proposed application by standing before the appropriate body and identifying their name, address and interest, along with any comments on the proposed application. A time limitation may be imposed at the discretion of the chairman. 
(5)  The petitioner shall have an opportunity for summary remarks and rebuttal concerning the proposed application. 
(6)  Upon completion of any comments from interested parties and the petitioner, the public hearing shall be completed and adjourned. 
(7)  All public comments having been heard, the members of the body considering the application may discuss the request among themselves. During this discussion period, the members of the body may call on the petitioner or other interested parties to clarify points made previously or to answer questions. Said petitioner or interested parties may respond upon recognition. 
(8)  The public hearing procedures as adopted by the board of commissioners shall be made available to all parties and the public by requesting a copy from the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 59-1613. - Action by the appropriate body. 
After the public hearing has been completed, the board of commissioners may take action to approve or deny the request, refer the application back to the planning director or planning commission for further study or the board of commissioners may table or defer action until a later meeting. The board of commissioners, after the public hearing has been completed, may take action to approve or deny the request, or defer action until a later meeting. 
Sec. 59-1614. - Conditional approval permitted. 
The planning director and planning commission may recommend, and the board of commissioners may approve, applications for map amendments and conditional use permits, subject to certain conditions, provided that said conditions are set forth in the ordinance regarding approval of such application. Said conditions of approval may reduce the number or type of permitted uses, limit the nature or scope of permitted uses, restrict certain activities on the property, restrict the number and kind of improvements which can be made on the property, stipulate specific acts which the property owner will perform or any other conditions directly related to the physical use of land and which are designed to render the proposed land use or use compatible with nearby properties. Applications for alteration or extension of conditional districting shall be made in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
Sec. 59-1615. - Standards of review. 
(a)  In ruling on any matter herein in which the exercise of discretion is required, or in ruling upon any application for zoning map amendment, the planning director, planning commission or board of commissioners shall act in the best interest of the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the county. In doing so, they will consider one or more of the following factors, in addition to other factors and criteria set forth in this chapter, as they may be relevant to the application: 
(1)  The existing land use pattern; 
(2)  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
(3)  The population density pattern and possible increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and streets; 
(4)  The cost of the county and other governmental entities in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and other public safety measures; 
(5)  The possible impact on the environment, including, but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality and water quantity; 
(6)  Whether the proposed zoning map amendment will be a deterrent to the value or improvement of development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations; 
(7)  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing regulations; 
(8)  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area; 
(9)  The extent to which the proposed zoning map amendment is consistent with the land use plan; 
(10)  The possible effects of the proposed zoning map amendment on the character of a zoning district, a particular piece of property, neighborhood, a particular area, or the community; 
(11)  The relation that the proposed zoning map amendment bears to the purpose of the overall zoning scheme, with due consideration given to whether or not the proposed change will help carry out the purposes of these zoning regulations; 
(12)  Applications for a zoning map amendment which do not contain specific site plans carry a rebuttable presumption that such rezoning shall adversely affect the zoning scheme; 
(13)  The consideration of the preservation of the integrity of residential neighborhoods shall be considered to carry great weight; 
(14)  In those instances in which property fronts on a major thoroughfare and also adjoins an established residential neighborhood, the factor of preservation of the residential area shall be considered to carry great weight. 
(b)  After hearing evidence at the zoning hearing, the board of commissioners shall apply the evidence to the standards of review in making their decision. It will not be required that the board of commissioners consider every criteria contained in the standards of review. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that the proposed zoning map amendment promotes the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. 
(c)  If the board of commissioners determine from the evidence presented that the applicant has shown that the proposed zoning map amendment promotes the health, safety, morals and general welfare under the standards of review, then the application shall be granted, subject to those reasonable provisions as may be imposed by board of commissioners as provided in this chapter. Otherwise, such application shall be denied. 
(d)  In ruling on any petition in which the petitioner has brought a challenge of the existing zoning classification, the board of commissioners may impose upon such property any appropriate zoning classification, which might be consistent with the considerations contained in [subsection] (a) above. 
Sec. 59-1616. - Reversion of conditional districting and/or conditional use approval. 
If, after 24 months from the date the board of commissioners approves a map amendment or conditional use permit, action has not been taken to utilize the property, pursuant to such conditions, such as securing a development permit, the approval shall expire. The board of commissioners shall, by official action, cause the conditional use approval to expire or the land use district to revert to the district classification assigned to the property immediately prior to the approval. 
The planning director shall notify all property owners in question of pending action to rescind or revoke approvals, and such notice shall be by certified mail, dated at least 15 days prior to the date of the board of commissioner's scheduled meeting and directed to the owner's address as it appears on the tax rolls of the board of commissioners. 
Prior to notification by the planning director of any reversion of approval, the owner of the property in question may petition the board of commissioners for a modification or extension of land use or conditional use approval. Any such extension shall valid for 24 months from the date of approval. Only one such extension shall be permitted. 
Sec. 59-1617. - Approval required by appropriate body. 
Applications for amendments to the text of the land use protection regulations, land use district map amendments, alterations or extensions of conditional districting and conditional use permits require approval by the board of commissioners before development may be initiated or before such application is made effective. Applications for variances and appeals shall require approval by the board of commissioners before development may be initiated or before such application is made effective. 
Sec. 59-1618. - Procedure for approved land use protection resolution text amendments. 
The date of all approved amendments to the text of this chapter may be indicated on the title/cover page of the text, and any sections within this resolution text hereafter amended or repealed shall be so indicated by an asterisk (*, **, ***, etc.) and concurring footnote providing the date such amendment was approved. All such text amendments shall be incorporated within the text without unreasonable delay. 
Sec. 59-1619. - Criteria for requiring screens and buffers. 
Where noise, visual effects or distracting activity is determined by the planning commission to affect adjacent property or roadway, a vegetative screen, cement or masonry wall, or earth berm may be required by the planning commission to reduce the undesirable effects. In deciding if such screens and buffers are necessary the planning commission shall consider the following criteria and factors: 
(1)  The nature of the adjoining use; 
(2)  The size of the property being considered for screens and buffers; 
(3)  The existence of any light, noise, odor or other impact caused by the property being considered for screens and buffers; 
(4)  Screens and buffers can be required as a permit condition for a conditional use permit or variance application; and 
(5)  Any factors herein for consideration of conditional use permits. 
Sec. 59-1620. - Reserved. 
Sec. 59-1621. - Conflict with Georgia's Zoning Procedures Law. 
In the event that any provisions of this article conflict with the minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., as subsequently amended, known as the "Zoning Procedures Law," the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., as subsequently amended, known as the "Zoning Procedures Law" shall control. 
ARTICLE XVII. - ADMINISTRATION, INTERPRETATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 59-1700. - Administration and interpretation. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the planning director who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners and serve at its pleasure. The planning director shall be responsible for interpretation of the provisions of this chapter and for maintenance of the official zoning map. 
Sec. 59-1701. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the building official, planning director or lawful designee of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 59-1702. - Building permit required. 
No building, structure or sign, except as specifically exempted by this chapter, (1) shall be erected, moved, extended, enlarged or structurally altered, nor (2) shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced until the building official has issued a building permit for such work in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
All building permits shall be issued by the building official, under guidelines set forth by the planning director, the planning commission and the board of commissioners. The building official and planning director positions may be held by the same person. In cases of uncertainty regarding whether a proposed building or structure conforms to any provisions within this resolution, the building official shall consult with the planning director for his interpretation and ruling unless both positions are held by the same person. 
Building permits shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within 90 days of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months or more. 
Sec. 59-1703. - Reserved. 
Sec. 59-1704. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined (1) not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense, or (2) as determined by the court of proper jurisdiction. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 59-1705. - Remedies. 
In addition to any other penalty herein, if (1) any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or (2) any building structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this chapter, then appropriate actions will be taken to ensure compliance. 
The building official, planning director, lawful designee of the board of commissioners or any other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies and after due notice to the owner of the violation, (1) issue a citation for violation of this chapter requiring the presence of the violator in the court of proper jurisdiction, (2) institute an injunction or (3) take other appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
Sec. 59-1706. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS/APPEALS 

Sec. 59-1800. - Creation and duties. 
The board of commissioners is hereby established as the board of appeals. The board of commissioners shall perform all of its duties and exercise all of its powers in such a way that the purpose and intent of the zoning regulations shall be: (1) accomplished, (2) public health, safety and welfare secured, and (3) substantial justice done. 
Sec. 59-1801. - Membership, quorum and voting. 
The board of commissioners shall serve as the board of appeals. 
Sec. 59-1802. - Meeting and records. 
The board of commissioners shall meet at least one time each month at the call of the chairman unless there is no business to consider, or at such other times as the board of commissioners may determine, unless no business is scheduled, and all such meetings shall be open to the public. Meetings of the board of commissioners may be conducted on the same calendar day as a regular meeting of the board of commissioners. However, such meeting shall take place separate from such regular meeting and shall be adjourned or convened before or after such regular meeting. The board shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, or in lieu of such rules, the board shall follow "Robert's Rules of Order", latest edition or the procedural rules suggested by the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia. The board shall keep record of its findings, proceedings and official determinations, which shall be kept separate from minutes of any other meetings of the board of commissioners. These records shall: (1) show the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and (2) be public record for purchase by interested parties at a reasonable cost. 
Sec. 59-1803. - Subpoena power. 
The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witness, administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidences pertinent to the matter before it. On all appeals, applications and matters before the board shall inform in writing all parties involved in its decision. 
Sec. 59-1804. - Reserved. 
Sec. 59-1805. - Appeals. 
The board is empowered to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the planning director or building official, in the interpretation or enforcement of these land use protection regulations. 
The board is empowered to hear an appeal made by any person, firm or corporation, or by any officer, department, board or bureau affected by any decisions of the planning director, building official or other employee based on these land use protection regulations. 
Such appeal shall be taken within 60 days or as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the planning director notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted to the board of commissioners. 
The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give at least 15 days of public notice thereof and due notice to the parties in interest and shall render a decision on the appeal within a reasonable time. 
The hearing procedures shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 3 of the Code of Stephens County, Georgia. A copy of which can be obtained from the clerk of the board of commissioners or online at www.municode.com. 
Sec. 59-1806. - Determination of district boundaries. 
The board of commissioners shall have original jurisdiction to, upon application, determine the location of a particular district boundary in question as specified in section 59-302 of this chapter after the initial determination by the planning director if the planning director's decision is appealed. 
Sec. 59-1807. - Variances. 
The board of commissioners is hereby empowered to authorize upon application in specific cases such variance from the term of this resolution as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. This existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings or structures in the same land use district or of permitted or nonconforming uses in other districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship, after appropriate application in accordance with article XVI upon specific findings that all of the following conditions exist. The absence of any one of the conditions shall be grounds for denial of the application for variance. 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other land or structure in the same district; and 
(2)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of these land use protection regulations would create an unnecessary hardship and would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners within the district in which the property is located; and 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located; and 
(4)  Relief, if granted, will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this resolution and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or general welfare in such a manner as will interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their value; and 
a.  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
b.  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure; and 
c.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building or structures which are not permitted by right in the district involved. 
Applications for variances shall require review and recommendation by the planning commission. 
Sec. 59-1808. - Conditional approval permitted. 
In exercising the powers to grant appeals and approve variances, the board may attach conditions to its approval which it finds necessary to accomplish the reasonable application of the requirements of this chapter. 
In exercising its powers, the board of commissioners may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all of the powers of the administrative officer and building official and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
Sec. 59-1809. - Approval period limited. 
No order of the board permitting the erection or alteration of a building or other variance shall be valid for a period of longer six months unless such use is established within such period; provided, however that such order by the board shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within such period, and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with such permit. 
Sec. 59-1810. - Application, hearings and notice. 
Applications for variance shall be made in accordance with all applicable provisions of article XVI. 
Sec. 59-1811. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 59-1900. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
Sec. 59-1901. - Separability. 
Should any article, section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declarations shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 59-1902. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances and resolutions and parts thereof in conflict herewith are repealed. 
Sec. 59-1903. - Pre-emption by state or federal law. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter conflict with state or federal law, such that the application of said provision would be pre-empted by law, such pre-emption shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically pre-empted by state or federal law. 
Sec. 59-1904. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
Sec. 59-1905. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX 1. - PLANNING DIRECTOR DUTIES 
1.  The planning director is responsible for the receipt, review and processing of all applications for rezoning, conditional use permit applications, text amendments, and for applications for all permits required by this chapter. 
2.  The planning director is responsible for all administrative activities related to the use or occupancy of land and buildings under this chapter. 
3.  The planning director presents items, information, and where applicable, recommendations to the planning commission for consideration by the planning commission on making a recommendation to the board of commissioners.. 
4.  The planning director shall receive and process all appeals filed with the county under the provisions of the appeals article of this chapter. 
5.  The planning director shall receive and process all variance application, hardship variances, and appeals under the provisions of the appeals article of this chapter. 
APPENDIX 2. - BYLAWS FOR THE STEPHENS COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION 
Section 1. Title; adoption; amendment. 
1.1 These rules may be cited as the Stephens County Planning Commission Rules of Procedure. 
1.2 These rules of procedure, and amendments thereto, shall be adopted by the Stephens County Planning Commission at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Stephens County Planning Commission. 
1.3 These rules of procedure shall become effective upon adoption by the Stephens County Planning Commission and approval by the Stephens County Board of Commissioners. The initial adoption of the rules of procedure shall in connection with the adoption of the Zoning Regulations for Stephens County, Georgia. 
Section 2. Membership; terms of office; officers; and vacancies. 
2.1 The planning commission shall consist of five members, appointed by the board of county commissioners to serve for five-year terms. Initial appointments be as follows: one appointment for one year, one appointment for two years, one appointment for three years, one appointment for four years, and one appointment for five years. Members can serve a maximum of two consecutive five-year terms. For the initial appointments less than five years, those initial appointments shall not be considered a five-year term and those members shall be authorized to serve two additional five-year consecutive terms. After former members no longer serve for a period of one, five-year term, they are eligible for reappointment subject to the service limitations above. 
2.2 The planning commission shall elect one of its members as chairperson and vice-chairperson, who will serve for one year or until the chairperson or vice-chairperson is re-elected or a successor is elected. The board of county commissioners shall appoint a secretary to take minutes of the planning commission's meetings, recording all motions and votes thereon as well as any other business of the planning commission conducted in a public forum. The planning commission shall maintain rules of procedure in accordance with this chapter and state law. The board of commissioners shall approve the planning commission's rules of procedure or any amendment before they become effective. 
2.3 Resignation shall be in writing and delivered to the chair of the Stephens County Planning Commission. Any member who accumulates three successive unexcused absences shall be deemed to have resigned. The chairperson of the Stephens County Planning Commission shall decide which absences are excused. All decisions concerning unexcused absences may be appealed to the board of county commissioners. 
2.4 Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be compensated as determined by the Stephens County Board of Commissioners but under no circumstances is compensation required. Any appointment to fill an unexpired term caused by vacancy shall not be considered a five-year term for the application of the two-term rule set forth in [section] 2.1 above. 
Section 3. Duties of planning commission. 
3.1 It shall be the responsibility of the planning commission to review and recommend to the board of commissioners its approval, disapproval, or approval with conditions on all requests for amendments. 
3.2 It shall be the responsibility of the planning commission to review and make a recommendation to the board of commissioners in regard to all requests for conditional uses. 
3.3 It shall be the responsibility of the planning commission to review and make a recommendation to the board of commissioners in regard to all requests for a variance. 
3.4 It shall be the responsibility of the planning commission to review and make a recommendation to the board of commissioners in regard to the adoption of a comprehensive plan or amendment thereto. 
3.5 The Stephens County Planning Commission does not have the power to amend any ordinance, to rezone land, to declare this chapter, or any amendment thereto invalid, or to allow any use not permitted by the same. 
Section 4. Duties of planning commission officers. 
4.1 The chairperson shall preside over meetings and shall be responsible for conduct and decorum of the meeting. The chairperson shall have the responsibility to ensure that all parties receive a full and fair hearing before the planning commission, enforcement of the rules herein and applicable state laws. 
4.2 The chairperson shall be responsible for calling special called meetings and notifying the secretary of the planning commission so notice can be provided in accordance with Georgia law. 
4.3 The vice-chairperson shall preside over meetings and assume the duties of the chairperson in the absence of the chairperson. 
4.4 The chairperson shall have the power to appoint sub-committees of the planning commission if he or she finds such committee necessary to carry out the functions of the planning commission. 
4.5 The secretary shall be responsible for the maintenance of the planning commission's minutes and records. 
Section 5. Meetings. 
5.1 A quorum of three members shall be required to conduct business; an affirmative vote of three members voting on a question shall be sufficient for the adoption of the question. 
Members abstaining shall not be considered "members voting" in determining whether a question has been adopted. 
5.2 The regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission shall be held monthly on a date and time to be set by resolution of the planning commission or the board of commissioners and shall take place monthly unless there is no business to consider or no cause to hold such a meeting, in which case, the secretary shall inform the members of the planning commission at least 24 hours in advance of the regularly scheduled time. 
5.3 Special called meetings may be called by the chairperson provided at least 24 hours' notice of such meeting is given. 
5.4 Conduct of meetings. 
5.4.1 All meetings shall be open to the public and may only be closed in accordance with Georgia law. 
5.4.2 Order of business. 
5.4.2.1 Roll call. 
5.4.2.2 Approval of minutes. 
5.4.2.3 Hearing on text amendments, map amendments, conditional uses and variances. 
5.4.2.4 Committee reports. 
5.4.2.5 Old business. 
5.4.2.6 New business. 
5.4.3 Procedures for hearing text amendments, map amendments, conditional uses and variances shall be those procedures provided in this chapter. 
5.4.4 The planning commission may adjourn a regular meeting if a business cannot be disposed of on the day set, and no further notice shall be necessary for rescheduling such meeting if the time and place of its resumption is stated at the time of adjournment and is not changed after adjournment. 
Section 6. Standards of conduct. 
6.1 Conflicts of interest: A planning commissioner shall have a conflict of interest if said planning commissioner or his/her family, has a property interest in any real property affected by action on an application before the planning commission or has a financial interest in any business entity that has a property interest in any real property affected by action on an application before the planning commission. Any planning commissioner having a conflict of interest shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest in writing to the Stephens County Board of Commissioners. These disclosures shall be made a public record. No planning commissioner shall vote or participate on a matter in which he or she has a conflict of interest. 
6.2 No planning commissioner shall represent an applicant before the planning commission. 
6.3 No planning commissioner shall discuss any matter pending before the planning commission with anyone outside a public hearing. All letters or other material personally received by a planning commissioner shall be provided to each planning commissioner at the public hearing on the item in question. 
Chapter 60 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 60-1—60-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 60-30. - Purpose and intent. 
The following regulations in this chapter are designed to promote the public health, safety, order, aesthetics and general welfare of the community by: controlling the number, placement, size and height of signs to prevent excessive and undue distraction to motorists and pedestrians and to prevent traffic hazards; avoiding an environment that encourages visual blight; and encouraging a more attractive urban environment. 
Regulation of the location, size, placement, and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities in the county without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the county, to take advantage of the beauty of the county's natural environment, and to protect property values therein. Such regulation is also necessary to facilitate and aid in the identification and location of businesses in the county in the event of police, fire, or other emergencies and to avoid confusion and delay in response to such emergencies. Accordingly, it is the intention of the county to establish regulations governing the display of signs that will: 
(1)  Promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  Provide for the expression of commercial and noncommercial speech by citizens and businesses in the county. 
(3)  Enhance the economy of the county and the success of business and industry by promoting the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs. 
(4)  Restrict signs and lights that increase the probability of traffic accidents by obstructing or confusing the vision of motorists, bicyclists, or pedestrians. 
(5)  Ensure property maintenance, for safety and structural soundness, as well as the appearance and functionality of signs. 
(6)  Preserve and protect the scenic beauty, natural surroundings and rural character of Stephens County. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 60-31. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Abandoned sign or billboard. A sign or billboard that is left without care, maintenance, no longer in use, is in a state of disrepair, neglected or deserted. 
Animated sign. A sign with action, motion, sound, changing colors or changing lighting effects. This includes signs that blink, flash or fluctuate lights or other illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness or color; provided however, that this definition does not include changeable copy signs as defined by this article. 
Area of sign. The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character from the background against which it is placed. For double-faced signs, only the largest display face shall be measured in computing the sign area. 
Banner. A temporary sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation applied to natural or synthetic paper or fabric, vinyl and other flexible, roll stock materials that is located on a building face or window or is attached to a fence, post(s), pole(s) or a pedestrian light fixture. Posters, labels, decals, characters or designs applied to, or sign materials produced in, sheet form such as corrugated plastic, PVC and acrylic, are excluded from this definition and may not be used to create a banner. For purposes of this chapter, a banner is a sign. 
Billboard. A large panel sign or structure used to carry outdoor advertising or an outdoor message that is usually found in high traffic areas along roadsides. 
Blade sign. A double-sided sign oriented perpendicular to the building wall. 
Canopy. A fixed overhead shelter used as a roof which is attached to a building. 
Canopy sign. A sign with a single or double face copy hung from a canopy. 
Changeable copy sign. A sign, usually freestanding, containing copy that changes electronically. This definition includes electronic message boards, tri-visions and similar signs. 
Commercial and industrial land use districts. For the purposes of this chapter the following land use districts are defined as commercial and industrial: CG and CI. 
Currahee Parkway. The unincorporated portions of Highway 17 extending from the Franklin County line to the intersection of the Toccoa Bypass and then continuing on the Toccoa Bypass until it reaches the Habersham County line. 
Department. For the purposes of this chapter the term department shall include the Stephens County Building Official, Stephens County Administrator, Stephens County Building Inspector, Stephens County Marshal or the designee of the Stephens County Board of Commissioners. 
Discontinued sign. A sign intended to identify, announce, direct, inform, or bring to the attention of others a subject that has been discontinued. 
Double-faced sign. A sign which has two display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Electronic message board. A sign with a fixed or changing message composed of a series of lights that may be changed through electronic means. This definition docs not include animated signs or projected copy. 
Expression sign. A sign device not otherwise specifically defined and permitted in this chapter, which involves the expression of any idea. An expression sign shall not be in the form of a banner. 
Externally illuminated sign. A sign supplied with light from an external light source aimed at the face of the sign. 
Frontage, building. The width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular establishment. 
Frontage, road. The width in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Ground sign. A permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support (i.e., freestanding). 
Height of sign. The distance in vertical feet from the ground to the highest point of the sign face. 
Internally illuminated sign. A sign supplied with light from an internal light source. 
Interstate system. The term "Interstate System" means the Dwight D. Eisenhower National System of Interstate and Defense Highways described in section 23 USCS § 103(c). 
Kiosk sign: A freestanding and multiple sided structure owned by the county and located in public rights-of-way that displays directional information to residential and commercial developments. 
Land disturbance permit. A site development permit, road construction permit, or clearing and grubbing and/or grading permit issued by Stephens County, the Georgia Environmental Protection Division or any other state or local agency. 
Lot. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Marquee. A roofed structure and attached to and supported by a building and projecting over private sidewalks or private pedestrian travel ways. 
Marquee sign. A sign painted on, attached to or hung from a marquee. For purposes of this chapter, marquee signs shall be considered wall signs. 
Monument blade sign. A freestanding sign where the base of the sign structure is on the ground and the sign face hangs from a support that is oriented perpendicular to the sign base. 
Monument sign. A freestanding sign where the base of the sign structure is on the ground. The width of the sign structure can be no more than 120 percent of the width of the base. 
Nit. A of unit brightness equal to one candle per square meter, measured perpendicular to the rays of the light source. 
Nonconforming sign. Any sign that lawfully existed on the effective date of this chapter but which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
Office residential land use district. For the purposes of this chapter the following land use district is defined as an office residential district: CC. 
Permittee. A person and/or entity erecting a sign on the property of an owner and/or permittee. 
Planned center, office, commercial, or industrial. A group of retail stores, service establishments, offices, industries, or any other businesses, institutions or activities planned to serve the public, which is in common ownership or condominium ownership. 
Portable sign. A sign which is not permanently affixed, including but not limited to signs mounted or painted on vehicles which are parked in such a manner as to serve the purpose of a sign. 
Primary highway. Any state highway that is part of the National Federal-Aid Primary System as of June 1, 1991, or any highway on the National Highway System, as designated by the administration and approved by the United States Secretary of Transportation under Title 23 of the United States Code. 
Projecting wall sign. A wall sign projecting more than 13 inches from the outside wall or walls of any building upon which it is located. 
Pylon sign. A freestanding sign that rests upon a pylon or pole(s). 
Residential land use district. For the purposes of this chapter the following land use districts are defined as residential AG, RS and RM. 
Roof sign. A sign projecting above the coping of a flat roof, above the ridge of a gable, hip or gamble roof or above the height of a parapet structure. A wall sign attached to a parapet structure, which is an extension of an exterior wall, shall not be considered a roof sign as long as the parapet structure is not in excess of six feet in height and the sign does not reach beyond the height of the exterior wall. 
Sidewalk sign. A movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located. 
Sign. A lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, or illuminated visual display, device, or communication designed or used for the purpose of identifying, announcing, directing, informing, or bring to the attention of others the subject thereon, that is visible from the public right-of-way of a county, city, or state road. 
Sign face. That part of a sign that is or can be used for communicating a message. 
Temporary sign. A sign of a nonpermanent nature. 
Time, place, and manner restriction. Regulations to protect governmental interests unrelated to speech, such as size, shape, location, appearance, and number. Time, place, and manner restrictions on signs have a content neutral effect on speech. 
Trailer sign. Any sign mounted on wheels and that may be moved from one location to another. 
Wall sign. A sign applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which does not project more than 12 inches from the outside wall of such building or structure. The total lettering on one side of a building or structure shall constitute one wall sign. 
Window sign. A sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. For purposes of this chapter, the area of any window sign shall be measured on the basis of the proportion of area within each individual window frame, not the total window area of a building window visible from a public street. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 60-32. - Signs shall meet applicable codes. 
Signs and other advertising structures shall be constructed and maintained in strict conformity with building and electrical codes and all other applicable regulations including but not limited to the Stephens County Building Regulations (chapter 18 of the Code of Stephens County, Georgia). 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 60-33. - Signs are permitted structures. 
Signs and other advertising structures are permitted as accessory uses, subject to all applicable limitations as specified in this chapter. All regulation of signs are governed by this chapter and no land use or other permit shall be required except those permits required by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 60-34. - Permit required. 
Except as otherwise excepted by the provisions of this chapter, any sign 64 square feet in area or larger shall require a permit to be issued by the building official before installation, construction, or erection. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or convert any sign, 64 square feet or larger, without first obtaining a permit from the building official: provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be constructed to require a permit for the repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 60-35. - Permit application. 
Applications for permits to erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert signs shall be made to the county clerk upon forms furnished by the building department. The application for permit shall include any such information such as, but not limited to, ownership information, location, construction cost, scaled site plans and elevation drawings, structural details or other information necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable codes. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 60-36. - Permit fees. 
No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed and fees have been paid as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED 

Sec. 60-37. - Signs and sign devices prohibited. 
The following signs and sign devices shall be prohibited in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75: 
(1)  No sign authorized by any section of this Code shall be erected or maintained which: 
a.  Advertises an activity that is illegal under Georgia or federal laws or regulations in effect at the location of such sign or at the location of such activity; 
b.  Is obsolete; 
c.  Is not structurally safe, clean, and in good repair; 
d.  Is not securely affixed to a substantial structure which is permanently attached to the ground; 
e.  Is attached to, drawn, or painted upon trees, rocks, or other natural features; 
f.  Moves or has any moving or animated parts, except as expressly allowed under subsection (3) of this Code section; 
g.  Emits or utilizes in any manner any sound capable of being detected on the main traveled way by a person with normal hearing; 
h.  If illuminated, contains, includes, or is illuminated by any flashing, intermittent, or moving light or lights except those giving public service information such as time, date, temperature, weather, or other similar information except as expressly permitted. The illumination of mechanical multiple message signs is not illumination by flashing, intermittent, or moving light or lights, except that no multiple message sign may include any illumination which is flashing, intermittent, or moving when the sign is in a fixed position; 
i.  If illuminated, is not effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled way, which beams or rays are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interfere with the operation of a motor vehicle; 
j.  If illuminated, is illuminated so that it obscures or interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device, or signal; 
k.  Contains an area, to be measured by the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses the entire sign, in excess of 300 square feet for billboards and 75 square feet for all other signs or exceeding 35 feet in height or 60 feet in length, inclusive of any border, trim, base, apron, supports, and other structural members; 
l.  Contains more than two faces visible from the same direction on the main traveled way; provided, no sign shall be erected that contains more than one face vertically stacked visible from the same direction on the main traveled way. Double-faced, back-to-back, and V-type constructed signs shall, for the purpose of determining compliance with size and spacing limitations, be considered as one sign; 
m.  Is in an area not zoned for commercial or industrial activity and within 300 feet of a residence without the written consent of the owner; 
n.  Is within 500 feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however, that such sign may be located within 500 feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery when the sign is separated by buildings or other obstructions so that the sign located within the 500-foot zone is not visible from the public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; 
o.  Is located so as to obscure or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, signal, or device; 
p.  Is located so as to obscure or otherwise interfere with a motor vehicle operator's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic; 
q.  Is located adjacent to an interstate highway and which is within 1,000 feet of another sign on the same side of the highway; provided, however, that such sign may be located within 1,000 feet of another sign when the signs are separated by buildings or other obstructions so that only one sign face located within the 1,000-foot zone is visible from the interstate highway at any time; 
r.  Is located outside of the corporate limits of a municipality and adjacent to an interstate highway within 1,000 feet of an interchange, intersection at grade, or safety rest area. The foregoing 1,000-foot zone shall be measured along the interstate highway from the point at which the pavement commences or ceases to widen at exits from or entrances to the main traveled way. In circumstances where both the exit and entrance ramps on one side of an interchange constitute continuous lanes of travel to the exit and entrance ramps of the adjacent interchange, this side of the interchange shall be treated as if no ramps exist and the foregoing 1,000-foot zone on this side of the interchange shall be measured from the survey centerline of the main traveled way and crossroad forming the interchange or intersecting road. In all circumstances where this definition conflicts with any agreement with the United States secretary of transportation pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-6-87, said agreement shall be deemed to control for purposes of this Code section; 
s.  Is located outside of the corporate limits of a municipality and adjacent to a highway on the primary system and which is within 1,000 feet of another sign on the same side of the highway; provided, however, that such sign may be located within 1,000 feet of another sign when the signs are separated by buildings or other obstructions so that only one sign face located within the 1,000-foot zone is visible from the primary system highway at any one time; 
t.  Depicts any material which is obscene as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(2)  Signs imitating warning signals are prohibited. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles, nor shall any sign use the words, slogans, dimensional shape and size, or colors of the governmental traffic signs. 
(3)  a.  Multiple message signs shall be permitted on the interstate system, primary highways, and other highways under the following conditions: 
1.  Each multiple message sign shall remain fixed for at least ten seconds; 
2.  When a message is changed mechanically, it shall be accomplished in three seconds or less; 
3.  No such multiple message sign shall be placed within 5,000 feet of another mechanical multiple message sign on either side of the highway; 
4.  Any such sign shall contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs; 
5.  Any maximum size limitations shall apply independently to each side of a multiple message sign; and 
6.  Non-mechanical electronic multiple message signs that are otherwise in compliance with this subsection and are illuminated entirely by the use of light emitting diodes, back lighting, or any other light source shall be permitted under the following circumstances: 
(i)  Each transitional change occurs within two seconds; 
(ii)  If the department finds an electronic sign or any display or effect thereon to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or to otherwise interfere with the safe operation of a motor vehicle, then, upon the department's request, the owner of the sign shall promptly and within not more than 48 hours reduce the intensity of the sign to a level acceptable to the department; and 
b.  If a multiple message sign on a primary highway or other highway is in violation of any of the above conditions, its permit shall be revoked and the sign shall be removed. During the appeal of any violations of paragraph a. of this subsection, the sign shall remain fixed until the matter is resolved. The board of commissioners may allow the continued operation of a multiple message sign during part or all of the appeals process. 
(4)  No billboard will be permitted to be constructed on the Currahee Parkway in order to preserve the natural scenic beauty of this corridor from obstruction for current and future generations, to protect visual encroachment on neighboring properties, to protect the distraction of drivers, to minimize the lowering property values and to minimize the negative affect that clusters of signs have on economic growth. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 60-38. - General requirements for signs. 
Signs, regardless of the district in which they are located, shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Signs, together with any supporting members, shall be kept in good repair and maintained so as to present a neat, clean appearance and be in a safe state of preservation. Painted areas and sign surfaces shall be kept in good condition, and illumination, if provided, shall be maintained in safe and good working order. 
(2)  Signs shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet for billboards and ten feet for all other signs from any public street right-of-way or private road. 
(3)  No sign shall be erected where it will interfere with vision clearance along any street or obstruct the vision of either drivers or pedestrians. 
(4)  Any illuminated sign shall be placed so that the rays and illumination therefrom shall not be cast upon neighboring dwellings. 
(5)  All permitted marquee or projecting signs shall be erected under the supervision of the building official. 
(6)  Other attached signs shall be inspected for safety and compliance with this chapter at the discretion of the building official or other official designated by the board of commissioners. 
(7)  When a building is constructed, remodeled, or expanded, all signs shall be approved by the appropriate official before an occupancy permit is issued. Drawings containing dimensions of signs and/or descriptions of sign dimensions, construction materials, and methods of erection or design and stress diagrams may be approved by the building official or other appropriate official, when, in their best judgement, erection of the sign will not constitute a safety hazard and upon determination that the sign meets all the requirements of this chapter and the building code of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 60-39. - Variances permitted. 
(a)  Recognizing that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter may, in limited instances involving unique or unusual physical conditions or other such unanticipated situations, pose an unnecessary hardship to the owner or user of a sign, the board of commissioners is authorized to permit variances from the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  An increase in the height of a sign. 
(2)  Reduction of the required setback for a sign. 
(3)  A sign of such type that is prohibited by this chapter. 
(4)  An increase in the maximum area of a sign. 
(5)  Temporary signs and sign devices. 
(b)  Applications for any of the variances set out in subsection (a) of this section shall be filed and considered in accordance with the requirements and procedures for variances and in addition shall require the filing of an elevation drawing of the sign or signs proposed to be erected, constructed, modified or continued, along with written justification that unusual conditions warrant such consideration. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 60-40. - Procedures for dangerous or unlawful signs. 
Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the building official, the owner thereof, or the person or firm maintaining the sign, shall upon written notice from the building official or the administrative officer, forthwith in the case of immediate danger, and in any case within ten days, secure the sign in a manner to be approved by the building official, in conformity with the applicable provisions of the building code of the county. If such order is not complied with in ten days, the sign shall be removed under instruction of the appropriate official at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. In case any sign shall be installed, erected, or constructed in violation of any of the terms of this chapter the administrative officer shall notify by certified mail, or written notice served personally, the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign, secure the necessary permit, make required alterations, or remove the sign. If such order is not completed within 24 hours from the time of notice being received, the sign shall be removed under instruction of the appropriate official at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 60-41. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Signs which on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived were legally erected and maintained under all applicable state, federal and local laws and ordinances, and which become nonconforming under the provisions of this article, may continue in existence, unchanged in structure and size. 
(b)  A nonconforming sign shall not be expanded, relocated or replaced by another sign except in accordance with the provisions of this article. The substitution or interchange of panels or painted boards shall be allowed, however. 
(c)  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs, such as repainting or electrical repairs shall be allowed. However structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall not be permitted except to make the sign comply with the provisions of this article, unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 60-39. 
(d)  If a sign is damaged or destroyed by wind, accident, fire or other disaster, the sign may be rebuilt at the same location using new materials except the in-ground supports may be reused if the building department determines they are sound and undamaged. Any rebuilding requires a permit. 
(e)  If the owner of a nonconforming sign applies for a permit to modify the sign in order to bring the sign into compliance with this article, the permit application fee is hereby waived, but all other requirements must be met. 
(f)  In the case of any nonconforming signs which in its present location blocks or spoils any scenic view in the county, if the owner agrees to relocate the nonconforming sign within 180 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived to an allowed location as provided in this chapter; the governing authority may grant a reasonable variance from the requirements of this article pertaining to square footage, setbacks, height, distance between signs and number of faces only. If there are multiple sets of signs requested to be moved under this provision, they shall be relocated separately in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 60-42. - Abandoned billboards. 
The county is authorized to remove any abandoned billboard. If an owner and an owner's address can be determined, advance notice by certified mail shall be given to the owner, providing the owner with 15 days' notice to bring the billboard into compliance with this article in addition to any other penalties imposed by this article. If no owner and address can be determined, then affixing a notice to the billboard for 15 days shall be sufficient. Any notice shall inform the owner that failure to bring the billboard fully into compliance with this article shall subject the billboard to removal by the county and that the owner shall be liable for repayment to the county for the complete cost of removal and restoration of the site. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION AND INTERPRETATION 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the planning director who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners and serve at its pleasure. The planning director shall be responsible for interpretation of the provisions of this chapter. 

Sec. 60-43. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Stephens County Marshal, building official, planning director or lawful designee of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 60-44. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined (1) not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense, or (2) as determined by the court of proper jurisdiction. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 60-45. - Remedies. 
In addition to any other penalty herein, if (1) any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or (2) any building structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this chapter, then appropriate actions will be taken to ensure compliance. 
The building official, planning director, lawful designee of the board of commissioners or any other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies and after due notice to the owner of the violation, (1) issue a citation for violation of this chapter requiring the presence of the violator in the court of [proper jurisdiction] (2) institute an injunction or (3) take other appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2017) 
Chapter 62 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Constitution reference— Power of county to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 
State Law reference— Waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-1 et seq.; litter control, O.C.G.A. §§ 67-7-40 et seq., 36-1-20; transporting refuse across county boundary for dumping without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Adoption of solid waste management plan. 
The board of commissioners officially adopts the solid waste management plan, dated August 1993, for the county and the Cities of Toccoa, Avalon, and Martin prepared by Jordan Jones and Goulding, Inc., as now or hereafter amended. 
(Res. of 11-16-1993) 
Secs. 62-2—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NORTHEAST GEORGIA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Other boards and commissions, § 2-61 et seq. 

Sec. 62-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
The Act means the Regional Solid Waste Management Authorities Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-50 et seq.). 
The agreement means the agreement dated August 1, 1993, between and among the county and each of the participants in the Authority. 
The Authority means the Northeast Georgia Regional Solid Waste Management Authority. 
(Res. of 7-20-1993, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-32. - Activation of Authority. 
The county, after diligent study and review, joins with the other participants in finding and declaring that there is a need for a regional authority to function in the area of solid waste management. In conjunction with the other participants, the county activates the Northeast Georgia Regional Solid Waste Management Authority, a public corporation created as an institution of purely public charity, to perform an essential governmental function in the exercise of the power conferred upon it by this article and the Act. 
(Res. of 7-20-1993, § 1) 
Sec. 62-33. - Appointment of members. 
In accordance with the terms of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-54, the board of commissioners shall appoint two persons as members of the board of directors of the Authority. 
(Res. of 7-20-1993, § 2) 
Sec. 62-34. - Authorization of agreement among participants. 
Under the authority of Ga. Const. art. IX, § III, ¶ I, and the Act, the execution, delivery and performance by the county of an agreement, dated as of August 1, 1993, between and among the county and each of the participants in the Authority is authorized. The agreement shall be in substantially the form attached to the resolution from which this section is derived as exhibit A, with such changes as are approved by the chairman of the board of commissioners, and the execution of the agreement by the chairman of the board of commissioners, which is authorized, shall be conclusive evidence of such approval. The agreement shall provide for the activation of the Authority and the relationship between and among the participants, including the county, and establish on a preliminary basis the powers and duties of the Authority relating to research, study and planning for projects for the management of solid waste on behalf of the participants. The agreement shall only become effective upon its execution by two counties pursuant to the authorization of such execution through duly adopted resolutions. 
(Res. of 7-20-1993, § 3) 
Sec. 62-35. - Other actions. 
In order to carry out the formation and activation of the Authority as stated in this article, the chairman of the board of commissioners is further authorized to take any and all further action and execute and deliver any and all other documents that may be necessary or desirable in the execution, delivery, performance or approval of the agreement and in order to carry out and effectuate fully the purposes thereof. 
(Res. of 7-20-1993, § 5) 
Secs. 62-36—62-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 62-71. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person, individual, company or corporation who violates or fails to comply with the rules and regulations in this article, shall be charged with a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person, individual, company or corporation convicted of a misdemeanor under the rules and regulations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(c)  If any provision in this article has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate actions or proceedings to correct or abate such violations. 
(Res. of 10-2-1973(1), §§ 2, 4) 
Sec. 62-72. - System established. 
(a)  A solid waste collection and disposal system shall be developed for the county as follows: 
(1)  The county shall locate, maintain and operate one or more landfills for the disposal of garbage and other solid waste. 
(2)  The county shall have the authority to locate, maintain and operate garbage containers at convenient locations for the deposit of garbage by individuals within the county. 
(3)  The county shall transport the garbage placed in garbage collection containers to the landfill. 
(b)  The intent of this section is to: 
(1)  Prevent the dumping of garbage along and on the public streets, roads and highways in the county and the rights-of-way and the shoulders thereof. 
(2)  Prevent the dumping of garbage on public and private property in the county. 
(c)  From time to time, the board of commissioners may form and establish the rules and regulations governing the use and operation of the garbage system to carry out the intention of this section, and instruct county personnel to carry out the same. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1973) 
Sec. 62-73. - Regulations for disposal. 
The following regulations for disposal of solid waste shall apply within the county: 
(1)  All solid waste will be deposited in the county landfill or in containers at such time as they are provided. Initially 20 or more containers of four-yard capacity will be provided. 
(2)  No solid waste will be placed on public or private land. 
(3)  Only solid domestic waste shall be placed in garbage containers. 
(4)  No waste shall be placed outside of garbage containers, at, or near or in close proximity to garbage containers. 
(5)  Items such as electric and gas appliances, automobiles or automobile parts, farm implements or farm implement parts, machines or machine parts used in keeping and tending yards and gardens, office and household furniture, equipment or parts, household furnishings or parts, dead animal carcasses or parts, trash, brush and trees or bush limbs shall not be placed in garbage containers. 
(6)  Industrial waste, manufacturing waste, processing waste and hatchery waste shall not be placed in garbage containers. 
(7)  A person, individual, company or corporation engaged in the business of collecting and/or hauling garbage, waste or trash for a charge of any kind shall not place garbage, waste or trash in garbage containers. 
(8)  No contractor of any kind shall place in garbage containers waste, trash, refuse or anything else resulting from the performance of any contract or agreement. 
(9)  No person, individual, company or corporation shall set fire to the contents of any garbage containers or place highly inflammable liquids or materials in garbage containers. 
(Res. of 10-2-1973(1), § 1) 
Secs. 62-74—62-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UNLAWFUL USE OF DUMPSTER SITE, GARBAGE CONTAINER OR RECYCLING CONTAINER 

Sec. 62-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dumpster site means any site within the county provided by the governing authority of the county for the disposal or recycling of metal, glass, aluminum, cardboard, paper products and household garbage. 
Household garbage means animal, vegetable, and fruit refuse matter and other refuse matter ordinarily generated as byproducts of a household or restaurant, such as tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics, and wrapping or packaging materials. 
Recycling container means a receptacle provided by the governing authority of the county at a dumpster site for the purpose of depositing materials for recycling. 
(Ord. No. 91-2, § 1, 4-2-1991; Ord. No. 92-1, § 1, 1-7-1992) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-47. 
Sec. 62-102. - Penalty. 
Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating any provision of this article shall be tried before the magistrate court of the county. The procedure for enforcement of this article shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 2, 8-18-1987; Ord. No. 91-2, § 3, 4-2-1991; Ord. No. 92-1, § 3, 1-7-1992) 
Sec. 62-103. - Nonresidents. 
No person who resides outside of the county shall deposit in a dumpster site any household garbage. 
(Ord. No. 92-1, § 2, 1-7-1992) 
Sec. 62-104. - Recycling containers. 
No person shall deposit in a recycling container any material other than that for which the recycling container is labeled to receive. 
(Ord. No. 91-2, § 2, 4-2-1991) 
Sec. 62-105. - Scavenging in containers. 
No person shall scavenge in, search through, or remove anything from the containers provided by the county for the disposal of household garbage. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 1, 8-18-1987) 
Secs. 62-106—62-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COUNTY LANDFILL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 62-141—62-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 62-161. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this division shall, upon conviction of such violation, be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 13) 
Sec. 62-162. - Licensing of collectors. 
No commercial collector of either domestic or industrial waste may use the certified landfill of the county until or unless such collector is licensed by the board of commissioners who shall license such collectors under the following conditions: 
(1)  An annual license fee for collectors of industrial waste as may be set by the board. 
(2)  An annual license fee for collectors of domestic waste as may be set by the board. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 1) 
Sec. 62-163. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees, as may be set by the board of commissioners, shall apply to all collectors, company trucks, building contractors and any other persons who use the county operated landfill. 
(b)  All fees collected from licensed collectors and landfill fees shall be set up in a special account to be used for the operation and maintenance of the landfill and also the purchase of equipment to be used for or in connection with the landfill site. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 62-164. - Revocation, suspension of collector licenses. 
The failure to follow the rules and regulations by a solid waste collector can result in the revocation or suspension of the license required by this division upon a proper hearing. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 5) 
Sec. 62-165. - Landfill supervisor. 
The disposal of solid waste in the county is placed under the supervision of the landfill supervisor who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 4(A)) 
Sec. 62-166. - Use of landfill required; exemption of household waste. 
All persons who desire to dispose of solid waste in the county must use the sanitary landfill located off Liberty Hill Road South of Toccoa in the county. Any person disposing of solid waste in any place other than this shall be guilty of a violation of this article and shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. The preceding two sentences shall not apply to household waste, which may be disposed of at dumpster sites throughout the county. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 4(B)) 
Sec. 62-167. - Charge required for use. 
Any person who desires to dispose of any solid waste at the sanitary landfill, and pursuant to this division is required to pay for such disposal at the time such person desires to dispose of his solid waste at the sanitary landfill. The sanitary landfill supervisor and no other sanitary landfill employee shall be authorized to accept cash or money from any person. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 4(C)) 
Sec. 62-168. - Hours of operation. 
The sanitary landfill will be open in accordance with the schedule of operating hours set by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 6) 
Sec. 62-169. - Dumpsters. 
Dumpster type containers will be placed outside of the entrance gate to the sanitary landfill for use when the landfill is closed. Also automobile traffic desiring to use the landfill will be advised to utilize these dumpsters during normal operating hours. No person shall dispose of any solid waste in or around the sanitary landfill other than in the dumpster type container as provided above, or in such place in the sanitary landfill as directed by a sanitary landfill employee. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 7) 
Sec. 62-170. - Burning material. 
Incoming vehicles will be observed and if found to be carrying burning waste, they will be routed to a clear and remote area to be emptied, or such vehicles will be turned away at the sole discretion of the sanitary landfill employee. If the burning material is accepted, it will be spread and the fire extinguished. After the fire is extinguished, the matter will be covered with dirt to smother the fire completely. "No Burning" signs will be posted on the site. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 8) 
Sec. 62-171. - Inspection of waste; unacceptable waste. 
(a)  All solid waste brought to the landfill area will be brought through the main gate and inspected prior to being allowed to proceed to an active trench. 
(b)  All traffic will stop and wait for specific instructions from the traffic director before proceeding to specified locations. 
(c)  Loads of mixed waste will not be accepted, such as: 
(1)  Household and kitchen furniture and furnishings. 
(2)  Trees and stumps. 
(d)  All tires will have to be split in half around the circumference or cut in quarters before they will be accepted. 
(e)  No hazardous waste will be accepted such as volatile, flammable or radioactive waste. Hazardous waste shall be any industrial, commercial, institutional or residential waste which contains hazardous solids, semisolids, liquids, explosives, pathological waste, pesticides, toxic, highly flammable or corrosive substances, sewage treatment residue, screenings from grit chambers, septic tanks, sludge, and similar materials. 
(f)  No dead animals will be accepted at the landfill. 
(g)  Large items such as junked automobiles will not be accepted at the landfill. 
(h)  Major appliances and all scrap metals will be dumped in an area designated for scrap metal. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 9) 
Sec. 62-172. - Scavenging at landfill. 
No salvage or scavenging will be allowed at the landfill by any person whatsoever, and signs will be posted to this effect. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 10) 
Sec. 62-173. - City participation. 
Since the City of Toccoa is participating in the operation of the landfill, the City of Toccoa shall have a right to dispose of all of its solid waste at the sanitary landfill, including all solid waste collected by the City of Toccoa from its residents at no charge. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 11) 
Sec. 62-174. - No outside solid waste. 
Only residents of the county shall utilize the landfill, except that all solid waste, which becomes solid waste in the county, may be disposed of at the county landfill. No solid waste shall be brought into the county for the purpose of being disposed of at the county landfill. 
(Res. of 5-20-1975, § 12) 
Secs. 62-175—62-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 62-201. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Stephens County Litter Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 91-3, § I, 7-16-1991) 
Sec. 62-202. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in this section. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; residential or farm properties; timberlands or forests. 
Waste means all discarded substances and materials whatsoever exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance in any weight or volume if biomedical waste, hazardous waste, a hazardous substance, or any such substance or material dumped for commercial purposes. Such term includes, without limitation, sand; gravel; slag; brickbats; rubbish; waste material; tin cans; refuse; garbage; trash; debris; dead animals; bottles; boxes; containers; papers; tobacco products; tires; appliances; mechanical equipment or parts; building or construction materials; tools; machinery; wood; motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts; vessels; aircraft equipment; waste oil; batteries; antifreeze; sludge from a wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; air contaminants from any source or facility; and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or governmental operations. 
(Ord. No. 91-3, § II, 7-16-1991) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-42, 16-7-51. 
Sec. 62-203. - Penalty. 
Any person, corporation, partnership, or other entity violating any provision of this article shall be tried before the magistrate court of the county. The procedure for enforcement of this article shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 91-3, § IV, 7-16-1991) 
Sec. 62-204. - Littering unlawful. 
No person shall dump, deposit, throw, or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the county. 
(Ord. No. 91-3, § III, 7-16-1991) 
Secs. 62-205—62-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CONTAINERS AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE AND SCRAP TIRES 

Sec. 62-241. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes, but is not limited to, landfilling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food and related products and by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Inert waste means wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed. 
Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in this section. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Open dump means a disposal facility at which solid waste from one or more sources is left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment, as defined in section 391-3-4.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Person means the state or any other state or agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in this state or any other state. The term "person" also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in this state or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government, as defined in section 391-3-4.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such term shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires, as defined in section 391-3-4.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility, as defined in section 391-3-4.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments, as defined in section 391-3-4.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the environmental protection division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing, as defined in section 391-3-4.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires, as defined in section 391-3-4.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material, as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923), and section 391-3-4.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste, or any combination of such activities, as defined in section 391-3-4.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Waste means all discarded substances and materials whatsoever exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance in any weight or volume if biomedical waste, hazardous waste (subject to permit under 33 USC 1342), a hazardous substance, or any such substance or material dumped for commercial purposes. With the exception of nonhazardous, low-impact animal by-products classified by the state department of natural resources, the term "waste" includes without limitation, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, bottles, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, tires, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, sludge from a wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, air contaminants from any source or facility, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or governmental operations. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, ï¿½ I, 7-8-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-242. - Waste disposal generally. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all litter; waste; scrap tires; and municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to dump, open dump, or permit the dumping of litter, waste, scrap tires, municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or recyclables at any place in the county including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any public or private property in the county or any waters in the county unless such litter or waste originates in the county or other areas authorized by the county board of commissioners: 
(1)  The property is designated by the board of commissioners or its duly designated agent for the disposal of litter; waste; municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste; scrap tires or recovered materials; and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)  The litter; waste; municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste; recyclables or scrap tires are placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; 
(3)  The property has a valid solid waste handling permit issued by the state environmental protection division (EPD) when required. 
(c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in chapter 391-3-4 et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, chapter 391-3-4 et seq. applicable to solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § II, 7-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-243. - Transporting solid waste and litter. 
(a)  All vehicles, driving or stationary, within the county shall be so constructed, loaded, covered, or securely fastened so as to prevent municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or any load, contents, litter, or other such waste or materials from flowing freely, being blown, scattered, leaked, spilt, or in any manner deposited in or upon any highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, sidewalk, other motor vehicles, pedestrians, or other public place, or upon private property within the county. However, this section shall not prohibit the necessary and permitted spreading of any substance in public road maintenance or public road construction operations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a business or private persons engaged in waste hauling or transportation for hire from businesses or private residences to dispose of materials as solid waste that have been intentionally sorted as recyclables by the business or private residence to a lawfully permitted disposal facility rather than placing the materials in the location designated by the county or appropriate authority for such recyclables. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move any vehicle within the county, the wheels or tires of which carry unto or deposit in or upon any highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property within the county, mud, dirt, sticky substance, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § III, 7-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-244. - Regulation of all solid waste or litter containers and receptacles. 
(a)  All solid waste or litter containers or receptacles and their surrounding area shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for solid waste and litter disposal. 
(b)  Persons using solid waste and litter containers or receptacles shall deposit only authorized solid waste and refuse in the appropriate container or receptacle. 
(c)  No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any container or receptacle unless authorized by the owner of the receptacle or the county board of commissioners or its designee. 
(d)  No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in such container or receptacle, or set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle. 
(e)  No person shall deposit large noncompatible articles in containers or receptacles such as but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, bedsprings, automobile parts, boat parts, large tree limbs or air conditioning units, except containers or receptacles designated for that purpose only. 
(f)  No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacle. 
(g)  No dead animals shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle, except containers or receptacles designed for such purpose and so designated by the county board of commissioners. 
(h)  No person shall willfully damage or alter the location of any such container or receptacle without the written consent of the county board of commissioners. 
(i)  No salvage or scavenging operations shall be conducted in or around such containers or receptacles except by written consent of the county board of commissioners. 
(j)  No person shall indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of any containers or receptacles. 
(k)  No person shall deposit any solid waste at a county solid waste collection and recycling center unless such solid waste is contained in a manner that it can be handled by the attendant and shall be deposited only during the official hours of operation unless express written permission is given by the county board of commissioners or its designee. 
(l)  No person shall deposit solid waste, litter or liquid of any kind at any county solid waste collection and recycling center into county owned receptacles or containers designated for the collection of recovered materials. Only authorized materials such as glass, aluminum, newspaper, cardboard, plastic, and tin or other accepted material may be deposited in the appropriate container designated for such material. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § IV, 7-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-245. - Regulation of municipal solid waste landfills, construction and demolition landfills, and solid waste collection and recycling centers. 
(a)  No landfill shall be operated in the county other than a landfill designated by the county board of commissioners as the county landfill, and no private municipal solid waste landfill shall be operated in the county without a solid waste handling permit issued by the state environmental protection division. 
(b)  No person shall deposit solid waste of any kind outside the gate of a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(c)  No scavenging operation of any kind shall be allowed at a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(d)  No person shall move, remove, or cross any fence, gate, barrier, or sign at a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(e)  A price on solid waste brought to such centers will be set to defray the total cost of solid waste and recycling operations. 
(f)  Hours of operation of such centers will be set to maximize convenience to residents of that area. 
(g)  All recovered materials (recyclables) brought to collection centers will be accepted free of charge, provided it is separated under current market specifications and likewise uncontaminated. 
(h)  All collection centers will be manned during hours of operation to ensure compliance with this article and all applicable state and/or federal laws. 
(i)  The attendant on duty will have full authority of such center consistent with this article. 
(j)  All rules listed in this section shall apply to all public and/or private property in the county, all waters and/or waterways of the county, and all county solid waste collection and recycling centers. 
Sec. 62-246. - Recovered materials. 
Recovered materials and recovered materials processing facilities are subject to rules as defined in chapter 391-3-4 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § VI, 7-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-247. - Accumulation. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of any such property shall bury or burn litter or waste without prior authorization and written consent from the applicable regulatory agency, including but not limited to, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, Georgia Environmental Protection Division and/or the Georgia Forestry Commission. Nothing in this provision shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state and/or federal law. 
(b)  No owner or occupant of any property shall cause, suffer or allow the accumulation, on his or her premises, of garbage, litter or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. 
(c)  The conduct described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall constitute a separate violation of this article for each day the garbage, litter or waste material remains or continues to unlawfully pollute, contaminate or burn on such premises. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § VII, 7-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-248. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the magistrate court of the county, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  First offense. By a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 (O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b.1)), or up to 30 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the county from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the county to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area; 
(2)  Second or subsequent offenses. The violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature punishable by a fine of not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or up to 60 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the person may also be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway and/or other public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence (O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b.2)). 
(c)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence (O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b.3). 
(d)  The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(e)  The court may order the person to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation (O.C.G.A. § 16-7-53(d)). 
(f)  In case of an open dump or improper solid waste, litter or waste disposal site, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this article. The county shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation. 
(g)  The expenses incurred by the county for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this article. 
(h)  In addition to actions filed by the county for violations of this article, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authorities and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § VIII, 7-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-249. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the county board of commissioners, the environmental education and enforcement officer or his/her designee, and/or the county marshal's office and/or the county sheriff's office. 
(b)  Any person authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this article, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this article must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon such person having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this article, or by a judge's order upon such person having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(c)  Appeals for the violation of this article may be made to the magistrate court of the county, or higher court if the person so chooses. The person always has the right to consult his/her attorney at any time before the hearing is scheduled for court. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § IX, 7-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-250. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  If any person violates any provision of this article, the county or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation (O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-52, 16-7-53). In addition, the county may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other county issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(b)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court as defined in subsection 62-248 (a)(2). 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this article, the court and/or the board of commissioners may cause written notice to be given, or incorporate into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this article for which such violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and if the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(d)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address such provisions within 20 days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the board of commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of, including but not limited to, any litter, or any type of waste as defined in this article, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article on behalf of the county. The expenses incurred by the county shall be chargeable to the violator and the board of commissioners and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for such expenses by registered mail. 
(e)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of such statement as provided for in this section, the board of commissioners shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the county, the dates of county action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(f)  This section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
(Ord. no. 2003-02, § X, 7-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-251. - Evidence of violations. 
(a)  Whenever litter, or any type of waste as defined in this article, is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped by any person or from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that such person or the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Whenever any litter, or any type of waste as defined in this article, which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § XI, 7-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-252. - Yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any solid waste disposal facility having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion within the county. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. Any yard trimmings to be collected by any entity other than the property owner shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § XII, 7-8-2003) 
Sec. 62-253. - Recycling. 
The board of commissioners hereby finds that it is in the best interest of citizens of the county, in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county, to recycle as many waste materials as possible in order to reduce the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste materials which must be properly disposed of; therefore, it is the policy of the board of commissioners to encourage recycling whenever practicable. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § XIII, 7-8-2003) 
Chapter 66 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the county saved from repeal, § 1-10(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Entry of approval of subdivision plat prior to recording, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d); procedures for approval of subdivision plats, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.; Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Development Standards of Stephens County, Georgia." The land development standards may be referred to in this chapter as the subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 101) 
Sec. 66-2. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(2)  To ensure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land development; 
(3)  To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments; 
(4)  To ensure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; and 
(5)  To ensure equitable handling of all development of land by providing uniform procedures and standards for observation and enforcement of standards both by the developer and local public bodies. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 102) 
Sec. 66-3. - Highest standard to apply. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter and those of some other ordinance or resolution or statute apply to the same subject matter, that ordinance, resolution or statute requiring the highest or most strictest standard shall govern. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 103) 
Sec. 66-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms not defined in this chapter shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. 
Administrative officer means the representative (or representatives) appointed by the board of commissioners being assigned the responsibility for administering this chapter. The office of administrative officer shall act as staff to the board and shall be given full responsibility for receiving applications, fees, and filings from developers and citizens and shall report to the board the status of various proposals. 
Block corner means the corner of any subdivision block where two streets intersect, halfway of any cul-de-sac, or the intersection of the back lot lines of a subdivision which define the outside limits of the subdivision at points having a change of direction greater than 75 degrees. 
County means the unincorporated area of Stephens County, Georgia. 
Lot means a portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description as on a subdivision plat or record survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of this chapter, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way, or land subdivided to achieve a boundary adjustment with adjoining property. 
Street means a way for vehicular traffic which serves as access for a "subdivision" as hereinafter defined, however designated, whether as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley, public or private easement, or other way. For the purpose of this chapter, streets are divided into the following categories: 
(1)  Rural principal and minor arterial. Those streets designated as such on the major thoroughfare plan of the county. 
(2)  Rural major and minor collector. Those streets serving travel of intracounty linking and the rural arterial system. 
(3)  Rural local routes. Those streets used primarily for access to the abutting properties and serving minor travel demands. 
(4)  Alley. A minor way used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(5)  Cul-de-sac. A residential street with only one outlet and a turnaround at the closed end, sometimes called a dead-end street. 
(6)  Marginal access street. A residential street parallel and adjacent to major thoroughfares and which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through traffic. 
Subdivider means the person, firm or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this chapter, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under this chapter. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land in five or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, or building development. Such definition includes all such division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; however, the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of this chapter. 
(2)  The division of land where no new street or change in an existing street is involved. 
(3)  All divisions of a tract or parcel of land in fewer than five lots. 
(4)  Any division where the lots created are all fronting on and have direct access to an existing county road. 
(5)  A bona fide intra-family transfer between family members where the purpose of such transfer or transfers is not development or sale to unrelated third parties. By way of example, a transfer to family members by will or intestate succession would not constitute a "subdivision" within the meaning of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 201; Ord. No. 04-01, §§ 1, 2, 4-5-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-5. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the county. The procedure for enforcement of this chapter shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq., and any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 13.01) 
Sec. 66-6. - Amendments. 
This chapter may be amended. Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published at least 15 days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 10.01) 
Sec. 66-7. - Injunctive relief. 
If any land is used in violation of this chapter, the administrative officer, the county attorney, the board of commissioners, or any adjacent property owners who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to stop the violation. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 12.01) 
Secs. 66-8—66-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 66-41. - Platting authority. 
The board of commissioners shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of land subdivision shall be entitled to record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, nor shall a certificate of approval be granted in accordance with the Georgia Land Sales Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq.) unless it shall have the approval of the board inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the board as required by this article is declared to be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 301) 
Sec. 66-42. - Use of plat. 
The transfer, sale, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to or exhibition of, or other uses referred by the board of commissioners of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the board and recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county under the Georgia Land Sales Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq.) if required, is prohibited, and description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 302) 
Sec. 66-43. - Opening and improving public streets. 
The board of commissioners shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street or lay any utility lines in any street which has not attained the status of a public street prior to February 2, 1988, unless such street corresponds to the street location shown on an approved subdivision plat or on an official street map adopted by the board. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 303) 
Sec. 66-44. - Erection of buildings. 
No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any subdivision lot in the county unless the lot abuts a public street or has access thereto or unless the lot abuts a private road approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 304) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Secs. 66-45—66-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PLAT 

Sec. 66-71. - Preapplication review. 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the county is proposed, the subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. No fee shall be charged for the preapplication review and no formal application shall be required. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 401) 
Sec. 66-72. - Application for plat approval. 
The subdivider shall submit to the board of commissioners at least 15 days prior to the next regular meeting of the board the following: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of a plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the board on the plat shall be sent. 
(2)  Two copies of the plat and other documents, as may be specified. 
(3)  A plat application fee as set by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 402) 
Sec. 66-73. - Review of plat. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners or the administrative officer shall check the plat for conformance to the rules and regulations of this article and report his findings and recommendations to the board, which shall approve or disapprove the plat at the next scheduled board meeting. A notation of the action shall be made in the minutes of the board including a statement of the reasons for disapproval if the plat is disapproved. One copy of the plat shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent and one copy added to the records of the board. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 403) 
Sec. 66-74. - Plat specifications. 
The plat shall conform to the following specifications and contain the required information: 
(1)  Specifications. 
a.  Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than 200 feet to one inch. 
b.  Sheet size. The sheet size shall be no larger than 17 inches in width or 22 inches in length. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet. 
c.  Ground elevations. A contour map of the proposed subdivision will be required if the topography of the land is such that in the opinion of the administrative officer there will be a drainage problem in the subdivision which would require a contour map to develop a proper drainage system. If a contour map is required it shall be based on the following criteria: 
1.  For land that slopes less than approximately two percent, elevations shall be shown at all breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swales, and at selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions. 
2.  For land that slopes more than approximately two percent, contours shall be shown with an interval of not more than 20 feet. 
(2)  Information to be provided on plat. The plat shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the owner of record and of the subdivider. 
b.  Proposed name of the subdivision and its acreage. 
c.  North point and graphic scale and date. 
d.  Acreage of the subdivision and vicinity map showing location. 
e.  Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearing and distances. 
f.  Names of owners of record of adjoining land. 
g.  Existing streets, utilities, and easements on and adjacent to the tract. 
h.  Proposed layout including streets and alleys with proposed street names, lot lines and approximate dimensions, easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses, and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings. 
i.  Block number and lot numbers. 
j.  Provisions of water supply, sewerage and drainage. 
k.  Such street cross sections and centerline profiles as may be required by the board. 
l.  Provisions for open space requirements. 
m.  The following certifications must be affixed before recording: 
1.  Certificate of dedication. A certificate of dedication by the owner submitted with the plat and in such form as approved by the county attorney which sets forth the description of the areas and improvements dedicated by the owner to the public and the extent of title which is being dedicated. 
2.  Copy of official action of board. A copy of the resolution adopted by the board accepting the streets, improvements, easements and any other property dedicated by the owner for public use as indicated on the plat, shall be attached to the plat before recording. This acceptance does not relieve the contractor of the obligation to guarantee against faulty materials as specified in section 66-149. 
3.  Certificate of approval of final plat. A certificate of approval of the final plat by the board, directly on the plat, as follows: "Pursuant to the Land Development Standards of Stephens County, Georgia, all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this plat was given approval by the Stephens County Board of Commissioners (insert the date of approval)." 

 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 404) 
Secs. 66-75—66-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL DESIGN AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 66-101. - Suitability of the land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue to increase the danger to health, safety, or property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 501) 
Sec. 66-102. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision must have approval of the board of commissioners. The name shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 502) 
Sec. 66-103. - Access. 
Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a public road or an approved private road. All private roads must meet specifications for public roads and must be inspected and approved by the board of commissioners. If in the future the county is requested to accept such roads, the roads must meet all county specifications enforced at the time they are to become public roads. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 503) 
Sec. 66-104. - Conformance to adopted major thoroughfare and other plans. 
All streets and other features of the major thoroughfare plan of the county shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the major thoroughfare plan adopted by the board of commissioners. When features or other plans adopted by the board such as schools or public building sites, parks, or other land for public uses are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acceptance or acquisition within a reasonable time by the appropriate public agency. Whenever a plat has proposed the dedication of land to public use that the board finds not required or the land not suitable for such public use, the board shall refuse to approve the plat and shall notify the subdivider of the reasons for such action. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 504) 
Sec. 66-105. - Large scale developments. 
A comprehensive group development including large scale construction of housing units together with necessary drives and ways of access may be approved by the board of commissioners although the design of the project does not include standard streets, lot and subdivision arrangements, if departure from this article can be made without destroying its intent, and if substantial evidence can be provided demonstrating the acceptable performance of the nonconformance. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 505) 
Sec. 66-106. - Easements. 
Easements shall be provided as required by utility companies for utility lines, underground mains and cables and shall be recorded on the final plat. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage right-of-way of adequate width to be reserved as open space. Parallel streets may be required by the board of commissioners in connection therewith. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 506) 
Sec. 66-107. - Reservation of public sites and open spaces. 
(a)  Where features of any comprehensive plan, such as school sites, parks, playgrounds and other public spaces, are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, such features shall be reserved by the subdivider; however, no more than 25 percent of the total area of the subdivision shall be required for reservation to fulfill the requirements of this section. Whenever the land required for such comprehensive plan features is not dedicated to and accepted, purchased, acquired, optioned, or condemned by the appropriate public agency within a four-year period from the date of recording the subdivision or by the time that at least 75 percent of the lots are built on and occupied, whichever is sooner, the subdivider may claim the original reservation and cause it to be subdivided in a manner suitable to the subdivider, subject to the provisions of this article. Whenever the board of commissioners executes a written release, stating that the reserved land is not to be acquired, the board shall waive the reservation requirements. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall not approve a plat when such planned features, as specified by the comprehensive plan, are not incorporated into the plat. 
(c)  Whenever the board of commissioners finds that proposed reservation of land or dedication of land for public use is not required or is unsuitable for the public use proposed, it may require the arrangement of lots to include such land in the subdivision. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 507) 
Sec. 66-108. - Community assets. 
In all subdivisions, due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as trees 15 inches or more in diameter, and watercourses, and for historical spots and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property or community. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 508) 
Secs. 66-109—66-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 66-141. - Speed design. 
All streets shall meet a 40 mile per hour speed design minimum as outlined in AASHTO's Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. A maximum degree of curve of 11 with a maximum percent grade of eight percent, a minimum stopping sight distance of 275 feet, a lane width of ten feet or 12 feet with a minimum width of shoulders at five feet and a right-of-way width of 60 feet to 80 feet shall be required. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 600) 
Sec. 66-142. - Continuation of existing streets. 
Existing streets shall be continued with a roadbed (shoulder to shoulder) of 30 feet or 34 feet width, but in no case less than the 30-foot roadbed for 20-foot paving or 34-foot roadbed for 24-foot paving width required in this article. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 601) 
Sec. 66-143. - Street names. 
Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive," "place," "way," or "court." Where available, through its index list of street names on file, the board of commissioners can assist the subdivider in avoiding duplication. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 602) 
Sec. 66-144. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 603) 
Sec. 66-145. - Culs-de-sac or dead-end streets. 
(a)  Minor streets or courts designed to have one end permanently closed shall be provided with a turnaround at the closed end. The turnaround must be paved to 65 feet in diameter. 
(b)  Where in the opinion of the board of commissioners it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining property, streets shall be extended to the boundary of such property and provided with a temporary turnaround. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 604) 
Sec. 66-146. - Development along major thoroughfare, limited access highway or railroad right-of-way. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains a major thoroughfare, a limited access highway, or a railroad right-of-way, the board of commissioners may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street or at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land, with a nonaccess reservation suitably platted. Due regard shall be given requirements for approach grades and future grade separations in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to a major thoroughfare (or limited access highway) but only to access streets. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 605) 
Sec. 66-147. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial, or industrial developments but shall not be provided in one-family and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the board of commissioners of the need for alleys. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 606) 
Sec. 66-148. - Street right-of-way widths and construction requirements. 
(a)  Width. The right-of-way shall be the distance across a road or street from property line to property line. The minimum right-of-way width shall be 80 feet, except in subdivisions where both water and sewer lines are available and the road will be paved in which case the minimum right-of-way width shall be 60 feet. 
(b)  Grade. A minimum of roadway to be graded shall be 30 feet for 20-foot pavement and 34 feet for 24-foot pavement. All stumps, rocks and other obstructions shall be removed to at least two feet below subgrade. The maximum grade shall not exceed eight percent. Roads shall be paved with a triple surface treatment using stone sizes 5, 7, 8, 9, or plant mix; minimum thickness for plant mix shall be two-inch compacted. New subdivision roads leading from existing public dirt roads shall meet all standards including paving. All paving required under this subsection shall be in accordance with the state department of transportation standards. 
(c)  Fill. All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches, or any other places as needed. The fills shall be spread in layers not to exceed 12 inches loose and compacted with a sheep's foot roller. Fill slopes shall not exceed a 2 to 1 slope. 
(d)  Subgrade. The subgrade shall be properly shaped, ditch lines sloped and compacted to conform with grade lines, and cross sections and shall have crown of a fourth-inch per foot. All unsuitable materials shall be excavated and replaced with suitable material properly compacted at 95 percent. 
(e)  Base. The base shall be a graded aggregate base course of one and one-half inches and down crusher run or other approved material such as top soil. Base cross slopes shall be a fourth-inch per foot or meet the state department of transportation standards for super elevation in curves. The minimum thickness shall be six inches after being compacted to 98 percent compaction. 
(f)  Shoulder cross slopes. Shoulder cross slopes shall be one inch per foot except in super elevated curves. Curve cross slopes shall meet the state department of transportation standards. 
(g)  Storm drainage. The street and roadway must have adequate drainage, including necessary open ditches, pipes, and culverts; intersectional drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and to be of sufficient length to permit full roadway width and slopes. The diameter of pipe shall be based on water flow, but in no case shall it be less than 15 inches or "Type B" pipe shall be used in all stream crossings, and riprap used at each end to prevent erosion. 
(h)  Erosion control. All banks and ditch slopes shall be grassed to prevent washing. Silt fence or hay bales shall be used during construction at all places that pose an erosion problem. 
(i)  Underground utilities. All underground utilities shall be installed after the grading has been completed but before the base is installed. 
(j)  Roadway signs. All street signs, stop signs, curve signs, and speed limit signs shall be placed by the developer prior to accepting the roadway. Signs shall be in accordance with GMUTCD published by the state department of transportation. 
(k)  Water line. All subdivisions shall include a minimum six-inch water line with fire hydrants located every 1,000 feet. The material shall meet the City of Toccoa's specifications for water lines. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 607) 
Sec. 66-149. - Guarantee against faulty materials. 
Final approval of street improvements shall be granted and streets accepted for maintenance by the county only in accordance with one of the following provisions: 
(1)  The street improvements shall have been completed and in place for a period of one year and shall, upon inspection, following such period of time, be found to be free from defective workmanship or material and free from sinkholes or other settling. 
(2)  Following otherwise satisfactory completion of such work, the subdivider shall post with the county a guaranty bond in an amount equal to ten percent of the street and utility improvement cost for the street for which acceptance is sought. The bond will guarantee the county that the street has been installed in a workmanlike manner, that same is free from defects caused by faulty material or workmanship, and that the street will remain in an acceptable condition for a period of at least one year. The board of commissioners may also authorize cash bonds of ten percent of the street and utility cost in lieu of guaranty bonds. If at the end of the one-year period the street is found to have settled or be otherwise unacceptable because of faulty workmanship or materials, any defects shall be repaired at the cost of the subdivider up to the amount of the guaranty bond, and upon his failure or refusal to do so within 90 days after demand is made upon him by the board, then the county shall make such repairs as are reasonably necessary and recover the cost thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 608) 
Secs. 66-150—66-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 

Sec. 66-181. - Lot sizes and proportions. 
(a)  Residential lots shall meet the lot width and lot area requirements of any existing zoning ordinance and/or those specified for lot size based on slope. 
(b)  Lot size requirements are as follows for single family dwellings including but not limited to: manufactured or mobile homes, stick built homes, modular homes, etc., and individual lots in subdivisions or mobile home lots located in areas other than commercial mobile home parks. Area requirements for multiple dwellings on a single recorded lot, where not prohibited by local zoning, must be provided in multiples of the following minimum lot sizes for each dwelling to be constructed on the recorded lot. See Table MT-1 and subsections (1) through (6) as follows. 
Table MT-1  Minimum (Min.) Lot Sizes, Minimum Lot Widths and Maximum (Max.) Allowable Sewage Flow for the Type of Water Supply System. 

 
* In this context "non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system.  ** gpad=gallons per acre per day=gal/acre/day. 
(1)  The above minimum lot sizes are for the typical size home (three or four bedroom) with basic appurtenances such as: driveway, minimum number of trees, and water supply line. If larger homes, swimming pools, tennis courts or outbuildings, etc. are proposed to be constructed or if trees would interfere with installation of an onsite sewage management system, the county board of health will require larger lots to assure useable soil area. 
(2)  The county board of health may also require larger lot sizes when physical factors indicate the need to do so. These factors include, but are not limited to, the availability of sufficient unobstructed land areas for an approved on-site sewage management system and approved replacement system, slope greater than five percent, percolation rates higher than 45 minutes per inch, need for subsurface drainage or adverse topographic features. 
(3)  Lots shall be a minimum width of 100 feet or 150 feet measured within the area where an approved on-site sewage management system and replacement system are to be located when served by a public water supply system or non-public water supply system respectively. 
(4)  All residential lots must contain at least 21,780 square feet of usable soil area for individual sewage disposal. 
(5)  There must be an unobstructed area on each lot for installation of an approved on-site sewage management system and an area equal in size for a conventional system or larger area, as appropriate, for an approved replacement system; this will include sufficient area for necessary site modifications for installation of both the initial system and a replacement system. All pertinent county zoning set-backs and other space requirements must also be met. 
(6)  The maximum daily sewage flow for each lot or parcel of land shall not exceed 600 gpad when served by non-public or individual water supply system of 1,200 gpad when served by public water supply system. When sewage flows exceed these quantities (600 or 1,200 gpad as indicated) for a given dwelling structure, the minimum lot size or parcel of land shall be increased proportionately. Example: Assume a public water supply exists (so 1,200 gpad maximum sewage flow allowed per minimum required land area of 21,780 square feet), and there is a proposed sewage flow of 5,000 gpd. To determine X= the square footage of the lot needed, use the following formula: 
X= 5,000 gal/day / 1,200 gal/acre/day 
X= 4.17 acres. 
X= 4.17 acres x 43,560 sq. ft./acre. 
X= 181,500 sq. ft. area of land needed. 
Likewise, for a non-public (individual) water supply, to determine Y= the square footage of the lot needed for a proposed sewage flow of 5,000 gpd, use the following formula: 
Y= 5,000 gal/day / 600 gal/acre/day 
Y= 8.33 acres. 
Y= 8.33 acres x 43,560 sq. ft./acre. 
Y= 363,000 sq. ft. area of land needed. 
Minimum (Min) Lot Sizes, Minimum Lot Widths and Maximum (Max) Allowable Sewage Flow for the Type of Water Supply System. 

 
* In this context "non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system.  ** gpad=gallons per acre per day=gal/acre/day. 
(c)  Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to provide a service area and off-street parking suitable to the use intended. 
(d)  Residential corner lots shall have an adequate width to meet building setback requirements from both abutting streets. 
(e)  The minimum setback for buildings shall be 40 feet from right-of-way lines and a minimum of ten feet from the side property lines. All property lines are considered side property lines except those adjoining right-of-way lines. 
(f)  The minimum setback for buildings for properties with frontage on Lake Hartwell shoreline property owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shall be 40 feet from the right-of-way lines, ten feet from any side line and five feet from the property line abutting Lake Hartwell shoreline property owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. All property lines are considered side property lines except those adjoining right-of-way lines and those adjoining Lake Hartwell shoreline property owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 701; Ord. No. 04-01, § 3, 4-5-2004; Ord. of 8-9-2011(2)) 
Sec. 66-182. - Adequate building sites. 
Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements or building setback lines required by this article and any existing zoning ordinance as is appropriate. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 702) 
Sec. 66-183. - Lot line arrangements. 
Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot must front for at least 20 feet upon or have access to a dedicated public street or road. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 703) 
Sec. 66-184. - Panhandle or flat lots. 
Panhandle or flat lots of a required width and area may be allowed where the terrain makes standard design or frontage impossible or impractical. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle access shall not be less than 20 feet wide. Not more than two such panhandle access points shall abut each other, and if so combined, the width of each panhandle may be reduced to not less than 15 feet. All such access points or combinations thereof shall be separated from each other by the frontage of a standard lot required under the other provisions of this article (see illustration 1). 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 705) 
Sec. 66-185. - Sidewalks, curbs and gutters. 
(a)  Sidewalks. This specification does not apply to second home-type developments with seasonal use or to developments that do not have locally centralized public facilities such as schools, churches, etc. The board of commissioners shall have final authority in determining the need for sidewalks. 
(b)  Concrete curb and gutter. Curb and gutter may not be required on all developments, provided the developer furnishes proof satisfactory to the board of commissioners that all grades on his road and road ditches will be stabilized without the use of curb and guttering. In lieu of curb and guttering, the developer may stabilize road ditches by paving or by rock check dams or by methods approved by the board. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 706) 

Flag and Pan Handle Lots 
Secs. 66-186—66-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 66-221. - Performances and specifications. 
Every subdivider shall be required to make the improvements outlined in this article in accordance with the specifications in this article or otherwise adopted by the board of commissioners. The improvements can be made by the county at the expense of the subdivider or the subdivider can make the improvements with the approval of the board. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 801) 
Sec. 66-222. - Monuments. 
Lot and block corners shall be marked with solid steel rods not less than five-eighths inch in diameter and 24 inches in length and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 802) 
Sec. 66-223. - Water supply system. 
Water mains within the subdivision must be provided with connections to each lot if a community or public water system is available unless the City of Toccoa has indicated in writing to the board of commissioners its willingness to bore under the pavement for water and sewer connections. The minimum diameter of water pipes shall meet the standards of the City of Toccoa. If a municipal water supply is not available to the subdivision, then the developer shall provide an adequate water source and an adequate water storage facility. This shall be accomplished by the use of individual wells for each housing unit or by a community water system. Individual wells are the responsibility of the lot purchaser; however, the community (subdivision) water system shall meet the standards of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, and a letter of approval from the environmental protection division shall be attached to the final plat when it is filed in the office of the clerk of court. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 803) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82. 
Sec. 66-224. - Sanitary sewers. 
If the sewage disposal facilities cannot be connected to a trunkline sewer at the time of the development of the subdivision, septic tanks, an oxidation pond, or another approved method of treatment of sanitary sewerage shall be installed by and at the expense of the subdivider or lot purchaser for interim use, in conformity with the requirements of the county health department. No private community systems shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 804) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82. 
Secs. 66-225—66-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 66-261. - Hardship. 
Where the board of commissioners finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with the regulations of this chapter due to unusual topographic or other conditions beyond the control of the subdivider upon due consideration, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; however, such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the intent or purpose of these regulations. Any variance thus authorized is required to be entered in writing in the minutes of the first board meeting following issuance of the variance and the reason which justified the departure set forth. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 901) 
Sec. 66-262. - Experimental subdivisions. 
The board of commissioners may waive, vary, or modify the standards and requirements of the regulations of this chapter if, in its judgment an unusual or experimental subdivision might prove of considerable merit toward the use of unusual materials in constructing required improvements, or a new or untried design concept in the area which appears promising. Special attention may be given to experimental subdivisions which are related to low cost housing design in an effort to provide housing for lower income families. The board shall require the subdivider to provide a written proposal stating the nature of the experiment, and cost-benefit study following the implementation of same. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 902) 
Sec. 66-263. - Comprehensive group housing development. 
A comprehensive group housing development to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least four acres, including construction of two or more buildings, together with the necessary drives and accessways, and which is not subdivided into the customary lots, blocks and streets, may be approved by the board of commissioners if, in the opinion of the board, departure from the foregoing regulations can be made without destroying the intent of the regulations. Plans for all such developments shall be submitted to the board whether or not such plat is to be recorded. No sales permits shall be issued until such approval has been given. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 903) 
Sec. 66-264. - Conditions. 
In granting variances, modifications, and approval for experimental subdivisions, the board of commissioners shall require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied, modified, or approved. They shall include, without being limited to, personal, surety, performance, or maintenance bonds, affidavits, covenants, or other legal instruments. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 904) 
Sec. 66-265. - Justification for variances. 
The burden of proof and/or justification of a need for a variance from the standards of this chapter shall be provided by the developer in the form of written documents and/or supporting graphics. The appropriate request for variance forms must be completed and attached. No variances shall be permitted which would nullify the intent of these standards and the adopted policies of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1995, § 905) 
ARTICLE IX. - MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING 

Sec. 66-266. - Purpose and intent. 
Multi-family housing shall be allowed in areas of Stephens County that are contiguous to the municipal boundaries of the City of Toccoa, subject to the provisions of this article. Contiguous shall be defined as property touching or in contact with the municipal boundaries of the City of Toccoa. Multi-family housing provides flexibility in minimum lot sizes, the configuration of lots and the combination of housing types in areas contiguous to the municipal boundaries of the City of Toccoa. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 66-267. - Definitions. 
(a)  Condominium. A form of individual ownership of a unit, combined with joint ownership of common areas of the building and the grounds in a development. 
(b)  Multi-family dwelling. A building consisting of two or more dwelling units with varying arrangements of entrances and party walls. 
(c)  Townhouse. One of a row of houses joined by common sidewalls. 
(d)  Two-family dwelling. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 66-268. - Permitted multi-family housing. 
The following housing types are permitted in areas contiguous to the municipal boundaries of the City of Toccoa. 
(1)  Any single-family dwelling or housing unit that meets county standards. 
(2)  Two-family dwelling. 
(3)  Multi-family dwellings. 
(4)  Townhouses. 
(5)  Condominiums. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 66-269. - Minimum lot size. 
(a)  Single-family: One acre with public water and private sewage treatment. Three-quarters of an acre with public water and sewer. 
(b)  Multi-family: Minimum 6,000 square feet of land area per structure, 3,000 square feet of land area per family. All multi-family lots must have public water and sewer or shall not be permitted. For the purposes of this section, any structure larger than a single-family dwelling shall be considered multi-family. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 66-270. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(b)  Front yard set back: 30 feet. 
(c)  Side yard set back: Ten feet. 
(d)  Rear yard set back: 20 feet. 
(e)  Corner lots must have an additional width of 15 feet along the side yard line. 
(f)  Detached, non-living utility buildings shall have a rear yard setback of ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, 10-3-2006) 
Chapter 70 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-10(2); any ordinance relating to specific public improvements or assessments for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-10(5); any ordinance, consistent with this Code, providing for the levy or collection of taxes or for an annual budget or appropriations saved from repeal, § 1-10(6); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-121 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Issuance of notes, etc., in anticipation of taxes, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2; revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. title 48; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq.; excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Board of tax assessors. 
Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-290(b), the number of members to serve on the county board of tax assessors shall be three. 
(Res. of 2-7-1989) 
Cross reference— Other boards and commissions, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 70-2. - Payments to tax commissioner. 
The tax commissioner of the county shall be authorized to receive in payment of taxes and license fees personal, company, certified, treasurer's or cashier's checks, or bank, postal, or express money orders. The tax commissioner shall not be personally liable for any unpaid instruments received by such officer provided that: 
(1)  The instrument presented for payment of taxes or license fees is not a two party instrument, that is the person to whom the instrument is initially payable is someone other than the county, the tax commissioner of the county, or some other similar designation; 
(2)  The tax commissioner takes reasonable steps to determine there is nothing irregular on the face of the instrument or irregular about its use in payment of the taxes or license fees under the circumstances; and 
(3)  If the instrument is returned unpaid, the tax commissioner shall take all actions authorized under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-146 to collect the unpaid instrument. 
(Res. of 12-16-1980) 
Sec. 70-3. - Exemption of certain tangible personal property. 
One hundred percent of the value of the tangible personal property as is more fully defined in Ga. Const. art. VII, § II, ¶ III, shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation, including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes. 
(Res. of 5-1-1979) 
Secs. 70-4—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCISE TAX ON ROOMS, LODGINGS AND ACCOMMODATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 

Sec. 70-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County means the area contained within the boundaries of Stephens County excluding only those areas within the corporate limits of any municipality which also levies a hotel-motel excise tax as provided by state law. 
Due date means from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio, hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. Such term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession of, or the right to use or possess, any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to use or possess the furnishings or the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, or use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the county including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for a period of more than ten consecutive days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose the tax provided in this article. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 8-15-1995) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-32. - Violation. 
Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended or who shall fail to do anything required by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be guilty of a violation of a county ordinance, amenable to the process of the magistrate court of the county, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 14, 8-15-1995) 
Sec. 70-33. - Levied. 
There is set and levied on each occupant of a guest room of any hotel located within the county a tax in the amount of five percent of the rent for such occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 2, 8-15-1995) 
Sec. 70-34. - Collection of tax. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of a hotel located within the county to collect the tax imposed on occupants pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 3, 8-15-1995) 
Sec. 70-35. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tax shall be imposed on accommodations furnished to a permanent resident, furnished for use as meeting rooms, furnished for a period of one or more days for use by the state or local government officials or employees traveling on official business, or for any other purpose exempted by law. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 4, 8-15-1995) 
Sec. 70-36. - Registration of business. 
Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the county shall immediately register such business with the county administrator, on a form provided by the administrator for such purpose. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date this section becomes effective; but such grace period for registration after the effective date of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of such tax on and after the date of imposition thereof. The required registration under this section shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business, and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the county administrator. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; by a member or partner in case of ownership by an association or partnership; or by an officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 5, 8-15-1995) 
Sec. 70-37. - Certificate of authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator as provided in this article, the administrator shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 6, 8-15-1995) 
Sec. 70-38. - Due and payable monthly. 
All taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable to the administrator monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 7, 8-15-1995) 
Sec. 70-39. - Reimbursement. 
Operators collecting the tax levied under this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and payment of the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the state sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 8, 8-15-1995) 
Sec. 70-40. - Estimate of gross rentals. 
If any operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this article, the administrator shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals of such operator which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in which the operator failed to file the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come to the possession of the administrator. 
(1)  Notice of determination. The administrator or his designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the administrator. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(2)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination made under this section shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 9, 8-15-1995) 
Sec. 70-41. - Record retention. 
Each operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this article shall keep for a period of at least three years all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers setting forth the rent charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the administrator may require. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 10, 8-15-1995) 
Sec. 70-42. - Powers of administrator. 
The administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed in this article, and in so doing shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To examine, or authorize the examination of, the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to persons subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(2)  To require the filing of reports by any person or person having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax levied in this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 11, 8-15-1995) 
Sec. 70-43. - Collection through court action. 
At any time within three years after any tax or any portion of such tax required to be collected pursuant to this article becomes due and payable, the county attorney may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the county to collect such amount due together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 12, 8-15-1995) 
Sec. 70-44. - Purchaser liable for tax. 
If any operator becomes liable for any amount required to be paid by this article and subsequently thereto sells out his business or quits the business, the successors or assignees of such operator shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due. If the purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount, he shall become personally liable therefor to the extent of the purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 13, 8-15-1995) 
Chapter 75 - PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY (PWSF) 
ARTICLE I. - TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 

Sec. 75-1. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Personal Wireless Service Facility ("PWSF") Ordinance of Stephens County ("county"), Georgia," also known as "the chapter," "this chapter," and "chapter" herein. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the locating of personal wireless service facilities ("PWSF") and their component parts, including but not limited to towers, antenna[s], ground equipment and related accessory structures. The purposes and intent of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public by regulating the locating of telecommunication facilities. 
(2)  Minimize the impacts of PWSFs on surrounding land uses by establishing standards for location, structural integrity, and compatibility. 
(3)  Encourage the location and collocation of PWSF equipment on existing structures thereby minimizing new visual, aesthetic, and public safety impacts, effects upon the natural environment and wildlife, and to reduce the need for additional towers. 
(4)  Accommodate the growing need and demand for PWSF services. 
(5)  Encourage coordination between suppliers and providers of PWSF services. 
(6)  Establish predictable and balanced codes governing the construction and location of PWSF within the confines of permissible local regulations. 
(7)  Establish review procedures to ensure that applications for PWSF are reviewed and acted upon within a reasonable period of time as required by applicable state and federal regulations. 
(8)  Respond to the policies embodied in the Telecommunications Act of 1996; The Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, and other applicable federal and state regulations in such a manner as not to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless services. 
(9)  Protect the character of the county while meeting the needs of its citizens to enjoy the benefits of PWSF. 
(10)  Encourage the use of public lands, buildings, and structures as locations for PWSF demonstrating concealed technologies and revenue generating methodologies. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-3. - Authority. 
The provisions of this chapter are adopted under authority granted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia with particular reference to O.C.G.A. ch. 66B of tit. 36. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-4. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall be effective from and after the date of its adoption by the county commission March 10, 2015. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-5. - Repeal of pre-existing telecommunications tower ordinance. 
The provisions and requirements of this chapter supersede all the provisions and requirements of the pre-existing county's telecommunications tower ordinance adopted on November 5, 2002 and amended through March 10, 2015. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Secs. 75-6—75-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JURISDICTION 

[Sec. 75-10. - Generally.] 
These regulations shall govern the establishment and maintenance of PWSF. Provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to all areas within the jurisdiction of county. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
ARTICLE III. - INTERPRETATION OF CERTAIN TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 75-11. - Interpretation. 
The following assumptions shall be made: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(2)  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular. 
(3)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(4)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(5)  The words "used" or "occupied" include the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-12. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Alternative structure means a structure that is not primarily constructed for the purpose of holding antennas but on which one or more antennas may be mounted, including buildings, water tanks, pole signs, billboards, church steeples, and electric power transmission towers. 
Amateur radio tower means any tower used for amateur radio transmissions consistent with the "Complete FCC U.S. Amateur Part 97 Rules and Regulations" for amateur radio towers. 
Ancillary structure means, for the purposes of this chapter, any form of development associated with a communications facility, including foundations, concrete slabs on grade, guy anchors, generators, and transmission cable supports, but excluding equipment cabinets. 
Antenna means any apparatus designed for the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, including telephonic, radio or television communications. Types of elements include omni-directional (whip) antennas, sectionalized (panel) antennas, multi or single bay (FM and TV), yagi, or parabolic (dish) antennas. 
Antenna array means a single or group of antenna elements and associated mounting hardware, transmission lines, or other appurtenances which share a common attachment device such as a mounting frame or mounting support structure for the sole purpose of transmitting or receiving electromagnetic waves. 
Antenna element means any antenna or antenna array. 
ASR means the antenna structure registration number as required by the FAA and FCC. 
Base station means the electronic equipment utilized by the wireless providers for the transmission and reception of radio signals. 
Board of county commissioners means the Board of County Commissioners of Stephens County. 
Breakpoint technology means the engineering design of a monopole wherein a specified point on the monopole is designed to have stresses concentrated so that the point is at least five percent more susceptible to failure than any other point along the monopole so that in the event of a structural failure of the monopole, the failure will occur at the breakpoint rather than at the base plate, anchor bolts, or any other point on the monopole. 
Collocation means the practice of installing and operating multiple wireless carriers, service providers, and/or radio common carrier licensees on the same tower or attached communication facility using different and separate antenna, feed lines, and radio frequency generating and receiving equipment. 
Combined antenna means an antenna or an antenna array designed and utilized to provide services for more than one wireless provider, or a single wireless provider utilizing more than one frequency band or spectrum, for the same or similar type of services. 
Concealed means a tower, ancillary structure, or equipment compound that is not readily identifiable as such, and is designed to be aesthetically compatible with existing and proposed building(s) and uses on a site. There are two types of concealed facilities: 
(1)  Antenna attachments, including painted antenna and feed lines to match the color of a building or structure, faux windows, dormers or other architectural features that blend with an existing or proposed building or structure; and 
(2)  Freestanding. Freestanding concealed towers usually have a secondary, obvious function which may include church steeple, windmill, bell tower, clock tower, light standard, flagpole with or without a flag, or tree. 
COW "cellular on wheels" means a temporary PWSF, typically located on a trailer, that can be erected/extended to provide short-term, high volume communications services to a specific location. 
Development area means the area occupied by a communications facility including areas inside or under an antenna-support structure's framework, equipment cabinets, ancillary structures, and/or access ways. 
Discontinued means any tower without any mounted transmitting and/or receiving antennas in continued use for a period of 180 consecutive days. 
Equipment compound means the fenced-in area surrounding the ground-based wireless communication facility including the areas inside or under a tower's framework and ancillary structures such as equipment necessary to operate the antenna on the structure that is above the base flood elevation including cabinets, shelters, pedestals, and other similar structures. 
Equipment cabinet mean any structure above the base flood elevation including cabinets, pedestals, and other similar structures and used exclusively to contain radio or other equipment necessary for the transmission or reception of wireless communication signals. 
Equipment shelter means a self-contained prefabricated building, made of permanent materials such as steel or concrete, which contains all electronic ancillary equipment and normally including a generator. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Feed line means cables or fiber optic lines used as the interconnecting media between the transmission/receiving base station and the antenna. 
Flush-mounted means any antenna or antenna array attached directly to the face of the support structure or building such that no portion of the antenna extends above the height of the support structure or building. Where a maximum flush-mounting distance is given, that distance shall be measured from the outside edge of the support structure or building to the inside edge of the antenna. 
Geographic search ring means an area designated by a wireless provider or operator for a new base station, produced in accordance with generally accepted principles of wireless engineering. 
Guyed structure. See "Tower." 
Handoff candidate means a wireless communication facility that receives call transference from another wireless facility, usually located in an adjacent first "tier" surrounding the initial wireless facility. 
Lattice structure. See "Tower." 
Least visually obtrusive profile means the design of a wireless communication facility intended to present a visual profile that is the minimum profile necessary for the facility to properly function. 
Mitigation means a modification of an existing tower to increase the height, or to improve its integrity, by replacing or removing one or several tower(s) located in proximity to a proposed new tower in order to encourage compliance with this chapter, or improve aesthetics or functionality of the overall wireless network. 
Monopole structure. See "Tower." 
Non-concealed means a wireless communication facility that is readily identifiable as such and can be either freestanding or attached. 
OTARD means over the air reception devices which are limited to either a "dish" antenna one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite service, or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals via satellite, or an antenna that is one meter or less in diameter and is designed to receive video programming services via broadband radio service (wireless cable), or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals other than via satellite or an antenna that is designed to receive local television broadcast signals. 
Personal wireless service facility ("PWSF") means any staffed or unstaffed location for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals or other wireless communications, including commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and usually consisting of an antenna or group of antennas, transmission cables, feed lines, equipment cabinets or shelters, and may include a tower. The following developments shall be deemed a PWSF: new, mitigated, or existing towers, public towers, replacement towers, collocation on existing towers, attached concealed and non-concealed antenna, concealed towers, and non-concealed towers (monopoles, lattice and guyed), and certain towers constructed for OTARD purposes which (a) are not "customer-end" installations designed to permit reception of fixed wireless communications and exceed 70 feet in height, or (b) are "customer-end" installations for reception of fixed wireless communications but exceed 47 feet in height. 
Planning commission means the planning commission of the county as defined by the county zoning ordinance. 
Public safety communications equipment means all communications equipment utilized by a public entity for the purpose of ensuring the safety of the citizens of the county and operating within the frequency range of 145 MHz through 155 MHz, 445 MHz through 475 MHz and 700 MHz through 1,000 MHz and any future spectrum allocations at the direction of the FCC. 
Radio frequency emissions means any electromagnetic radiation or other communications signal emitted from an antenna or antenna-related equipment. 
Radio frequency propagation analysis means computer modeling to show the level of signal saturation in a given geographical area. 
Replacement. See "Mitigation." 
Satellite earth station means a single or group of parabolic or dish antennas mounted to a support device that may be a pole or truss assembly attached to a foundation in the ground, or in some other configuration, including the associated separate equipment cabinets necessary for the transmission or reception of wireless communications signals with satellites. 
Stanchion means a vertical support structure generally utilized to support exterior lighting elements. 
Streamlined processing means expedited review process for collocations. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which required permanent location on the ground, or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, including advertising signs. 
Temporary PWSF means a temporary tower or other structure, typically located on a trailer, that provides interim short-term communications when permanent PWSF equipment is unavailable or offline. A temporary PWSF meets an immediate demand for service in the event of emergencies and/or public events where the permanent wireless network is unavailable or insufficient to satisfy demand. 
Tower means a physical structure, typically metallic in composition, used as part of a PWSF to provide an elevated location to attach antenna and other equipment necessary for the operation of a PWSF. Towers do not include any device used to attach antennas to an existing building, unless the device extends above the highest point of the building by more than 20 feet. Types of towers include the following: 
Guyed tower means a style of tower consisting of a single truss assembly composed of sections with bracing incorporated. The sections are attached to each other, and the assembly is attached to a foundation and supported by a series of wires that are connected to anchors placed in the ground or on a building. 
Lattice structure means a self-supporting tapered style of tower that consists of vertical and horizontal supports with multiple legs and cross bracing, and metal crossed strips or bars to support antennas. 
Monopole structure means a style of freestanding tower consisting of a single shaft usually composed of two or more hollow sections that are in turn attached to a foundation. This type of tower is designed to support itself without the use of guy wires or other stabilization devices. These facilities are mounted to a foundation that rests on or in the ground or on a building's roof. All feed lines shall be installed within the shaft of the structure. 
Tower base means the foundation, usually concrete, on which the tower and other support equipment are situated. For measurement calculations, the tower base is that point on the foundation reached by dropping a perpendicular weight from the geometric center of the tower. 
Tower height means the vertical distance measured from the grade line to the highest point of the tower, including any antenna, lighting or other equipment affixed thereto. 
Tower site means the land area that contains, or will contain, a proposed tower, support structures and other related buildings and improvements. 
Variance means a modification of the terms of this chapter where a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in an unnecessary site specific hardship and shall be recommended by the planning director and reviewed and issued by the board of county commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
ARTICLE IV. - EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 75-13. - Existing telecommunications towers. 
Telecommunications towers existing prior to the adoption of the PSWF chapter on March 10, 2015 or permitted prior to the adoption of this chapter shall be allowed to continue to operate provided they met the requirements set forth by the county at the time of final inspection; not including any towers that are currently in violation of this chapter and pre-existing tower ordinance of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-14. - Exempt facilities. 
The following items are exempt from the provisions of this chapter; notwithstanding any other provisions: 
(1)  Satellite earth stations that are one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter in all residential zoning districts and two meters or less in all other zoning districts. 
(2)  A government-owned communications facility, upon the declaration of a state of emergency by federal, state, or local government, and a written determination of public necessity by the county designee; except that such facility must comply with all federal and state requirements. No communications facility shall be exempt from the provisions of this division beyond the duration of the state of emergency. 
(3)  A government-owned communications facility erected for the purposes of installing antenna(s) and ancillary equipment necessary to provide communications for public health and safety. 
(4)  A temporary PWSF, upon the declaration of a state of emergency by federal, state, or local government, or determination of public necessity by the county and approved by the county; except that such facility must comply with all federal and state requirements. The PWSF may be exempt from the provisions of this division up to 60 days after the duration of the state of emergency. 
(5)  Over the air reception devices ("OTARD") as that term is defined by the Federal Communications Commission, provided that same do not require the construction of a tower or other structure which height exceeds 70 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015; Ord. of 7-11-2017) 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 75-15. - Application of this chapter. 
This chapter shall apply to the development activities including installation, construction, or modification of all antenna and tower facilities including but not limited to: 
(1)  Non-commercial, amateur radio station antennas. 
(2)  Existing towers. 
(3)  Proposed towers. 
(4)  Public towers. 
(5)  Mitigation of towers. 
(6)  Collocation on existing towers. 
(7)  Attached PWSF. 
(8)  Concealed PWSF. 
(9)  Non-concealed towers. 
(10)  Temporary PWSF (a/k/a COW). 
(11)  OTARD towers. 
(12)  Broadcasting towers. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-16. - Abandonment (discontinued use). 
(a)  PWSF towers, antennas, and the equipment compound shall be removed, at the owner's expense, within 180 days of cessation of use, unless the abandonment is associated with a mitigation as provided in the "mitigation" section of this chapter, in which case the removal shall occur within 90 days of cessation of use. 
(b)  An owner wishing to extend the time for removal or reactivation shall submit an application stating the reason for such extension. The county may extend the time for removal or reactivation up to 60 additional days upon a showing of good and unique cause. If the tower or antenna is not removed within this time, the county may give notice that it will contract for removal within 30 days following written notice to the owner. Thereafter, the county may cause removal of the tower with costs being borne by the owner. 
(c)  Upon removal of the PWSF tower, antenna, and equipment compound, the development area shall be returned to its natural state and topography and vegetated consistent with the natural surroundings or consistent with the current uses of the surrounding or adjacent land at the time of removal, excluding the foundation, which does not have to be removed. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-17. - Conflict with other laws or regulations. 
When the requirements of this chapter conflict with the requirements of other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances of Stephens County, or deed restrictions imposed by the developer or subdivider, the more stringent requirements shall govern. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-18. - Severability of chapter. 
Should any section or provisions of this chapter be decided by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-19. - Interference with public safety communications. 
In order to facilitate the regulation, placement, and construction of antenna, and to ensure that all parties are complying to the fullest extent possible with the rules, regulations, and/or guidelines of the FCC, each owner of an antenna, antenna array or applicant for a collocation shall agree in a written statement to the following: 
(1)  Compliance with "good engineering practices" as defined by the FCC in its rules and regulations. 
(2)  Compliance with FCC regulations regarding susceptibility to radio frequency interference, frequency coordination requirements, general technical standards for power, antenna, bandwidth limitations, frequency stability, transmitter measurements, operating requirements, and any and all other federal statutory and regulatory requirements relating to radio frequency interference (RFI). 
(3)  In the case of an application for collocated PWSF, the applicant, together with the owner of the subject site, shall use their best efforts to provide a composite analysis of all users of the site to determine that the applicant's proposed facilities will not cause radio frequency interference with the county's public safety communications equipment and will implement appropriate technical measures, as described in antenna element replacements, to attempt to prevent such interference. 
(4)  Whenever the county has encountered radio frequency interference with its public safety communications equipment, and it believes that such interference has been or is being caused by one or more antenna arrays, the following steps shall be taken: 
a.  The county shall provide notification to all wireless service providers operating in the county of possible interference with the public safety communications equipment, and upon such notifications, the owners shall use their best efforts to cooperate and coordinate with the county and among themselves to investigate and mitigate the interference, if any, utilizing the procedures set forth in the joint wireless industry-public safety "Enhanced Best Practices Guide," released by the FCC in Appendix D of FCC 04-168 (released August 6, 2004), including the "Good Engineering Practices," as may be amended or revised by the FCC from time to time in any successor regulations. 
b.  If any equipment owner fails to cooperate with the county in complying with the owner's obligations under this section or if there is a determination of radio frequency interference with the county's public safety communications equipment, the owner who failed to cooperate and/or the owner of the equipment which caused the interference shall be responsible for reimbursing the county for all costs associated with ascertaining and resolving the interference, including but not limited to any engineering studies obtained by the county to determine the source of the interference. For the purposes of this subsection, failure to cooperate shall include failure to initiate any response or action as described in the "Enhanced Best Practices Guide" within 24 hours of county's notification. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Secs. 75-20—75-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PERMITS REQUIRED, SITING ALTERNATIVE ORDER, PERMITS REQUIRED BY ZONING DISTRICT FOR ANTENNAS, TOWERS, AND ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 75-29. - Permits required. 
(a)  Building code permit requirements. PWSF infrastructure shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with all applicable building code requirements. 
(b)  Planning permit requirements. 
(1)  Permit (Level I). The permit issued by the planning director as designated by this chapter, to an individual, corporation, partnership, or other entity to engage in the creation of amateur radio tower, an OTARD facility greater than 70 feet in height but equal to or less than 120 feet in height, or a temporary PWSF (a/k/a COW). 
(2)  Permit (Level II). The permit issued by the planning director as designated by this chapter to an individual, corporation, partnership, or other entity to engage in collocated or combined PWSF, concealed or non-concealed attached PWSF, antenna and associated equipment replacements, PWSF tower replacement or mitigation, an OTARD facility in excess of 120 feet in height but equal to or less than 150 feet in height, or new PWSF concealed towers. 
(3)  Permit (Level III). The conditional use permit issued by the planning director (after public hearing, recommendation by the planning commission and approval by the board of county commissioners) as designated by this chapter, to an individual, corporation, partnership, or other entity to engage in the creation of new non-concealed PWSF towers. 
(4)  Permit (Level IV). The conditional use permit issued by the planning director (after public hearing, recommendation by the planning commission and approval by the board of county commissioners) as designated by this chapter, to an individual, corporation, partnership, or other entity holding a broadcast license issued by the FCC to engage in the creation of a new AM, FM or TV broadcast tower. 
(c)  Permit table. 

 
NOTE: P—Permitted by right       C—Permitted conditionally 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015; Ord. of 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 75-30. - Siting alternatives order. 
(a)  Siting of new PWSF. Siting of a new PWSF shall be in accordance with the preferred siting alternatives order: 
(1)  Concealed attached PWSF. 
a.  On publicly-owned property. 
b.  On nonpublicly-owned property. 
(2)  Collocated or combined PWSF. 
a.  On publicly-owned property. 
b.  On nonpublicly-owned property. 
(3)  Non-concealed attached PWSF. 
a.  On publicly-owned property. 
b.  On nonpublicly-owned property. 
(4)  Mitigation of existing PWSF. 
a.  On publicly-owned property. 
b.  On nonpublicly-owned property. 
(5)  Concealed freestanding PWSF. 
a.  On publicly-owned property. 
b.  On nonpublicly-owned property. 
(6)  Non-concealed freestanding PWSF. 
a.  On publicly-owned property. 
b.  On nonpublicly-owned property. 
(b)  Preference ranking for attached, collocated, and combined PWSF. For attached, collocated, or combined PWSF, the order of ranking preference, highest to lowest, shall follow the same ranking as provided in A1 through C2 of "Siting of New PWSF" section above. Where a lower ranked alternative is proposed, the applicant must file relevant information as required including, but not limited to, an affidavit by a radio frequency engineer demonstrating that despite diligent efforts to adhere to the established hierarchy within the geographic search area, higher ranked options are not technically feasible, practical or justified given the location of the proposed PWSF. 
(c)  Preference ranking for mitigation and freestanding towers. Where a mitigated or freestanding PWSF is permitted the order of ranking preference from highest to lowest shall follow the same ranking as provided in D1 through F2 of "Siting of New PWSF" section above. Where a lower ranked alternative is proposed, the applicant must file relevant information as required and demonstrate higher ranked options are not technically feasible, practical, or justified given the location of the proposed communications facility, and the existing land uses of the subject and surrounding properties within 300 feet of the subject property. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-31. - PWSF required permits by zoning district. 
New PWSF antennas and PWSF towers shall be permitted in Stephens County according to the table below: 
_____ 

 
# Antenna for purpose of this chart means all radio frequency equipment mounted to a support structure. 
* Non-concealed attached antennas are only allowed on transmission towers and existing light stanchions. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
_____
Secs. 75-32—75-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PERMIT (LEVEL I) AMATEUR RADIO TOWERS, TEMPORARY TOWERS AND NON-EXEMPT OTARD FACILITIES 

Sec. 75-41. - Amateur tower specifications and requirements. 
(a)  Height. Amateur tower height, location and other technical specifications shall comply with federal and state law. Amateur towers shall not exceed 120 feet. Amateur tower permits shall be issued conditioned upon the tower being used solely for non-commercial purposes and no commercial wireless communications facilities may be collocated thereon (notwithstanding the provisions of 47 USC § 1455(a)). 
(b)  Setbacks. A distance equal to the height of the tower shall separate new amateur radio towers from all structures not located on the same parcel as the tower, property lines, right-of-way lines and/or easements. Any relocation of amateur radio towers shall remain on same parcel and must comply with stated chapter setback requirements, or, if compliance is not possible, the relocation must not increase the amount by which setbacks are nonconforming, other than increases necessitated solely by changes in size of the base to support the new tower. The setback waiver form from all adjoining land owners with structures within the applicable setbacks will waive these setback requirements. 
(c)  Application requirements. All permit (Level I) applications for amateur radio towers shall contain the following: 
(1)  One original and two copies of a survey of the property completed by a registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of Georgia or a tax map showing all existing uses, structures, and improvements as well as proposed structure and setbacks and the setback waiver form if applicable. 
(2)  A copy of an active FCC amateur license and statement that the structure will only be utilized for amateur radio purposes. 
(3)  Any applicant for facilities under this section shall certify that such proposed facility shall comply with all applicable federal regulations, and that the proposed facility will not be used for commercial purposes in any form. 
(4)  A copy of an active FCC amateur license and statement that the structure will only be utilized for amateur radio purposes. 
(5)  Any applicant for facilities under this section shall certify that such proposed facility shall comply with all applicable federal regulations, and that the proposed facility will not be used for commercial purposes in any form. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015; Ord. of 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 75-42. - Temporary PWSF specifications and requirements. 
Temporary PWSF permit shall be issued conditioned upon the following specifications: 
(1)  It will be in place for no more than 60 days. 
(2)  It requires notification of construction to the FAA. 
(3)  It does not require marking or lighting by the FAA. 
(4)  It will be less than 200 feet in height. 
(5)  It does not involve any excavation (or excavation where prior disturbance exceeds proposed excavation by at least two feet). 
Application requirements. All permit (Level 1) applications for TEMPORARY PWSF shall contain the following: 
(1)  Completion of the "temporary tower application." 
(2)  Application fee. 
(3)  Description of proposed location, type of temporary structure, duration of proposed location not to exceed 60 days (subject to a one-time extension of an additional 60 days for good cause), type of electrical service to be utilized, description of temporary necessity requiring temporary PWSF. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-43. - Non-exempt OTARD specifications and requirements. 
(a)  Height. Non-exempt OTARD tower height, location and other technical specifications shall comply with federal and state law. Non-exempt OTARD towers eligible for Level 1 permitting shall not exceed 120 feet. Non-exempt OTARD Level 1 tower permits shall be issued conditioned upon the tower being used solely for OTARD purposes and the applicant and landowner shall certify that no commercial wireless communications facilities will be collocated thereon (notwithstanding the provisions of 47 USC § 1455(a)). 
(b)  Setbacks. A distance equal to the height of the tower shall separate new non-exempt OTARD towers from all structures not located on the same parcel as the tower, property lines, right-of-way lines and/or easements. Any relocation of OTARD towers shall remain on same parcel and must comply with stated chapter setback requirements, or, if compliance is not possible, the relocation must not increase the amount by which setbacks are nonconforming, other than increases necessitated solely by changes in size of the base to support the new tower. The setback waiver form from all adjoining land owners with structures within the applicable setbacks will waive the setback requirements. 
(c)  Application requirements. All permit (Level I) applications for non-exempt OTARD towers shall contain the following: 
(1)  One original and two copies of a survey of the property completed by a registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of Georgia or a tax map showing all existing uses, structures, and improvements as well as proposed structure and setbacks and the setback waiver form if applicable. 
(2)  A statement that the structure will only be utilized for OTARD purposes. 
(3)  Any applicant for facilities under this section shall certify that such proposed facility shall comply with all applicable federal regulations, and that the proposed facility will not be used for any other commercial purposes in any form. 
(4)  One original and two copies of construction drawings showing the proposed structure and setbacks. 
(5)  Any applicant for facilities under this section shall certify that such proposed facility shall comply with all applicable federal regulations, and that the proposed facility will not be used for any other commercial purposes in any form. 
(6)  One original and two copies of construction drawings showing the proposed structure and setbacks. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015; Ord. of 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 75-44. - Waiver of certain application requirements. 
The county may waive any of the application requirements provided for in this article VII to be provided by an applicant where the county determines that such application requirements are not necessary or are inapplicable to the determination of the subject application. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Secs. 75-45—75-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PERMIT (LEVEL II) PWSF COLLOCATION, COMBINED, ATTACHMENT, ANTENNA ELEMENT AND EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT, REPLACEMENT TOWERS, OTARD TOWERS IN EXCESS OF SEVENTY FEET, AND CONCEALED TOWERS 

Sec. 75-50. - PWSF collocation and combination. 
(a)  Development standards. The county requires collocation and combining of PWSF antennas on existing towers as a higher priority where collocation is possible. Upon enactment of this chapter, any person, corporation, partnership, or other entity, which intends to collocate on an existing tower within the jurisdiction of this chapter, must obtain a permit (Level II). Collocation PWSFs are subject to the following: 
(1)  A PWSF collocated or combined antenna or antenna array shall not exceed the maximum height prescribed in the conditional use permit (if applicable) or increase the height of an existing tower by more than 20 feet and shall not affect any tower lighting, except as provided for herein below. 
(2)  New PWSF antenna mounts shall be flush-mounted onto existing structures, unless it is demonstrated through radio frequency (RF) propagation analysis that flush-mounted antennas will not meet the network objectives of the desired coverage area. 
(3)  The equipment cabinet shall be subject to the setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. The setback waiver form from all adjoining land owners with structures within the applicable setbacks will waive these setback requirements. 
(4)  When a PWSF collocated or combined antenna is to be located on a nonconforming building or structure, then the existing permitted nonconforming setback shall prevail. 
(5)  Applications entitled to the streamlined processes described in O.C.G.A. § 36-66B-4, shall meet all the following requirements: 
a.  The proposed modification or collocation shall not increase the overall height or width of the PWSF to which the wireless facilities are to be attached. 
b.  The proposed modification or collocation shall not increase the dimensions of the equipment compound initially approved by the county. 
c.  The proposed modification or collocation shall comply with applicable conditions of approval, if any, applied to the initial wireless facilities and PWSF as well as any subsequently adopted amendments to such conditions of approval, as updated by any applicable modifications to ANSI EIA/TIA standards or Georgia Building Code. 
d.  The proposed modification or collocation shall not exceed the applicable weight limits for the PWSF, as demonstrated by a letter from a structural engineer licensed to practice in this state. 
e.  The proposed additional PWSF collocation and tower shall comply with all federal, state, and local safety requirements. 
(6)  Applications for collocation entitled to streamlined processing pursuant to Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (47 USC § 1455(a)) shall be approved provided they meet the following requirements: 
a.  A PWSF collocation on an existing antenna-supporting structure not in a public right-of-way shall not increase the overall height of the antenna-supporting structure, antenna and/or antenna array more than ten percent or 20 feet, whichever is greater. A PWSF collocation on an existing antenna-supporting structure within a public right-of-way shall not increase the overall height of the antenna-supporting structure, antenna and/or antenna array more than ten percent or ten feet, whichever is greater. 
b.  A PWSF collocation eligible under this subsection (6) shall not, for towers not in a public right-of-way, protrude from the antenna-supporting structure more than 20 feet or the width of the structure at the elevation of the collocation, and for towers within a public right-of-way, protrude from the antenna-supporting structure more than six feet. 
c.  Any PWSF collocation on an existing antenna-supporting structure shall meet current building code requirements (including windloading). 
d.  A PWSF collocation shall not add more than four additional equipment cabinets or one additional equipment shelter to be eligible as a collocation under this subsection (6). 
e.  A PWSF collocation eligible under this subsection (6) shall not require excavation outside of existing leased or owned parcel or existing easements. 
f.  A PWSF collocation eligible under this subsection (6) shall not defeat any existing concealment elements of the antenna-supporting structure. 
g.  A PWSF collocation eligible under this subsection (6) shall comply with all conditions associated with the prior approval of the antenna-supporting structure except for modification of parameters as permitted in this subsection (6). 
h.  Proposed PWSF collocations that do not meet the standards of this subsection (6) shall be processed either pursuant to subsection (5) above or pursuant to this section 75-51, as applicable. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015; Ord. of 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 75-51. - PWSF antenna attachment: Concealed and nonconcealed. 
(a)  Development standards. PWSF antennas and equipment may be mounted onto a structure, which is not primarily constructed for PWSF purposes but upon which one, or more PWSF antennas and equipment may be mounted. Upon enactment of this chapter, any person, corporation, partnership, or other entity, which intends to place an antenna and equipment on an alternative structure within the jurisdiction of this chapter, must obtain a permit (Level II). 
Attached antenna and equipment shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The top of the attached PWSF antenna shall not be more than 20 feet above the existing or proposed building or structure. 
(2)  Non-concealed PWSF attachments shall only be allowed on electrical transmission towers and existing light stanchions subject to approval by the [planning department] and utility company. 
(3)  When an attached PWSF antenna and equipment is to be located on a nonconforming building or structure, the existing permitted nonconforming setback shall prevail. 
(4)  Except for non-concealed PWSF attached antennas, feed lines and all tower mounted associated equipment shall be designed to architecturally match the façade, roof, wall, and/or structure on which they are affixed so that they blend with the existing structural design, color, and texture. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015; Ord. of 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 75-52. - PWSF antenna element replacement or modification. 
(a)  Development standards. For any replacement or modification of existing PWSF antenna and associated equipment, the applicant must, prior to making such modifications, submit the following: 
(1)  A written statement setting forth the purpose of the replacement or modification. 
(2)  A description of the proposed modifications to the PWSF antenna, including modifications to PWSF antenna element design, type and number, as well as changes in the number and/or size of any feed lines, from the base of the equipment cabinet to such PWSF antenna elements. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015; Ord. of 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 75-53. - Mitigation. 
(a)  Minimum mitigation accomplishments. Mitigation shall accomplish a minimum of one of the following: 
(1)  Reduce the number of PWSF support structures or towers. 
(2)  Replace a non-concealed PWSF tower with a PWSF concealed tower or reduce the visual impact of a PWSF. 
(3)  Replace an existing PWSF tower with a new PWSF tower to improve network functionality resulting in compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Mitigation development standards. Mitigation is subject to the following: 
(1)  Setbacks: A new PWSF tower approved for mitigation shall not be required to meet new setback standards so long as the new tower and its equipment compound are no closer to any property lines or dwelling units as the tower and equipment compound being mitigated. The intent is to encourage the mitigation process, not penalize the tower owner for the change out of the old facility. (For example, if a new tower is replacing an old tower, the new tower is permitted to have the same setbacks as the tower being removed, even if the old tower had nonconforming setbacks). 
(2)  Height: The height of a PWSF that is mitigated shall comply with the provisions of subsection 75-509(a)(6) hereinabove. 
(3)  Breakpoint technology: A newly mitigated PWSF tower shall use breakpoint technology in the design of the replacement facility, if applicable. 
(4)  Visibility: Mitigated PWSF towers or support structures shall be configured and located in a manner that minimizes adverse effects on the landscape and adjacent properties, with specific design considerations as to height, scale, color, texture, and architectural design of the buildings on the same and adjacent zoned lots. 
(c)  Application requirements. 
(1)  One original and two copies of a survey of the property completed by a registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of Georgia or tax map showing all existing uses, structures, and improvements and the setback waiver form if applicable. 
(2)  a.  Maximum height of the proposed tower and proposed and future mounting elevations of future antenna, including individual measurement of the base, the tower, and lightning rod. 
b.  Location, classification, and size of all major public or private streets and rights-of-way. 
c.  Identify adjacent features within 500 feet of property boundary including driveways, public parking areas, pedestrian ways, trails, and any other pertinent features. 
(3)  Simulated photographic evidence of the proposed tower and antenna appearance from any and all residential areas within 1,500 feet and vantage points approved by the planning department including the facility types the applicant has considered and the impact on adjacent properties including: 
a.  Overall height. 
b.  Configuration. 
c.  Physical location. 
d.  Mass and scale. 
e.  Materials and color. 
f.  Illumination. 
g.  Architectural design. 
(4)  All other documentation, evidence, or materials necessary to demonstrate compliance with the applicable approval criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(5)  Prior to issuance of a building permit, proof of FAA compliance with Subpart C of the Federal Aviation Regulations, Part 77, and "Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace," if applicable. 
(6)  Proof of compliance with National Environmental Policy Act and National Historic Preservation Act. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015; Ord. of 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 75-54. - Concealed PWSF towers. 
(a)  Development standards. 
(1)  Determination of need. No new concealed PWSF tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates that no existing tower or existing support structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed use; or that use of such existing facilities would prohibit personal wireless services in the geographic search area to be served by the proposed tower. 
(2)  Signage. Commercial messages shall not be displayed on any concealed PWSF tower. Required noncommercial signage shall be subject to the following: 
a.  The only signage that is permitted upon a concealed PWSF tower, equipment cabinets, shelters or fence shall be informational, and for the purpose of identifying the tower (such as ASR registration number), as well as the party responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility, and any additional security and/or safety signs as applicable. 
b.  If more than 220 voltage is necessary for the operation of the facility and is present in a ground grid or in the tower, signs located every 20 feet and attached to the fence or wall shall display in large, bold, high contrast letters, minimum height of each letter four inches, the following: "HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER." 
c.  Name plate signage shall be provided, in an easily visible location, including the address and telephone number of the contact to reach in the event of an emergency or equipment malfunction, including property manager signs as applicable. 
(3)  Lighting. Lighting on concealed PWSF towers shall not exceed the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) minimum standards. All other lighting shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Any lighting required by the FAA must be of the minimum intensity and number of flashes per minute (i.e., the longest duration between flashes) allowable by the FAA. Dual lighting standards are required with strobe during daytime and red flashing lights at night unless prohibited by the FAA. 
b.  Lights shall be filtered or oriented so as not to project directly onto surrounding property or rights-of-way, consistent with FAA requirements. 
(4)  Equipment compound. The fenced-in compounds shall not be used for the storage of any excess equipment or hazardous materials. No outdoor storage yards shall be allowed in a tower equipment compound. The compound shall not be used as habitable space. 
(5)  Visibility. 
a.  New concealed PWSF towers shall be configured and located in a manner that shall minimize adverse effects including visual impacts on the landscape and adjacent properties. 
b.  Concealed PWSF towers shall be constructed to accommodate antenna arrays as follows: 
1.  Up to 120 feet in height shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate no less than four antenna arrays. 
2.  All towers between 121 feet and 150 feet shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate no less than five antenna arrays. 
c.  Grading shall be minimized and limited only to the area necessary for the new PWSF and equipment compound. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  One original and two copies of a survey of the property completed by a registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of Georgia or tax map showing all existing uses, structures, and improvements and the setback waiver form if applicable. 
(2)  a.  Maximum height of the proposed tower and proposed and future mounting elevations of future antenna, including individual measurement of the base, the tower, and lightning rod. 
b.  Location, classification, and size of all major public or private streets and rights-of-way. 
c.  Identify adjacent features within 500 feet of property boundary including driveways, public parking areas, pedestrian ways, trails, and any other pertinent features. 
(3)  Simulated photographic evidence of the proposed tower and antenna appearance from any and all residential areas within 1,500 feet and vantage points approved by the planning department including the facility types the applicant has considered and the impact on adjacent properties including: 
a.  Overall height. 
b.  Configuration. 
c.  Physical location. 
d.  Mass and scale. 
e.  Materials and color. 
f.  Illumination. 
g.  Architectural design. 
(4)  All other documentation, evidence, or materials necessary to demonstrate compliance with the applicable approval criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(5)  Prior to issuance of a building permit, proof of FAA compliance with Subpart C of the Federal Aviation Regulations, Part 77, and "Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace," if applicable. 
(6)  Proof of compliance with National Environmental Policy Act and National Historic Preservation Act. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015; Ord. of 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 75-55. - OTARD towers in excess of seventy feet. 
(a)  Development standards. 
(1)  Determination of need. No OTARD tower in excess of 70 feet shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates that no existing tower or existing support structure less than 70 feet can accommodate the applicant's proposed OTARD use. 
(2)  Signage. Commercial messages shall not be displayed on any OTARD tower. Required noncommercial signage shall be subject to the following: 
a.  The only signage that is permitted upon an OTARD tower, equipment cabinets, shelters or fence shall be informational, and for the purpose of identifying the tower (such as ASR registration number), as well as the party responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility, and any additional security and/or safety signs as applicable. 
b.  If more than 220 voltage is necessary for the operation of the facility and is present in a ground grid or in the tower, signs located every 20 feet and attached to the fence or wall shall display in large, bold, high contrast letters, minimum height of each letter four inches, the following: "HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER." 
c.  Name plate signage shall be provided, in an easily visible location, including the address and telephone number of the contact to reach in the event of an emergency or equipment malfunction, including property manager signs as applicable. 
(3)  Lighting. Lighting on OTARD towers, if required, shall not exceed the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) minimum standards. All other lighting shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Any lighting required by the FAA must be of the minimum intensity and number of flashes per minute (i.e., the longest duration between flashes) allowable by the FAA. Dual lighting standards are required with strobe during daytime and red flashing lights at night unless prohibited by the FAA. 
b.  Lights shall be filtered or oriented so as not to project directly onto surrounding property or rights-of-way, consistent with FAA requirements. 
(4)  Equipment compound. The fenced-in compounds shall not be used for the storage of any excess equipment or hazardous materials. No outdoor storage yards shall be allowed in a tower equipment compound. The compound shall not be used as habitable space. 
(5)  Visibility. 
a.  New OTARD towers shall be configured and located in a manner that shall minimize adverse effects including visual impacts on the landscape and adjacent properties. 
(6)  [Matching.] New OTARD towers shall be designed to match adjacent structures and landscapes with specific design considerations such as architectural designs, height, scale, color, and texture. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  One original and two copies of a survey of the property completed by a registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of Georgia or a tax map showing all existing uses, structures, and improvements and the setback waiver form if applicable. 
(2)  a.  Maximum height of the proposed tower and proposed and future mounting elevations of future antenna, including individual measurement of the base, the tower, and lightning rod. 
b.  Location, classification, and size of all major public or private streets and rights-of-way. 
c.  Identify adjacent features within 500 feet of property boundary including driveways, public parking areas, pedestrian ways, trails, and any other pertinent features. 
(3)  Simulated photographic evidence of the proposed tower and antenna appearance from any and all residential areas within 1,500 feet and vantage points approved by the planning department including the facility types the applicant has considered and the impact on adjacent properties including: 
a.  Overall height. 
b.  Configuration. 
c.  Physical location. 
d.  Mass and scale. 
e.  Materials and color. 
f.  Illumination. 
g.  Architectural design. 
(4)  All other documentation, evidence, or materials necessary to demonstrate compliance with the applicable approval criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(5)  Prior to issuance of a building permit, proof of FAA compliance with Subpart C of the Federal Aviation Regulations, Part 77, and "Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace," if applicable. 
(6)  If applicable, proof of compliance with National Environmental Policy Act and National Historic Preservation Act. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015; Ord. of 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 75-56. - Waiver of certain application requirements. 
The county may waive any of the application requirements provided for in this article VIII to be provided by an applicant where the county determines that such application requirements are not necessary or are inapplicable to the determination of the subject application. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Secs. 75-57—75-65. - Reserved 
ARTICLE IX. - PERMIT (LEVEL III) NEW NON-CONCEALED PWSF TOWERS 

Sec. 75-66. - Development standards. 
(a)  (1)  Determination of need. No new non-concealed PWSF shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates that no existing tower can accommodate the applicant's proposed use; or that use of such existing facilities would prohibit personal wireless services in the geographic search area to be served by the proposed tower. 
(2)  Height. Height calculations shall include above ground foundations, but exclude lightning rods or lights required by the FAA that do not provide any support for antennas. It is intended that all new non-broadcasting non-concealed PWSF towers be 120 feet or less in height. However, should a non-concealed PWSF tower applicant for a site located in a non-residential zoning district adequately demonstrate that a height in excess of 120 feet is required to provide service, under no circumstance shall any non-concealed PWSF tower in a non-residential zoning district exceed 199 feet. 
(3)  Setbacks. New non-concealed PWSFs and equipment compounds shall be subject to the setbacks described below for breakpoint technology: 
a.  If the non-concealed PWSF tower is constructed using breakpoint design technology (see "definitions"), the minimum setback distance shall be equal to 110 percent of the distance from the top of the structure to the breakpoint level of the structure, or the minimum side and rear yard requirements, whichever is greater. Certification by a registered professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia of the breakpoint design and the design's fall radius must be provided together with the other information required herein from an applicant. (For example, on a 100-foot-tall monopole with a breakpoint at 80 feet, the minimum setback distance would be 22 feet (110 percent of 20 feet, the distance from the top of the monopole to the breakpoint) plus the minimum side or rear yard setback requirements for that zoning district). 
b.  If the non-concealed PWSF tower is not constructed using breakpoint design technology, the minimum setback distance shall be equal to the height of the proposed PWSF. 
(4)  Equipment cabinets and equipment shelters. Electronic equipment shall be contained in either (a) equipment cabinets or (b) equipment shelters. Equipment cabinets shall not be visible from pedestrian and right-of-way views. Equipment cabinets may be provided within the principal building, behind a screen on a rooftop, or on the ground within the fenced-in and screened equipment compound. 
(5)  Fencing. All equipment compounds shall be enclosed with an opaque fence or masonry wall in residential zoning districts, and in any zoning district when the equipment compound adjoins a public right-of-way. Alternative equivalent screening may be approved through the site plan approval process. 
(6)  Buffer. The equipment compound shall be landscaped with a minimum ten-foot-wide perimeter buffer containing the following planting standards: 
a.  All plants and trees shall be indigenous to this part of Georgia. 
b.  Existing trees and shrubs on the site should be preserved and may be used in lieu of required landscaping as approved by the planning department. 
c.  One row of evergreen trees with a minimum two-inch caliper, 25-foot on center. 
d.  Evergreen shrubs capable of creating a continuous hedge and obtaining a height of at least five feet shall be planted, minimum three-gallon or 24 inches tall at the time of planting, five-foot on center. 
e.  Alternative landscaping plans which provide for the same average canopy and understory trees but propose alternative locating on the entire subject property may be considered and approved by the planning department, provided the proposed alternative maximizes screening as provided above, and is otherwise consistent with the requirements of this section. 
(7)  Signage. Commercial messages shall not be displayed on any non-concealed PWSF tower. Required noncommercial signage shall be subject to the following: 
a.  The only signage that is permitted upon a non-concealed PWSF tower, equipment cabinets, shelters or fence shall be informational, and for the purpose of identifying the PWSF (such as ASR registration number), as well as the party responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility, and any additional security and/or safety signs as applicable. 
b.  If more than 220 voltage is necessary for the operation of the facility and is present in a ground grid or in the tower, signs located every 20 feet and attached to the fence or wall shall display in large, bold, high contrast letters, minimum height of each letter four inches, the following: "HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER." 
c.  Name plate signage shall be provided, in an easily visible location, including the address and telephone number of the contact to reach in the event of an emergency or equipment malfunction, including property manager signs as applicable. 
(8)  Lighting. Lighting on non-concealed PWSF towers shall not exceed the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) minimum standards. All other lighting shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Any lighting required by the FAA must be of the minimum intensity and number of flashes per minute (i.e., the longest duration between flashes) allowable by the FAA. Dual lighting standards are required with strobe during daytime and red flashing lights at night unless prohibited by the FAA. 
b.  Lights shall be filtered or oriented so as not to project directly onto surrounding property or rights-of-way consistent with FAA requirements. 
(9)  Equipment compound. The fenced-in compounds shall not be used for the storage of any excess equipment or hazardous materials. No outdoor storage yards shall be allowed in a tower equipment compound. The compound shall not be used as habitable space. 
(10)  Visibility. 
a.  New non-concealed PWSF towers shall be configured and located in a manner that shall minimize adverse effects including visual impacts on the landscape and adjacent properties. 
b.  A balloon test shall be required subsequent to the receipt of the photo simulations in order to demonstrate the proposed height of the tower. The applicant shall arrange to raise a colored balloon no less than three feet in diameter at the maximum height of the proposed tower, and within 25 horizontal feet of the center of the proposed tower. 
c.  A three-foot by five-foot sign with lettering no less than three inches high stating the purpose of the balloon test shall be [placed] at [the] closest major intersection of proposed site. 
d.  The applicant shall meet the following for the required balloon test: 
1.  Applicant must inform the planning department and abutting property owners in writing of the date and times, including alternative date and times, of the test at least 14 days in advance. 
2.  The date, time, and location, including alternative date, time and location, of the balloon test shall be advertised in a locally distributed paper by the applicant at least seven but no more than 14 days in advance of the test date. 
3.  The balloon shall be flown for at least four consecutive hours during daylight hours on the date chosen. The applicant shall record the weather during the balloon test. 
4.  Readvertisement will not be required if inclement weather occurs. 
e.  New antenna mounts shall be flush-mounted, unless it is demonstrated through RF propagation analysis that flush-mounted antennas will not meet the network objectives of the desired coverage area. 
f.  Non-concealed PWSF towers shall be constructed to accommodate antenna arrays as follows: 
1.  All freestanding towers up to 120 feet in height shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate no less than four antenna arrays. 
2.  All towers between 121 feet and 150 feet shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate no less than five antenna arrays. 
g.  Grading shall be minimized and limited only to the area necessary for the new PWSF and equipment compound. 
h.  Freestanding non-concealed PWSF towers shall be limited to monopole type towers, unless the applicant demonstrates that such design is not feasible to accommodate the intended uses. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Completion of PWSF application. 
(2)  Application fee. 
(3)  Applicant shall provide a written statement of compliance with all applicable FCC rules and regulations. 
(4)  Applicant shall provide a complete set of construction drawings of the proposed facility demonstrating compliance with applicable federal, state and Stephens County building codes. 
(5)  A map of the same search ring submitted and used by the applicant's site locator with a statement confirming the same. 
(6)  A map indicating applicant's existing RF signal propagation, a map indicating applications proposed new RF signal propagation, and a map indicating the proposed improvements' coverage area, which provides sufficient justification for the requested support structure. 
(7)  A statement from the applicant providing information regarding justification for the proposed new non-concealed PWSF facility. 
A report and supporting technical data shall be submitted, demonstrating the following: 
a.  Location of all potential alternative structures including utility distribution towers and other elevated structures within the proposed service area have been examined, and found unacceptable. 
b.  Reasoning as to why alternative structures are not acceptable. 
(8)  Proof that a property and/or tower owner's agent has appropriate authorization to act upon the owner's behalf (if applicable). 
(9)  An affidavit by a radio frequency engineer demonstrating compliance with "locating alternatives order" section of this chapter. If a lower ranking alternative is proposed the affidavit must address why higher ranked options are not technically feasible, practical, and/or justified given the location of the proposed communications facility. 
(10)  Statement as to the potential visual and aesthetic impacts of the proposed tower and equipment on all adjacent residential zoning districts. 
(11)  Written statement by a registered professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia specifying the design structural failure modes of the proposed facility, if applicable. 
(12)  Statement certifying that no unusual sound emissions such as alarms, bells, buzzers, or the like are permitted. Emergency generators are permitted. Sound levels shall not exceed 65 dB as measured at the closest property boundaries for the facility. 
(13)  A radio frequency propagation plot indicating the coverage of existing antenna sites, coverage prediction, and design radius, together with a certification from the applicant's radio frequency (RF) engineer that the proposed facility's coverage or capacity potential cannot be achieved by any higher ranked alternative such as a concealed facility, attached facility, replacement facility, collocation, or new tower, and the reasoning why such alternatives are unacceptable. A radio frequency propagation plot indicating the proposed improvements' coverage area, which provides sufficient justification for the requested support structure height. 
(14)  One original and two copies of a survey of the property completed by a registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of Georgia showing all existing uses, structures, and improvements. 
(15)  Six sets (24″×36″) of signed and sealed site plans shall include the following: 
a.  Name of project and date. 
b.  Deed book, and page and map book and page reference. 
c.  Scale, north arrow, and vicinity map. 
d.  Subject property information including zoning, watershed classification, percent coverage of lot to be impervious surface (if located in a designated watershed area). 
e.  Adjacent property information, including landowners, land uses, height of principal building, size of lots, zoning, and land use designation. 
f.  Tower elevations. 
g.  Landscape buffering plans. 
h.  Maximum height of the proposed tower and proposed and future mounting elevations of future antenna, including individual measurement of the base, the tower, and lightning rod. 
i.  Location, classification, and size of all major public or private streets and rights-of-way. 
j.  Identify adjacent features within 500 feet of property boundary including driveways, public parking areas, pedestrian ways, trails, and any other pertinent features. 
k.  Two reduced copies (8½″×11″), of the foregoing preliminary grading plans may be included on site plans or separately submitted in equal quantities. 
(16)  Title report or American Land Title Association (A.L.T.A.) survey showing all easements on the subject property, together with a full legal description of the property. 
(17)  List of adjacent property owners and keyed to the map. The list must be from the most current ownership information supplied by the county tax department, together with two sets of mailing labels for such property owners. Applicant will also provide a notarized certification letter stating the ownership list referenced herein is accurate to the best of the applicant's ability. 
(18)  Simulated photographic evidence of the proposed tower and antenna appearance from any and all residential areas within 1,500 feet and vantage points approved by the planning department including the facility types the applicant has considered and the impact on adjacent properties including: 
a.  Overall height. 
b.  Configuration. 
c.  Physical location. 
d.  Mass and scale. 
e.  Materials and color. 
f.  Illumination. 
g.  Architectural design. 
(19)  All other documentation, evidence, or materials necessary to demonstrate compliance with the applicable approval criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(20)  Prior to issuance of a building permit, proof of FAA compliance with Subpart C of the Federal Aviation Regulations, Part 77, and "Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace," if applicable. 
(21)  Proof of compliance with National Environmental Policy Act and National Historic Preservation Act. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-67. - Waiver of certain application requirements. 
The county may waive any of the application requirements provided for in this article IX to be provided by an applicant where the county determines that such application requirements are not necessary or are inapplicable to the determination of the subject application. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
ARTICLE X. - PERMIT (LEVEL IV) BROADCAST TOWERS 

Sec. 75-68. - Broadcast facility determination of need. 
No new broadcast facilities shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates that no existing broadcast tower can accommodate the applicant's proposed use. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-69. - Broadcast facility height. 
Height for broadcast facilities shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis; the determination of height contained in the applicant's FCC Form 351/352 construction permit or application for construction permit and an FAA determination of no hazard (FAA Form 7460/2) shall be considered prima facie evidence of the tower height required for such broadcast facilities. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-70. - Broadcast facility setbacks. 
New broadcast facilities and anchors shall be setback a minimum of 500 feet from any single-family dwelling unit on same zone lot; and a minimum of one foot for every one foot of tower height from all adjacent lots of record. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-71. - Broadcast equipment cabinets. 
Except for AM broadcast facilities, cabinets shall not be visible from pedestrian views. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-72. - Fencing. 
All broadcast facility towers, AM antenna(s) towers, and guy anchors shall each be surrounded with an anti-climbing fence compliant with applicable FCC regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-73. - Buffers. 
(a)  Except for AM broadcast facilities, it is the intent that all pedestrian views from public rights-of-ways and adjacent residential land uses be screened from proposed broadcast facilities pursuant to article IX, subsection 75-66(a)(6) and (7). AM broadcast facilities shall, where practicable, use artificial screening devices in lieu of natural vegetation for screening its ground equipment located at the base of AM tower(s). 
(b)  Alternative landscaping plans which provide for the same average canopy and understory trees but propose alternative siting on the entire subject property on which the proposed facility is projected may be considered and approved by the planning division, provided the proposed alternative maximizes screening as provided above, and is otherwise consistent with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-74. - Signage. 
Commercial messages shall not be displayed on any tower. Noncommercial signage shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The only signage that is permitted upon an antenna support structure, equipment cabinets, or fence shall be informational, and for the purpose of identifying the antenna support structure (such as ASR registration number), as well as the party responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility; i.e. the address and telephone number, security or safety signs, and property manager signs (if applicable). 
(2)  If more than 220 volts are necessary for the operation of the facility, signs located every 20 feet and attached to the fence or wall shall display in large, bold, high contrast letters (minimum height of each letter four inches) the following: "HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER." 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-75. - Lighting. 
Lighting on towers shall meet and not exceed the FAA minimum standards. All other lighting shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Any lighting required by the FAA must be of the minimum intensity and number of flashes per minute (i.e., the longest duration between flashes) allowable by the FAA. Dual lighting standards are required and strobe light standards are prohibited unless required by the FAA. The lights shall be oriented so as not to project directly onto surrounding property, consistent with FAA requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-76. - Equipment compound. 
The fenced in compounds shall not be used for the storage of any excess equipment or hazardous materials. No outdoor storage yards shall be allowed in a tower equipment compound. The compound shall not be used as habitable space. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-77. - Abandonment. 
(a)  Towers, antennas and the equipment compound shall be removed, at the owner's expense, within 180 days of cessation of use, unless the abandonment is associated with a replacement antenna structure as provided in the mitigations requirements, in which case the removal shall occur within 90 days of cessation of use. 
(b)  An owner wishing to extend the time for removal or reactivation shall submit an application stating the reason for such extension. The city may extend the time for removal or reactivation up to 60 additional days upon a showing of good cause. If the antenna support structure or antenna is not removed within this time, the city may give notice that it will contract for removal within 30 days following written notice to the owner. Thereafter, the city may cause removal of the antenna support structure with costs being borne by the owner. 
(c)  Upon removal of the tower, antenna, and equipment compound, the development area shall be returned to its natural state and topography and vegetated consistent with the natural surroundings or consistent with the current uses of the surrounding or adjacent land at the time of removal. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-78. - Broadcast facility additional standards. 
(a)  Grading shall be minimized and limited only to the area necessary for the new tower and equipment. 
(b)  Sounds. No unusual sound emissions such as alarms, bells, buzzers, or the like are permitted. Emergency generators are allowed. Sound levels shall not to exceed 65 db as measured at the closest property boundaries for the facility. 
(c)  Parking. One parking space is required for each tower development area. The space shall be provided within the leased area, or equipment compound or the development area as defined on the site plan. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-79. - Waiver of certain application requirements. 
The county may waive any of the application requirements provided for in this article X to be provided by an applicant where the county determines that such application requirements are not necessary or are inapplicable to the determination of the subject application. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
ARTICLE XI. - REVIEW AND DECISION TIMELINES FOR COLLOCATIONS AND NEW TOWER APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 75-80. - Streamlined processing for collocation approvals. 
(a)  A collocation application entitled to streamlined processing under article VIII, subsection 75-50(a)(6) shall be deemed complete unless the county notifies the applicant within 30 days of submission (or within some other mutually agreed upon timeframe) that the submission is incomplete. Notices of application incompleteness shall identify specifically the deficiencies in the application, which, if cured, would make the application complete. Upon notice of deficiency, the timeline for a decision shall be tolled until the applicant resubmits to correct such deficiency. The county shall, within ten days of resubmission, notify the applicant of continuing deficiencies or the application will be deemed complete. The timeline for a decision shall be likewise tolled during the additional resubmission deficiency period until the second resubmission. Approval or denial of a complete application shall be in writing and shall be postmarked to the applicant by the sixtieth day after the initial submission, excluding any tolling period. 
(b)  A collocation application entitled to streamlined processing other than under article VIII, subsection 75-50(a)(6) shall be deemed complete unless the county notifies the applicant within 30 days of submission (or within some other mutually agreed upon timeframe) that the submission is incomplete. Notices of application incompleteness shall identify specifically the deficiencies in the application, which, if cured, would make the application complete. Upon notice of deficiency, the timeline for a decision shall be tolled until the applicant resubmits to correct such deficiency. The county shall, within ten days of resubmission, notify the applicant of continuing deficiencies or the application will be deemed complete. The timeline for a decision shall be likewise tolled during the additional resubmission deficiency period until the second resubmission. Approval or denial of a complete application shall be in writing and shall be postmarked to the applicant by the ninetieth day after the initial submission, excluding any tolling period. 
(c)  Upon resubmitting of the revised application the county shall follow the process identified in this section, above, until all deficiencies identified are deemed cured. 
(d)  If the county does not respond in writing to the applicant for a collocation under this section 75-80 as set forth above within the specified timeframe under this section 75-80 as set forth above, then the application shall be deemed approved. If the county does not respond in writing to the applicant for a collocation under section 75-81 below within the specified timeframe under section 75-81 below, the applicant has available the remedies established by federal regulations. 
(e)  Application entitled to the streamlined review process shall not be subject to design or placement requirement, or public hearing review. All applications shall be initially submitted to the planning department for review and processing. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-81. - New concealed and non-concealed PWSF towers. 
[Applications] shall be reviewed and have a decision rendered within 150 days of receipt of the application, subject to any applicable tolling for application deficiencies and resubmissions as described in section 75-80 above. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
ARTICLE XII. - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 75-82. - Amendments. 
The county board of commissioners may from time to time amend the terms of this chapter (but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation). If the planning commission fails to submit a report within 30 days of the public hearing by the county board of commissioners, the proposed amendment shall be deemed to have recommended approval by the planning commission. 
No amendment shall be adopted by the governing body until they have held a public hearing on the amendment. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in county at least once a week for two successive weeks prior to the hearing, the first publication being not less than ten days nor more than 25 days before the date of the hearing. In computing the ten-day and 25-day period, the date of publication is not to be counted, but the date of the hearing is to be counted. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
ARTICLE XIII. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 75-83. - Administration. 
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Planning Director of Stephens County or designee. The county may, through contract, secure the professional services of telecommunications consultants to assist county staff in the implementation of this chapter. Such professional services include, but are not limited to, review and evaluation of permit applications, determination of compliance with existing and proposed federal regulations, minimization of the aesthetic impact, review of the technical data and expert testimony as needed. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-84. - Enforcement. 
If the planning director, county marshal, building inspector or any authorized designee of such officials shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, it shall notify in writing the person responsible for the violation, specifying the nature of the violation and what corrective measures must be taken. The planning director or other applicable official shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by law to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-85. - Penalties. 
Any person failing to take corrective action within a reasonable time after receiving written notice from the planning department and any person operating a PWSF without a valid permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-86. - Fees. 
The board of county commissioners shall set a fee, payable to the county planning department, to cover the necessary processing cost of all PWSF permits. The set fee shall be posted in the planning department. 
(1)  Variances or appeals. The county board of commissioners shall set a fee, payable to Stephens County, Georgia, to cover the necessary administrative costs and advertising of each application for a variance or appeal. The set fee shall be posted in the planning department office. 
(2)  Supplemental review. The county reserves the right to require a supplemental review for any permit (Levels I, II, or III) subject to the following: 
a.  Where due to the complexity of the methodology or analysis required to review an application for a permit (Levels I, II, or III ) facility, the county may require the applicant to pay for a technical review by a third party expert, the costs of which shall be borne by the applicant and be in addition to other applicable fees. Schedules of current fees are listed in the county fee schedule. 
b.  Based on the results of the expert review, the approving authority may require changes to the applicant's application or submittals. 
c.  The supplemental review may address any or all of the following: 
1.  The accuracy and completeness of the application and any accompanying documentation. 
2.  The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies. 
3.  The validity of conclusions reached. 
4.  Whether the proposed communications facility complies with the applicable approval criteria set forth in these codes. 
5.  Other items deemed by the county to be relevant to determining whether a proposed communications facility complies with the provisions of these codes. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Sec. 75-87. - Appeal. 
Appeals from the enforcement and interpretation of this chapter and requests for variances shall be filed with the planning director specifying the grounds thereof. The planning director shall transmit to the board of county commissioners all applications and records pertaining to such appeals and variances. The board of county commissioners shall fix a 30-day period for the hearing of appeals, giving notice to all participants by first class mail. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the planning director certifies to the board of county commissioners that by reason of facts stated in the record a stay would, in his opinion, cause eminent peril to life and or property. In such a case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order from the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Chapter 78 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing or providing traffic regulations at specific places, such as speed limits, through streets, stop intersections, yield intersections, one-way travel, no left turns, no right turns, traffic control by electrical devices, truck routes, loading zones, no parking zones and limited parking zones saved from repeal, § 1-10(14); courts, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. title 40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1—78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REMOVAL OF JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 78-31. - Authority of county. 
(a)  The county shall have the authority to provide for the removal and disposal of any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked motor vehicles, or parts thereof, when requested by the owner or when such motor vehicles are in such a condition that they constitute a health hazard or unsightly nuisance, notwithstanding the fact that such motor vehicles may be located upon private property; to provide the procedures connected therewith; and such other additional powers as shall be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle which shall be located within the premises of any junkyard complying with the laws of this state relating to the licensing and regulating of motor vehicle junkyards. 
(Ord. of 8-1-1972) 
Chapter 82 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; water supply system, required improvements for, § 66-223; sanitary sewers, § 66-224; telecommunications, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-1 et seq.; regulations of county board of health governing sewage management systems, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; codes relating to construction, livability, sanitation, equipment, occupancy, etc., of buildings, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-1 et seq.; contracts to provide industrial wastewater treatment services, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1—82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWAGE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 82-31—82-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, "on-site sewage management system" defined, O.C.G.A. § 31-2-7. 

Sec. 82-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to adopt the state department of human resources on-site management systems rules and regulations (chapter 290-5-26) as a county ordinance in order to facilitate the enforcement of those rules in the county. 
(Ord. No. 91-4, § I, 8-6-1991) 
Sec. 82-52. - Penalty. 
Any person, corporation, partnership, or other entity violating any provision of this division shall be tried before the magistrate court of the county. Upon conviction, a violation of this division may be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 91-4, § III, 8-6-1991) 
Sec. 82-53. - Compliance with rules and regulations. 
All persons in the county who dispose of the sewage from their residence or any residence owned by them shall follow all rules and regulations outlined in the state department of human resources manual for on-site sewage management systems (chapter 290-5-26) or be in violation of the ordinance adopted in section 82-51. 
(Ord. No. 91-4, § II, 8-6-1991) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials not reflected in the table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 